Elimination of spurious oscillations on photoemission spectra
7
In order to understand the origin of the spurious oscillations commonly observed
in the theoretical photoionization spectra, we start considering a laser interacting
with an electron conﬁned within a square potential well. This potential has a width of
a = 3 a.u. and depth V0 = 0.5. It features a single bound state φ1 with an energy of
E1 = −0.314 a.u.. The laser pulse has a frequency of ω = 0.8 a.u., peak ﬁeld strength
of F0 = 0.5, and a duration of six cycles, i.e., τ = 6 × 2π/ω = 47.12 a.u.. We solve the
TDSE as given by Eq. (1) in the length gauge, where Hint(t) = zF(t). The spatial grid
for our calculations consists of 5000 points evenly distributed over z = (−L/2, L/2)
with L = 200 a.u.. The stationary eigenfunctions are obtained by diagonalizing the H0
Hamiltonian using the LAPACK package [25]. For the TDSE solution, we utilize the
staggered leap-frog method [19, 20], propagating the wavefunctions over 60000 time
steps with ∆t = 8.3 × 10−4 a.u. until a time slightly greater than the pulse duration.
Throughout the propagation, we continuously monitor the proper normalization of
the wave function to ensure unitarity.
3.1. Diﬀerential emission probabilities
The photoionization emission probability is usually calculated by projecting the
solution of the TDSE at the end of the laser pulse onto the continuum stationary
eigenvectors. We computed the probabilities using Eq. (6) and present the outcome
in Fig. 2.
The expected photoelectron emission spectra consists of broad peaks
resulting from the multiphoton absorption process from the initial bound state. These
peaks correspond to above-threshold ionization (ATI) energy levels (n = 1, 2, . . .) and
are separated by a photon energy of ω = 0.8 a.u., in accordance with the energy
conservation relation given by:
En = nω −Ip −Up .
(14)
In this context, the ionization potential is the binding energy of the initial state,
Ip = |E1| = 0.314 a.u., while the ponderomotive potential Up = (F0/2ω)2 ≃0.1
represents the energy of an oscillating electron inﬂuenced solely by the laser ﬁeld [2].
However, the resulting spectra exhibit a strong oscillating pattern superimposed
on the expected curves. These rapid oscillations cover an amplitude of about two
orders of magnitude, and the spacing between their peaks increases as the emitted
electron energy increases. It becomes evident [24] that the strong oscillatory structures
within the peaks are a spurious artefact of the ﬁnite basis set used in the computations.
The explanation for these unexpected oscillations is straightforward. Since the time-
evolved wavefunction ψ(τ) primarily retains the spatial shape of the initial bound state
φ1, projecting onto continuum functions results in two types of transition amplitudes:
one type, where both the initial φ1 (and consequently ψ(τ)) and the projected φk
waves have the same parity, retains nearly the entire probability. The other type, in
which the projected wavefunctions have opposite parities, exhibits signiﬁcantly lower
probabilities. When the physical problem is conﬁned to a numerical grid, it is possible
to move arbitrarily the walls of the box, changing thus the stationary eigenfunctions.
It is possible then to design two potentials in which the same eigenvalue appears in
both cases, but the corresponding eigenvectors have diﬀerent parities. Therefore, the
highly oscillating structures interfering with the ATI photoemission spectra are indeed
spurious and should be disregarded.
To reduce the high oscillations in the total energy spectrum, we initially employed
the WOM method using Eq. (12) with γ = 0.045 and examined three diﬀerent values
