A Scalable Automatic Model Generation Tool for
Cyber-Physical Network Topologies and Data Flows for
Large-Scale Synthetic Power Grid Models
SAMANTHA ISRAEL, SANJANA KUNKOLIENKAR, ANA GOULART, KATHERINE DAVIS,
and THOMAS OVERBYE, Texas A&M University, USA
Power grids and their cyber infrastructure are classified as Critical Energy Infrastructure/Information (CEII)
and are not publicly accessible. While realistic synthetic test cases for power systems have been developed in
recent years, they often lack corresponding cyber network models. This work extends synthetic grid models by
incorporating cyber-physical representations. To address the growing need for realistic and scalable models that
integrate both cyber and physical layers in electric power systems, this paper presents the Scalable Automatic
Model Generation Tool (SAM-GT). This tool enables the creation of large-scale cyber-physical topologies for power
system models. The resulting cyber-physical network models include power system switches, routers, and firewalls
while accounting for data flows and industrial communication protocols. Case studies demonstrate the tool’s
application to synthetic grid models of 500, 2,000, and 10,000 buses, considering three distinct network topologies.
Results from these case studies include network metrics on critical nodes, hops, and generation times, showcasing
SAM-GT ’s effectiveness, adaptability, and scalability.
CCS Concepts: • Networks →Topology analysis and generation; Star networks; Hybrid networks;
Cyber-physical networks; • Computer systems organization →Embedded and cyber-physical sys-
tems.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Electric grid test cases, cyber-physical models, star, radial, statistics-based
topology, topology generation, network modeling, cyber-physical model.
1
Introduction
Electric grid models have been used for years to study how power systems function [25]. Models
or test cases enable researchers to test new algorithms on power grid networks without the risk of
interrupting the electricity supply to customers. The information is not publicly available since
power grid data is considered critical infrastructure [4, 26]. Thus, fictitious electric grid models of
varying sizes, also known as synthetic models, have been used for research.
Over the past few decades, communication systems have been widely integrated into power
systems, transforming them into more intelligent and sophisticated networks. The stable operation
of power grids depends on various factors, including the interdependencies between subsystems,
system parameters, and control mechanisms—many of which are influenced by the cybersecurity
of communication and software systems.
The synergy between cyber and power networks is undeniable; they represent two interconnected
layers of the same system. Incorporating communication models, particularly for cybersecurity
applications, is crucial for improving our understanding of power grid behavior and informing the
development of new planning strategies. This is especially important in the context of high-impact,
low-frequency events, such as communication-related failures and cyber threats.
Cyber-physical models play a critical role in advancing cybersecurity research by enabling
researchers to analyze communication nodes, protocols, and adversarial tactics. These models
strengthen the resilience and robustness of modern power grids against evolving threats.
Enhancing cyber-physical resiliency benefits a wide range of stakeholders, including utilities,
Transmission Service Providers (TSPs), Independent System Operators (ISOs), and consumers. The
Authors’ Contact Information: Samantha Israel, samantha.israel@tamu.edu; Sanjana Kunkolienkar, sanjanakunkolienkar@
tamu.edu; Ana Goulart, goulart@tamu.edu; Katherine Davis, katedavis@tamu.edu; Thomas Overbye, overbye@tamu.edu,
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA.
arXiv:2504.06396v1  [eess.SY]  8 Apr 2025
