Finally, we note that several direct entanglement generation schemes of stationary nodes have been
demonstrated. In Ref. [483], entanglement between two Rb atomic memories separated by 12.5km was
generated by sending a single photon emitted from one memory to be absorbed by the other. Here,
atom-photon entanglement was generated in the first memory node between an atom and a photon at
795nm, which was frequency converted to 1342nm for transmission in the optical fibers. It was sent to
the second node, where it was converted back to 795nm using sum-frequency generation, and stored in
the second memory. A second experiment [486] produced entangled photons from SPDC, stored the state
of one of them in a single-ion quantum memory, while the other was sent to a remote detection station
via a 14km deployed urban fiber link.
An all-optical approach for an event-ready setup is through qubit amplifiers, several of which have
been proposed [487–490], and are based on a previous proposal for probabilistic noiseless amplification for
quantum optical signals [491]. Based on quantum teleportation, these qubit amplifiers can not only act
as a herald of an incoming signal but also introduce an optical gain on the desired optical mode. This can
reduce or eliminate the effects of transmission losses, but also increases technical demands due to the need
for ancilla photons or photon pairs on demand, which must be coupled and detected efficiently with the
linear optical measurement device. A recent finite-key analysis analysis shows that detection efficiencies
greater than 96.5% are required [492] to achieve a positive key rate with 39dB of overall transmission loss
(about 195km distance if only fiber attenuation is considered).
Many types of encoding and protocols can be used to produce photon-mediated entanglement for
quantum networking (for details see a recent tutorial [493]). To realize long-distance DI-QKD, it will
be crucial to realize quantum protocols through quantum networks of different physical types. In this
direction, a quantum network stack has been defined [494] and realized [495], in analogy with classical
networking models such the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI).
6.3.3. Link Relays
The transmission losses in optical fibers is a limiting factor for all quantum networking protocols, and
limits point-to-point links to a few hundred kilometers in length. As is well known, the no-cloning theo-
rem prevents quantum information from being copied deterministically, so classical optical amplification
techniques cannot be used in the quantum regime. Several solutions exist to overcome this limitation.
Current fiber-based QKD systems over several hundred kilometers use trusted classical relays to
extend transmission length [496]. Conceptually, these trusted relays consist of hardware security modules
where the keys from the two neighboring links are stored confidentially. These keys (at all connecting
relay points) are then post-processed18, resulting in a shared key between the two endpoints. However,
DI-QKD is not possible in a trusted relay infrastructure, since entanglement cannot be shared between
the two end points.
To overcome the need for trusted classical hardware devices, quantum relays consisting of quantum
repeaters [497, 470] are required. Many of the same event ready setups described above can be used to
build quantum repeaters, which employ multiple stages of entanglement swapping between intermediate
nodes to construct a long-distance entangled state between edge nodes.
Since efficient entanglement
preparation and swapping are typically probabilistic processes, quantum memory devices are needed to
store quantum information from one link while swapping is performed on others. The development of
robust quantum memory is one of the principle challenges in creating large-scale quantum networks for
DI-QKD and other applications. For a review of recent progress on quantum memories and repeaters,
see Refs. [470, 471].
6.4. Integration of QKD into Cybersecurity Infrastructure
Significant advancements have been made worldwide in the proof-of-concept implementation of QKD
networks in real-world scenarios, and their integration into cybersecurity infrastructure. Of critical im-
portance was to demonstrate how QKD, which establishes a shared key between users in a point-to-point
configuration, can be employed within the network architectures used in modern communications. As
early as 2002-2006 the DARPA network demonstrated a multi-node QKD network with optical switching,
connecting fiber and free-space links using weak coherent pulses and also entangled photons [498]. The
issues of routing, trusted relays, key management and integration into communication protocols such as
IPSec were also addressed for the first time. The SECOQC network operated from 2004-2008 in and
around Vienna, Austria [499], and included weak coherent pulse, entanglement-based, and continuous
18A bitwise XOR, publication of result and correction at one side, is a simple example.
75
