Ry(θ1)
•
Ry(θ9)
Ry(θ2)
•
Ry(θ10)
Ry(θ3)
•
Ry(θ11)
Ry(θ4)
•
Ry(θ12)
Ry(θ5)
•
Ry(θ13)
Ry(θ6)
•
Ry(θ14)
Ry(θ7)
•
Ry(θ15)
Ry(θ8)
Ry(θ16)
Figure 11: The real amplitudes ansatz for 8 qubits. 18 qubits were used in Section 4.3 which corresponds to 32
parameters.
amplitudes). The circuit consists of alternating layers of Y rotations and CX entanglements. Figure
12 shows the ansatz for the 2 qubits.
Ry(θ1)
•
Ry(θ3)
Ry(θ2)
Ry(θ4)
Figure 12: Quantum circuit representation of the ansatz with two Ry gates, a CNOT gate, and another two Ry
gates.
The Dynamical Lie Algebra (DLA) for this circuit ig is given by all possible nested commutators
between the generators iGj, until no new independent skew-Hermitian operator is generated. The first
two elements of the DLA are iY ⊗I and iI⊗Y (which we will write as iY1 and iY2), since RY (θ) = eiY θ.
By noting exp(iπ2(|1⟩⟨1| ⊗(I −X))) = CNOT the third element of g is |1⟩⟨1| ⊗(I −X). To find
other elements of the DLA we now take the commutator of our current elements. We can do this in
Pennylane [101] to give the DLA:
⟨iX, iY ⟩LIE = {iY0, iY1, iX1, iZ1}.
(7)
Considering the additional two RY
gates produces no new elements in the DLA. Therefore
dim gRealAmplitudes = 4. The dimension of the special unitary group su(2n) is dim su(N) = N2 −1,
which for n = 2 gives dim su(4) = 15. The Hilbert space is H = C2n, and for full universality, we require
the available gates to span all of SU(2n). That means when we have all unitaries of SU(2n) available
to us, we can reach any state in Hilbert space from any other state. Therefore, the RealAmplitudes
ansatz is not universal.
The dimension of the DLA for the RealAmplitudes with reverse linear entanglement scales polyno-
mially with n. This can be seen by the fact that each RY contributes a local generator iYj, therefore,
n generators. Each CNOT gate introduces a new generator (e.g. iXj, iZj) on the target qubit. The
number of these generators scales linearly with n because the entanglement is limited to neighbour-
ing qubits. The new number of generators produced under commutation is restricted by the limited
connectivity.
Ref. [102] states that barren plateaus do not exist for QUBO problems due to having 2-local ob-
servables. A key idea in Ref. [103] is that if there is an absence of barren plateaus this implies that
your circuit can be simulated classically in polynomial time (rather than exponential time using the
state vector simulator). The simulation algorithm: G-sim [104], exploits low dimensional lie algebra.
In summary, our ansatz likely avoids barren plateaus and is efficiently classical simuable.
28
