4
we also fit the simulated spectra to a Lorentzian line-
shape to extract FWHM, shown as the orange band in
Fig. 3(c).
Overall, our theoretical calculations repro-
duced the broadened excitation spectra. We note that
even though our theoretical model assumed that the reso-
nant interaction is coherent, the ensemble averaging pro-
cess washed out oscillations in the Rydberg spectroscopy
data, and separately, time evolution measurements of the
N = 1 KRb molecule population.
Because the dipolar interaction strength Vdd depends
on the distance between the Rydberg atom and the near-
est molecule, a reduction in spectral broadening is ex-
pected at lower KRb densities. Additionally, as the sepa-
ration between Rb atoms and neighboring KRb molecules
increases, the collective enhancement effect diminishes,
further contributing to the decrease in spectral broad-
ening. To verify this, we controllably reduced the KRb
density. The experimental implementation (SM Section
A) started with exciting a desired portion of the KRb
molecules to N = 1 via a microwave pulse, followed by
dissociating the remaining N = 0 molecules into atoms.
We then removed all K atoms and part of the Rb atoms
with resonant light. Finally, we used a microwave π-pulse
to transfer the hide-out N = 1 population back to N = 0.
We extracted the FWHM of the Rydberg excitation
spectrum for each KRb density, as shown in Fig. 4.
The excitation linewidths broadened from 1.1 MHz to
3.2 MHz as we increased the KRb density from 0 to
3.38 × 1011/cm3, and the theoretical calculations pre-
sented a good match with experiment data. We inde-
pendently verified that varying the Rb density did not
affect the excitation linewidths (SM Section A), as the
Rydberg atom density remained unchanged due to the
Rydberg blockade effect.
While the dipole-dipole interaction model captures the
experimental results, the point-dipole approximation is
expected to break down when the interspecies separa-
tion becomes comparable to the size of the Rydberg or-
bital. A charge-dipole interaction Hamiltonian, separat-
ing contributions of the valence electron and the posi-
tively charged core, could deviate from dipole-dipole in-
teraction at higher KRb densities. Future works can test
for the applicability of such a Hamiltonian.
This work provides an experimental demonstration
and measurement of resonant dipolar interactions be-
tween ultracold Rydberg atoms and polar molecules,
paving the way for realizing hybrid systems for quan-
tum computation and simulation. A potential next step
is to explore the central spin model at higher molecu-
lar densities, where one may also investigate the physics
of a strongly interacting molecular gas mediated by Ry-
dberg atoms. In parallel, coherent interaction dynamics
could be more naturally realized in a system with uniform
particle spacing, such as individually optical-tweezer-
confined atoms and molecules, aiding non-destructive de-
tection of molecules and speeding up quantum gates be-
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
KRb peak density (1/cm3)
1011
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Rydberg excitation linewidth (MHz)
data
theory
FIG. 4. Rydberg excitation linewidth as a function of peak
KRb molecule density.
We varied the KRb density up to
3.38 × 1011/cm3.
The experimental excitation linewidths
were extracted from the FWHM of Lorentzian fits of the
measured spectra. Theoretical linewidths were obtained by
applying the same fitting procedure to the simulated spectra,
given the KRb densities and relevant experimental parame-
ters. The KRb density remained relatively constant during
the Rb atom excitation and depletion, with less than a 10%
decrease observed over this interval.
tween molecules [26, 27].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank Grigor Adamyan and Artem Volosniev for
fruitful discussions of charge-dipole interaction.
We
thank Rosario Gonz´alez-F´erez, Mikhail Lemeshko, and
David Wellnitz for discussions. We thank Mark Babin
for experimental assistance. This work is supported by
the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Science,
Basic Energy Sciences (BES), under Award No.
DE-
SC0024087 (molecule state detection), the Center for Ul-
tracold Atoms (an NSF Physics Frontiers Center, PHY-
2317134) (Rydberg excitation), AFOSR DURIP FA9550-
23-1-0122 (instrument upgrade), and the Gordon and
Betty Moore Foundation GBMF11558 (Theoretical cal-
culations).
∗These authors contributed equally to this work.
† ni@chemistry.harvard.edu
[1] Z.-L. Xiang, S. Ashhab, J. You, and F. Nori, Hybrid
quantum circuits: Superconducting circuits interacting
with other quantum systems, Reviews of Modern Physics
85, 623 (2013).
[2] G. Kurizki, P. Bertet, Y. Kubo, K. Mølmer, D. Pet-
rosyan, P. Rabl, and J. Schmiedmayer, Quantum tech-
nologies with hybrid systems, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 112, 3866 (2015).
[3] A. Reiserer and G. Rempe, Cavity-based quantum net-
works with single atoms and optical photons, Reviews of
