Brillouin Platycosms and Topological Phases
Chen Zhang, Peiyuan Wang, Junkun Lyu, and Y. X. Zhao∗
Department of Physics and HK Institute of Quantum Science & Technology,
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, China
There exist ten distinct closed flat 3D manifolds, known as platycosms, which hold significance
in mathematics and have been postulated as potential geometric models for our universe. In this
work, we demonstrate their manifestation as universes of Bloch particles, namely as momentum-
space units referred to as Brillouin platycosms, which are natural extensions of the Brillouin torus
within a broader framework of projective crystallographic symmetries. Moreover, we provide exact
K-theoretical classifications of topological insulators over these platycosms by the Atiyah-Hirzebruch
spectral sequence, and formulate a complete set of topological invariants for their identification.
Topological phase transitions are generically characterized by Weyl semimetals, adhering to the
generalized Nielsen-Ninomiya theorem: the total chirality number over a Brillouin platycosm is
even (zero) if the platycosm is non-orientable (orientable).
Our work generalizes the notion of
Brillouin torus to ten Brillouin platycosms and therefore fundamentally diversifies the stages on
which Block wavefunctions can perform their topological dance.
Introduction Since 1933, it has been known that there
exist a total of ten closed flat 3D manifolds, named as
platycosms [1]. The ten platycosms are widely studied
in the mathematics literature [2, 3], and have been spec-
ulated as potential shapes of a finite universe [4, 5], in-
spired by the flatness of our universe at large scales [6–
8] and the fluctuation behavior of the cosmic microwave
background. While it is still unsettled whether the phys-
ical universe is a platycosm, the universe for Bloch parti-
cles definitely is. It is just the 3D Brillouin torus, namely
the zeroth platycosm, in the ordinary theory of crystal
symmetries.
The topology of the 3D torus is relatively simple, as it
can be regarded as a cubic box with periodic boundary
conditions for all three directions. The other nine platy-
cosms have more intricate topologies. Four of them are
non-orientable, resembling the Mobius strip and Klein
bottle, since translating along some direction leads to a
mirror reflection. They all feature nontrivial 1D cycles
with finite orders.
Particularly, all elementary 1D cy-
cles in the didicosm are fourfold, namely, traveling along
any cycle four times necessarily leads to a contractible
cycle, which inspired the popular science fiction story,
Didicosm, named after the platycosm [9].
In this work, we show that not just the zeroth
platycosm, but all the ten platycosms can appear as
momentum-space units in the broader framework of pro-
jective crystal symmetries, and therefore refer them to
as Brillouin platycosms. In fact, the ten Brillouin platy-
cosms exhaust all possible momentum units.
Recently, projective crystal symmetries have been
emerging as a research focus [10–18]. A particular feature
is that projectivity can lead to momentum-space nonsym-
morphic symmetries like glide reflections and screw rota-
tions [19], where mirror reflections and rotations are com-
bined with fractional reciprocal lattice translations. The
essential difference of nonsymmorphic symmetry from
symmorphic symmetry is that it shifts all points and
therefore is said to be free.
Free symmetries can fur-
ther reduce the Brillouin torus into other platycosms. In
two dimensions, it has been shown that a glide reflection
can reduce the 2D torus to the Klein bottle [20], and in-
spired wide investigation on the topological phases over
the Brillouin Klein bottle [16, 19, 21–27].
It is known that the ten platycosms Mα have a one-to-
one correspondence with the ten Bieberbach groups Bα
with α = 0, 1, · · · , 9. They are the quotient manifolds of
R3 under the actions of Bα, i.e.,
Mα = R3/Bα.
(1)
Thus, to realize the Brillouin platycosm Mα, we only
need to realize the corresponding Bieberhach group Bα
in momentum space R3. Every Bieberhach group Bα can
be realized by an appropriate projective representation
of a real-space symmorphic group Sα, which can emerge
from certain gauge flux configurations [28]. We have con-
structed physical tight-binding and lattice Dirac models
for all of them [29], paving the way for experimental re-
alizations of the ten Brillouin platycosms.
The Brillouin torus is the universe in which Bloch
wavefunctions can form topological configurations.
As
the Brillouin torus has been diversified into ten Brillouin
platycosms, abundant topological phases are waiting to
be explored. We present the K-theoretical classifications
of topological insulators over the ten Brillouin platycosms
. In more detail, by applying the Atiyah-Hirzebruch spec-
tral sequence, we show that the reduced K group of each
platycosm is isomorphic to the second cohomology group
of the corresponding Bieberbach group,
eK(Mα) ∼= H2(Bα, Z).
(2)
Inspired by this isomorphism, we formulate a complete
set of topological invariants for each classification.
In
general, transitions between two topological phases are
characterized by a Weyl semimetal phase. These Weyl
arXiv:2504.06882v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  9 Apr 2025
