3
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
FIG. 1.
The illustration of nine nontrivial Brillouin platy-
cosms by constant-energy surfaces. (a) to (i) correspond to
α = 1 to 9, respectively. In each figure, dashed lines denote
the intersection of colored planes with the constant-energy
surfaces, and are related by the marked momentum-space
nonsymmorphic symmetries.
the corresponding projective symmetry algebras. As has
been demonstrated by numerous experiments, Z2 gauge
fluxes can be flexibly engineered by artificial crystals [31–
47]. Thus, the six Brillouin platycosms can be readily re-
alized in experiments. The remaining three Bieberbach
groups, Pn1, requires Zn gauge fields, with n = 3, 4, 6.
In the supplementary material [29], tight-binding mod-
els with a single state at each site and Dirac lattice mod-
els have been constructed for all momentum space Bα
with appropriate gauge flux configurations that can real-
ize the projective representations of Sα. In Fig. 1, using
the Dirac lattice models, we plot a constant energy sur-
face within the Brillouin zone for each Bα to illustrate
the topology of the corresponding platycosm.
Topological classification We then proceed to the classi-
fication of topological insulators over the ten platycosms.
For each Mα, the classification is given by the reduce
K group eK(Mα). Each K group K(Mα) can be ana-
lyzed by the Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence, which
is stabilized at the fourth page. However, the spectral
sequence cannot completely determine the K group.
In addition, each vector bundle gives rise to a determi-
nant line bundle. As the complex line bundles are clas-
sified by the second cohomology group H2(Mα) [48, 49],
we have the natural group homomorphism,
Det : eK(Mα) →H2(Mα, Z),
(6)
which is apparently surjective. Since Mα is the quotient
space of R3 under the free action of Bα, Mα is the clas-
sifying space of Bα. Thus, H2(Mα, Z) is isomorphic to
the group-cohomology group H2(Bα, Z),
H2(Mα, Z) ∼= H2(Bα, Z).
(7)
The advantage of this isomorphism is that the group-
cohomology groups of 3D space groups can be readily
obtained from GAP [50].
With the aid of the surjective homomorphism (6),
we can determine all K groups from the spectral se-
quences. The case-by-case study shows that eK(Mα) ∼=
H2(Bα, Z), i.e., Eq. (2). All eK(Mα) are listed in Tab. I,
and all technical details for the above analysis can be
found in the SM [29].
Topological invariants It is significant to note that the
isomorphism (6) in fact implies that all topological in-
sulators can be characterized by the topologies of the
corresponding determinant line bundles. In other words,
all topological invariants can be formulated in terms of
the Abelian Berry connection aµ = TrAµ, with Aµ the
Berry connection of the valence bands.
The Z components in each classification just corre-
spond to the Chern numbers over some 2D sub-tori. It is
quite easy to identify which sub-tori can host nontrivial
Chern numbers. For the first amphicosm M1 the Chern
number is defined over the ky-kz sub-torus as only on
this sub-torus no momentum coordinates are reversed.
For M2, the sub-torus is spanned by the anti-diagonal
line on the kx-ky plane and the reciprocal lattice vector
along the kz direction. For M5, M6, · · · , M8, the torus
for the Chern number is spanned by the two primitive
reciprocal lattice vectors on the kx-ky plane.
The topological invariants for the torsion components,
namely Zn components, can be formulated by a trick
resembling that was used by Dijkgraaf and Witten to
formulate the Chern-Simons theories [51]. That is, for
each Zn, we choose a 2-chain c so that a set of symmetries
Bα freely acts on its boundary ∂c and therefore naturally
divide ∂c into n symmetry-related 1-chains. Note that in
general, c is a Z-linear combination of sub-manifolds in
momentum space.
Because of the free action, we can
require that the Bloch wavefunctions ψa at symmetry-
related momenta are the same, i.e.,
ψa(k) = ψa(gk),
(8)
where g is an arbitrary symmetry and k any point in
momentum space. Then, the Abelian Berry connection
a is invariant under the Bieberbach group. Under this
gauge condition, the Zn invariant is formulated as
ν(n) = 1
2π
Z
c
f −n
2π
Z
∂c/Bα a
mod n.
(9)
Here, ∂c/Bα may be represented by any 1-chain divided
from the action of Bα. The second term is equal to the
