Evidence for Intrinsic charm in the proton
69
We may use the difference between the 4FNS perturbative charm obtained from NNLO and
N3LO matching as an estimate of the MHOU on perturbative charm at the scale Qc. The total
uncertainty is found by adding this in quadrature to the PDF uncertainty (which however in
practice is negligible). The result is shown in Fig. 3.1 (right). Within this total uncertainty
there is now good agreement between our fitted charm result and perturbative charm for all
x <∼0.2. On the other hand, there is a clear deviation for larger x. We may view the difference
between the 4FNS default result and the 4FNS perturbative charm as the intrinsic component
in the 4FNS, and indeed it is clear from Fig. 3.1 that the 4FNS intrinsic component is sizable
and positive at large x.
3.1.3. Stability of the 4FNS charm
The main input to our determination of intrinsic charm is the 4FNS charm PDF extracted from
high-energy data. While this determination comes with an uncertainty estimate, it is important
to verify that this adequately reflects the various sources of uncertainty, and that there are no
further sources of uncertainty that may be unaccounted for. To this purpose, here we assess
the stability of our boundary condition PDF first, upon the choice of underlying dataset, next
upon changes in methodology, and finally, upon variation of Standard Model parameters. In
each case we verify stability upon the most important possible source of instability: respectively,
the use of collider vs. fixed target and deep-inelastic vs. hadronic data (dataset); the choice of
parametrization basis (methodology); and the value of the charm quark mass. In all comparisons
we focus on the large-x region in which the fitted charm displays a valence-like peak. As we
shall see in Section 3.2 this is the x-region where intrinsic charm could be localized. In this
section, the 4FNS charm PDF is displayed at the scale Q = 1.65 GeV so that results for all fit
variants, including those with different mc values, can be shown at a common scale.
Dependence on the choice of dataset.
We now study the stability of the 4FNS charm
determination upon variation of the underlying data, which also allows us to identify the
datasets or groups of processes that provide the leading constraints on fitted charm. To this
purpose, we have repeated our PDF determination using a variety of subsets of the global
dataset used for our default determination. Results are shown in Fig. 3.2, where we compare
the result using the baseline dataset to determinations performed by adding to the baseline
the EMC charm [243] structure function data; by only including DIS data; by only including
collider data (HERA, Tevatron and LHC); and by removing the LHCb W and Z production data.
The EMC data are relatively imprecise as they were taken at relatively low scales, where radiative
corrections are large and their accuracy has often been questioned. For these reasons, we have
not included them in our baseline analysis. However, it is interesting to assess the impact of
their inclusion. We find that the extra information provided by these F c
2 data is subdominant in
comparison to that from the global dataset. The result is stable and only a moderate uncertainty
reduction at the peak is observed. It is interesting to contrast this with the previous NNPDF
