2.3
Empirical BC approximation
The dimensionality of the n-th distribution’s support, sn, is the number of
qubits measured in the n-th circuit. In Figure 2, sn = 2 because only q2
and q3 are measured. As the number of qubit measurements grows, e.g. for
d > 5, computing the BC explicitly becomes expansive or unfeasible be-
cause of the sum over all possible output configurations, P
y∈Yn ∼O(2sn).
Moreover, the explicit form of the distribution densities, P ˆY and PY , is usu-
ally unknown and depends on the quantum dynamics of the qubits inside
the circuit with and without hardware noise. While Quantum Mechanics
and the circuit layout may be used to obtain a theoretical estimate of PY ,
modeling P ˆY would require including system-specific Noise Error Models for
all device disturbances. A data-driven option is to estimate the densities
from the available samples using flexible enough ML algorithms, e.g. deep
models or Kernel Density Estimation (KDE). Nonparametric estimators like
KDE are assumption-free but rely on the careful choice of the bandwidth
and become unstable in high dimensions. Parametrized models, e.g. Neural
Networks, may be misspecified and never capture substantial details of the
distributions (even for an infinite sample size). Our estimation strategy is
hyperparameter-free and independent from the dimensionality of the distri-
bution support. The idea is to replace straightforward density estimations
with a more constrained but stable density-ratio estimation Sugiyama et al.
(2012). The need to estimate a density ratio is shared with other works,
e.g. Tibshirani et al. (2019) or Hu and Lei (2024), and is closely related to
CP conditional validity (see Section 2.5 for more details). Our motivation
for using a density-ratio estimator comes from a direct manipulation of the
conformity score, A = BC(Y, ˆY ). More explicitly,
BC =
X
y∈Y
q
PY (y)P ˆY (y) =
X
y∈Y
P ˆY (y)
s
PY (y)
P ˆY (y)
(4)
∼
1
Mshots
Mshots
X
m=1
s
pY (ˆYm)
p ˆY (ˆYm)
= E ˆY
q
ˆr(ˆY )
(5)
where ˆr(ˆY ) ∼pY ( ˆYm)
p ˆY ( ˆYm) is an empirical estimation of the ratio between the two
densities evaluated and E ˆY (ˆr(ˆY )) its empirical expectation obtained from
the available noisy samples, {Yn1, . . . , YnMshots}. We refer to Sugiyama et al.
