6.3
Electric ﬁeld after annihilation
One may worry about the overproduction of electric ﬁeld due to the drop of electric con-
ductivity. This can be argued as follows. In plasma physics, one adopts the Debye length
to characterize the electrostatic eﬀect. We may assume that on scales much larger than
Debye length, the universe is in a quasineutral state and the electric ﬁeld is negligible. The
lower limit of Debye length is estimated as
λD(T) ≥
s
ǫ0kBT
neq2e
,
(6.10)
where ion terms are dropped for simplicity.
After annihilation the number density of
electrons are
ne ≃10−10nγ = 10−10 ×
Z
8π
(2π)3
E2dE
eE/T −1 = 2.4 × 10−11T 3 .
(6.11)
We remind the readers that we’re working in Planck units such that ℏ= kB = c = 1. This
leads to
λD = 6.7 × 105
T
= 8.3 × 104

T
0.1MeV
−1
m ,
(6.12)
which is much smaller than galaxy scale.
Thus, we are justiﬁed to work in this phase
without the problem of the overproduction of electric ﬁeld.
7
Conclusion
We propose a novel mechanism of primordial magneto-genesis that takes place in the stan-
dard radiation dominated epoch after the electroweak symmetry breaking phase to evade
the baryon isocurvature problem and the over-production of electric ﬁelds. The confor-
mal invariance of the EM ﬁeld is broken because of its eﬀective mass term that originated
from the interaction with a scalar ﬁeld. The scalar ﬁeld is assumed to be very light and
is extremely weakly coupled, and thus the strong coupling problem is absent. We ﬁnd
that suﬃcient magnetic ﬁelds capable to account for seed magnetic ﬁelds can be produced
without the back-reaction problem provided that the scalar ﬁeld experiences a tachyonic
growth phase. Therefore, our mechanism provides a viable mechanism for generating large
scale magnetic ﬁeld without all above problems.
This work highlights the possibility of primordial magneto-genesis in radiation dom-
inated epoch and motivates further exploration along this line. Notably, in our minimal
setup, the spectra index of the magnetic ﬁeld power spectrum is always 2. As future as-
trophysical observations may reveal more information about the spectra index, it would be
interesting to generalize our models and explore the allowed spectra index in future works.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank G. Dom`enech, M. Sasaki for their helpful comments and discussions.
C.L. and M. Z are supported by the grant No. 2021/42/E/ST9/00260 from the National
Science Centre, Poland. A. G. receives support by the DFG under the Emmy-Noether
program, project number 496592360, and by the JSPS KAKENHI grant No. JP24K00624.
– 21 –
