merical simulations are run with pulsed excitation, whereas the analytical model assumes a
continuous wave (CW) excitation. Since the average field of a pulse is smaller than in the
CW case, the analytical function underestimates the dipole element involved. Second, the
analytical model is based on approximations that are instead missing in the numerical sim-
ulations, which inherently takes into account all possible nonlinear effects that could affect
the observed intensity-dependent blueshift of the SH signal. We thus determine the dipole
element as d = 4.9 e˚A and a lower limit of T2 = 25 fs for the dephasing time.
D.
Conclusion
In this work, we investigated the intrinsic limitations and capabilities of parametric non-
linear optics, in particular as a spectroscopy tool to probe the equilibrium condition of
resonant two-level systems. We have shown that, even in the perturbative regime, coherent
all-optical modulation triggered by the fundamental beam can modify the energy levels un-
der investigation. A deeper understanding of the dual effect of the light that simultaneously
perturbs and measures the sample therefore plays an indispensable key role for any measure-
ment of nonlinear optical effects in the perturbative regime. In our WSe2 monolayer sample,
this dual effect manifests itself in power-dependent measurements in the proximity of the
A exciton resonance, with a characteristic deviation from the canonical quadratic scaling
of the SH intensity. This unusual behavior is caused by an intensity-dependent blueshift
of the energy levels caused by light-induced OS and BS shifts. We corroborate our exper-
imental observations both analytically and numerically with a theoretical model based on
the Semiconductor Bloch Equations. From this, we additionally extract the fundamental
material parameters: dephasing time and transition dipole element, which can serve again
as a basis to optimize the used models. Finally, we anticipate that SH modulation, achieved
through optically controlled bandgap engineering in the perturbative regime, could enable
novel nonlinear modulation schemes. When combined with elements like metasurfaces [27]
or photonic cavities [35], this approach could lead to sizeable modulations at even lower
excitation intensities than demonstrated in this work.
12
