Multilevel Quantum Rabi Models
13
reduces to 2√n for large enough n. We also found that although the broad structure
of the spectral properties are not significantly changed by the introduction of small
detunings, closer examination reveals that they can nevertheless lead to interesting
systematic deviations.
We conclude that multilevel systems in which the individual elements of the
coupling matrix are relatively weak, can nevertheless provide a promising route to
accessing the strong coupling regimes of the Rabi model, provided sufficiently large
numbers of almost degenerate levels exist. Going beyond the case of multiple excited
states considered in Ref. [10], having in addition a ground state manifold containing a
large number of almost degenerate levels does indeed provide a significant additional
boost to the largest coupling in the system. Furthermore, our results from the extreme
cases of uniform and random coupling matrices suggest that the strongest coupling for
the more likely range of intermediate cases will be boosted in a way that scales at least
as strongly as 2√n.
We believe that there are several interesting possible ways in which the work
presented here could be extended. These include quantifying the impact of detunings
on the spectral properties of the system in more detail (e.g., calculating the properties
of the distribution shown in Fig. 6 analytically), as well exploring how they affect the
dynamical properties. Finally, we note that in thinking about the couplings between
levels in the ground- and excited-state manifolds, we have approached the problem
from a mathematical perspective focusing on the limiting cases of uniform and random
couplings.
For specific physical realisations (colloidal quantum dots coupled to a
plasmonic resonator [11], for example) it would be interesting to carry out a derivation
starting from a microscopic description.
This might be expected to reveal system-
dependent constraints on the couplings, as well as possibly giving rise to interesting
complications, such as couplings to more than one field quadrature.
Acknowledgments
We thank Sven Gnutzmann for very helpful suggestions on random matrix theory. ADA
acknowledges support in the form of a Leverhulme Trust Research Project Grant (RPG-
2023-177).
Appendix A. Singular Value Decomposition and Radiation Basis
The goal of this Appendix is to outline the general form of the transformation between
the bare basis and radiation basis achieved by applying a singular value decomposition
(SVD) to the coupling matrix, Λ. The SVD isolates the collective atomic modes that
couple independently to the field, with each singular value λk representing an effective
coupling strength.
This decomposition ensures that the light-matter interaction is
reduced to a direct sum of independent two-level subsystems. Only those modes with
non-zero singular values, of which there are at most m (since we take n ≥m), participate
