The initial set of model parameters is created at random from the interval bounds specified for each parameter,
beginning with a random seed. This will create a family of curves, resulting in an increase in MAPE and convergence
time to the best solution.
After a thousand iterations and thorough observations of the trend of phase shifts and potential, we can decrease
the sample space for the parameters so that computation time for parameter optimization is reduced while the error
between expected and computed phase shifts is lowered.
The advantage of the Genetic algorithm is that it scans across a large no of possible curves while tending to
converge towards the final potential.
The optimal model parameters for single channels are shown in the Table 1.
During optimization, it was
discovered that the values of parameter V2 approach zero or are in the order of 10−5. As a result, we have omitted
the value of V2 from the table because it consistently tends to zero across all channels.
The obtained inverse potential using these optimized parameters and corresponding phase shifts are plotted in
Fig.(1, 2) for single ℓ−channels.
For the P state, data is available from 6 MeV and consists of several disparate values, as shown in the Fig.1. The
generated interaction potential represents the best feasible optimal solution. The quality of the fits is substantially
energy dependent, therefore it tries to match the largest phase shift possible.
In the case of 3P0, the data shows a discontinuous pattern at 6- 8 MeV . Beyond 8 MeV , the obtained SPS
corresponds well to the expected data. Because phase shifts exhibit a declining trend with negative values, the
potential curve can be seen to be repulsive.
For the 3P1 state, the phase shift initially increases before gradually decreasing to negative values. This slight
initial rise in phase shift results in a shallow potential well with a depth of approximately 4.5 MeV .
Likewise, for the 3P2 state, a potential well with a depth of 7.21 MeV is observed. Additionally, the presence
of a Coulomb barrier arises due to the repulsive interaction, which corresponds to the characteristic increasing and
decreasing behavior of the phase shift.
For the D-state, data has been obtained from Schmelzbach et al. for the energy range of 3 to 5.8 MeV and from
Jenny et al. for 6 to 14 MeV . To accurately capture the resonances in 3D2 and 3D3, it is essential to consider the
low-energy data from 3 to 6 MeV , as the resonances occur within this range. With the exception of the 6–8 MeV
region, where there is a small disagreement due to discontinuity in the expected data, 3D2 phase shifts match the
experimental data quite well. The phase shifts remain consistently positive, indicating an attractive interaction.
The obtained inverse potential for 3D2 is purely attractive, with a depth of Vd = 57.54 MeV at a distance of
rd = 1.1 fm.
For 3D3, phase shifts decrease from 3 to 14 MeV , while data below 3 MeV is extrapolated using the Genetic
Algorithm. As a result of this precise extrapolation of the measured phase shifts, the resonance obtained in 3D3
matches the experimental ones. This demonstrates how efficient, adaptable, and stable the algorithm is. As a result,
the generated inverse potential for 3D3 exhibits a depth of potential Vd of 69.83 MeV at a distance of 0.94 fm, as
illustrated in Fig. 2.
Multi channel scattering: For α −d scattering up to 14 MeV , coupling exist only for J = 1. The interaction
between the two states within this channel is governed by the degree of coupling, represented by the mixing
10
