Consensus-based qubit configuration optimization for variational algorithms on
neutral atom quantum systems
R.J.P.T. de Keijzer,1, 2, ∗L. Y. Visser,3, 2 O. Tse,3, 2 and S.J.J.M.F. Kokkelmans1, 2
1Department of Applied Physics and Science Education,
Eindhoven University of Technology, P. O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands
2Eindhoven Hendrik Casimir Institute, Eindhoven University of Technology,
P. O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands
3Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Eindhoven University of Technology,
P. O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
In this work, we report an algorithm that is able to tailor qubit interactions for individual vari-
ational quantum algorithm problems. Here, the algorithm leverages the unique ability of a neutral
atom tweezer platform to realize arbitrary qubit position configurations [1]. These configurations
determine the degree of entanglement available to a variational quantum algorithm via the inter-
atomic interactions. Good configurations will accelerate pulse optimization convergence and help
mitigate barren plateaus. As gradient-based approaches are ineffective for position optimization
due to the divergent R−6 nature of neutral atom interactions, we opt to use a consensus-based
algorithm to optimize the qubit positions. By sampling the configuration space instead of using
gradient information, the consensus-based algorithm is able to successfully optimize the positions,
yielding adapted variational quantum algorithm ansatzes that lead to both faster convergence and
lower errors. In this work, we show that these optimized configurations generally result in large
improvements in the system’s ability to solve ground state minimization problems for both random
Hamiltonians and small molecules.
INTRODUCTION
The goal of a variational quantum algorithm (VQA) is
to construct a parametrized unitary U that maps an
initial state |ψ0⟩to a final state |ψ(T)⟩minimizing some
cost function f [2]. This is performed by optimizing the
parameters θ in parameterized unitaries U[θ], such that
|ψ(T)⟩= U[θ]|ψ0⟩.
Generally, gate-based variational
quantum algorithms will try to create a universal gate
ansatz that is in theory able to find a minimizer for
any f [3]. Such ansatzes include the hardware-efficient
ansatz [4] and the qubit coupled cluster ansatz (QCC) [5].
However, these ansatzes often require a multitude of
gates and large depths to realize specific unitaries.
Especially in the NISQ era [6], these large-depth circuits
can lead to low fidelities that inhibit the rendering of the
unitary. Recent work suggests using a problem-inspired
ansatz rather than a universal one [7–10].
This could
lead to lower depths and faster convergence in finding
optimal parameters θ. In quantum chemistry, VQAs are
used to find the ground state of some molecular target
Hamiltonian Htarg by minimizing a function of the
form f = ⟨ψ(T)|Htarg|ψ(T)⟩. Work on problem-inspired
ansatzes for these problems includes the UCCSD ansatz
based on the annihilation and creation operators of
electronic orbitals [10], and the ADAPT-VQE ansatz
which tries to gain the most correlation energy for the
least number of parameters [7].
We refer to Ref. [11]
for a recent comprehensive overview on gate-based
∗Corresponding author: r.j.p.t.d.keijzer@tue.nl
problem-inspired ansatzes.
Another approach to in-
crease the expressibility of evolution is to go from a
gate-based algorithm to a pulse-based algorithm, where
the parameters θ take the form of physical control
functions z, such as laser intensities or electrical currents
[12, 13]. These have demonstrated the ability to realize a
larger class of unitaries in less running time, mitigating
errors, and increasing fidelity [14].
Figure 1. CBO of 5-qubit positions Xα. On the right side,
through the consensus based algorithm, the gold traps Xa
shift more to the blue traps Xb than vice versa, since f(Xb) <
f(Xa). Left side shows analogous case for f(Xb) > f(Xa).
Positions of traps generated via SLM, and pulses z executed
through qubit lasers.
arXiv:2504.06702v1  [quant-ph]  9 Apr 2025
