covery potential well beyond current experimental bounds in time for the final decisions on the
experiments for the future colliders.
The full physics programme of SHiP will then be able to exploit the facility for 15 years of data-
taking, establishing SHiP as a cornerstone of CERN’s long-term strategy in non-energy-frontier particle
physics. By extending CERN’s reach into the coupling frontier, SHiP strengthens Europe’s leader-
ship in intensity-frontier research, ensuring that all viable paths to new physics remain rigorously
explored.
2
Physics programme at the "Coupling Frontier"
The parameter space for potential new particles that could extend the SM spans a vast range of masses
and coupling constants, requiring a broad-gauged experimental approach. The SHiP experiment is de-
signed to explore this uncharted territory by pushing the limits of the coupling frontier. It will search for
signatures of FIPs, including LDM, and perform precision measurements in neutrino physics, leveraging
the high-intensity proton beam at the SPS.
The main BSM target of SHiP are FIPs with mass in the 0.5 – 5 GeV/c2 range. This domain is
special and attractive for several reasons: (i) current collider experiments and experiments at future col-
liders have limited potential to explore this range; (ii) the possibility to copiously produce these particles
by decays of numerous mesons and have thousands of events, which may allow, in case of discovery, to
reconstruct the properties of the FIP and test if it is involved in the resolution of the BSM problems; (iii)
synergy between laboratory probes and cosmological/astrophysical observations, that define the target
FIP parameter space in terms of coupling from below and from above.
SHiP’s search for FIP decay signatures is designed to be performed in a near-zero background
environment, while the measurements of scattering signatures have a very low but well-controlled irre-
ducible background component from neutrino interactions. These are crucial conditions given that the
expected event rates for many of these feebly-interacting particles are extremely low.
The following sections outline SHiP’s physics objectives and experimental strategy in more detail.
2.1
Searches for FIPs through decay signatures
The discovery of long-lived FIPs would fundamentally transform our understanding and strategy in
particle physics. These particles, predicted in many well-motivated extensions of the SM, could provide
crucial insights into some of the most profound open questions, such as the origin of neutrino masses,
the nature of dark matter, and the mechanism behind baryogenesis [10].
With the use of the SPS high-intensity proton beam and a detector capable of reconstructing a very
wide range of multi-body final states, SHiP is specifically designed to directly and generically search for
decays of FIPs that couple feebly to SM particles. Some of the most compelling candidates include
(see [3] and references therein):
– Heavy Neutral Leptons (HNLs): Predicted in seesaw models, HNLs offer a natural explanation
for neutrino oscillations and masses and the observed matter-antimatter asymmetry via leptogen-
esis;
– Dark Scalars and Dark Photons: Emerging from Higgs-portal and vector-portal models, respect-
ively, these particles provide a potential link between the SM and a hidden sector, could play a role
in explaining dark matter, or be involved in inflation;
– Axion-like Particles (ALPs): ALPs arise in many extensions of the SM, and can be viable dark
matter candidates, or mediate the interactions between SM and hidden sectors;
– Inelastic dark matter: generically appear when considering the scenario with dark matter escap-
ing direct detection;
2
