Entropy 2024, 26, 612
58 of 84
6.5.2. Poincaré Plots
As with the equal mass case, the annulus and pretzel trajectories are in similar regions
of the Poincaré plot, separated by a region of chaos, but the shapes and sizes of the different
regions change. The R system is topologically similar to the N system, but with the various
regions distorted in a manner similar to the equal mass case.
Figure 40 compares the Poincaré sections for the N and R systems for the mass ratio
1:1:0.1 for η = 0.3. The triangular annulus region moves towards the top of the surface of
section, and becomes smaller in both systems. This latter effect is a manifestation of the
difﬁculty in attaining annulus motion noted above, when one particle is much less massive
than the other two.
If one particle is much more massive than the other two, the annulus region becomes
larger and extends towards the lower region of the plot, as shown in Figure 41 in both the R
and N systems for the mass ratio 1:1:10. In this situation, the hex-particle needs less angular
momentum to attain an annulus orbit in the (ρ-λ) plane. Somewhat like a two-planet solar
system in one-dimension, the two lighter bodies behave like members of two separate
two-body systems, with the heavy particle taking the role of the second body for each,
as shown in Figure 38. Furthermore, additional regions of chaos appear that are absent in
the equal mass case.
An example of a Poincaré plot when all three masses are unequal is shown in Figure 42
for the N and R systems, with a mass ratio 1:5:10. Since none of the bodies have the same
mass, the symmetry about the pR = 0 axis in the N system is gone. Different regions are
not as clearly segregated as in the m1 = m2 case, and instead extend over a larger region of
the plot. A region of chaos separating outer pretzel regions from the inner annulus region is
marked by A in the left diagram, and above and below B are new regions of chaos amongst
pretzel trajectories.
The R system further distorts the N diagram to the lower right. The chaotic region
separating annulus and pretzel trajectories is now two loops that were created by a single
trajectory, both marked by a 1. The annulus region is conﬁned to the area inside both of
these loops (marked by a 2), where a single annulus trajectory will visit both regions.
The key feature of the unequal mass case, for both the N and R systems, is the presence
of additional chaotic regions that are absent in the equal mass case in the corresponding
constant energy hyper-surface. These additional chaotic regions appear within the pretzel
regions of the corresponding equal mass plot, and are characterized by broadened lines in
the pretzel region, evident in each of Figures 40–42. The origin of this additional chaos is
not understood.
The unequal mass case is equivalent to the two-dimensional symmetric wedge billiard
system in a uniform gravitational ﬁeld [3], with the relative masses of the particles directly
related to the wedge angle θ by
tan θ =
√
1 + 2α−2
1 + 2α−1
(190)
where α is as deﬁned as above, and θ = π/6 corresponds to α = 1, the equal mass case.
The angle of the wedge is related to the angle between the bisectors of the hexagonal well.
The only distinction between the wedge system and the three-body system is the absence of
collisions in the latter. If all masses are equal there is no distinction between a collision and
a crossing of two bodies (apart from particle labelling) and so the Poincaré maps become
identical in this case.
