 
4 
To further evaluate scalability, we conduct a systematic benchmarking study on QUBO problems 
(size: up to 10,000 variables), designed to mimic real-world scenarios through randomly generated 
elements. PT-ICM is excluded from this analysis due to excessive solving times compared to other 
solvers (Fig. 1b). As shown in Fig. 2, classical solvers (IP, SA, SD, and TS) are accurate for smaller 
problems but become inaccurate as the problem size increases. Consistent with the results in Fig. 
1, the SD and TS solvers exhibit low relative accuracy even for a relatively small problem (e.g., 
2,000). IP and SA are more accurate than SD and TS but fail to identify the optimal state for large 
problems. It is known that IP can provide global optimality guarantees40, but our study highlights 
that proving a solution is globally optimal is challenging for large and dense problems. For 
example, in one case (n = 7,000), the optimality gap remains as large as ~17.73%, where the best 
bound is -19,660 while the solution obtained from the IP solver is -16,700, with the optimality gap 
not narrowing even after 2 hours of runtime. The relative accuracy can be improved by employing 
the QUBO decomposition strategy (e.g., SA–QBSolv), yet it still fails to identify high-quality 
solutions for problem sizes exceeding 4,000. In contrast, quantum solvers demonstrate superior 
accuracy for large-scale problems. Notably, the HQA solver consistently outperforms all other 
methods, reliably identifying the best solution regardless of problem size (Fig. 2).  
 
Fig. 3a shows that the solving time rapidly increases as the problem size increases for the classical 
solvers, indicating that solving combinatorial optimization problems with classical solvers can 
become intractable for large-size problems (Fig. 3b). The solving time trends with increasing 
problem size agree well with the theoretical time complexities of the classical solvers (Fig. 3b and 
Fig. S3, see 2-4-2. Computational Time section). While the IP solver can be faster than other 
classical solvers, it also requires significant time for large problems (e.g., n > 5,000). The use of 
the QUBO decomposition strategy dramatically reduces the solving time, but the quantum solvers 
consistently outpace classical counterparts (Fig. 3a). For example, the solving time (n = 10,000) is 
0.0855 s for HQA, 101 s for QA–QBSolv, and 561 s for SA–QBSolv.  
 
Decomposing a large QUBO into smaller pieces leads to a higher relative accuracy, as a solver can 
find better solutions for each decomposed QUBOs, mitigating the current hardware limitations. 
Note that the accuracy of QA for QUBOs with problem sizes of 30 and 100 is, respectively, 1.0 
and 0.9956 (without leveraging the QUBO decomposition method). Hence, the accuracy of QA–
QBSolv with a sub-QUBO size of 30 is higher than that with a sub-QUBO size of 100, as 
decomposed QUBOs with a smaller size fit the QA hardware better (Fig. 4a). However, a smaller 
sub-QUBO size results in a greater number of sub-QUBOs after decomposition, leading to 
increased time required to solve all decomposed problems (Fig. 4b). It is noted that the QA–
QBSolv solver does not guarantee finding the best solution for large problems (size > 4,000), 
resulting in lower accuracies regardless of sub-QUBO sizes, as can be seen in Fig. 2 and Fig. 4a.  
 
Our results show that HQA, which incorporates QA with classical algorithms to overcome the 
current quantum hardware limitations, is currently the most efficient solver for complex real-world 
problems that require the formulation of dense and large QUBOs. In this context, we define 
"Quantum Advantage" as the ability of a quantum-enhanced solver to achieve high accuracy and 
significantly faster problem-solving time compared to the classical solvers for large-scale 
optimization problems. Our findings suggest that leveraging quantum resources, particularly in 
hybrid configurations, can provide a computational advantage over classical approaches. Besides, 
as the current state of HQA demonstrates, we expect QA will have much higher accuracy and 
