12
Fig. 15. Measured directivity patterns for the sector patterns at 5GHz with a
beamwidth of: (a) θb = 30◦, (b) θb = 45◦, and (c) θb = 60◦. The patterns
from full-wave simulations are also included for comparison.
were investigated through simulations and experiments. For
the beamforming case, it was shown that the subwavelength
cells allow for the excitation of surface waves that are nec-
essary to achieve both amplitude and phase tapering along
the RIS aperture. Additionally, optimizing the RIS through
the simpliﬁed integral-equation model shows high accuracy,
when compared with full-wave simulations and a simpliﬁed
reﬂectarray model that disregards any mutual coupling effects.
The experiments veriﬁed beamsteering with directivities that
approximate the theoretical limit of a uniform-aperture of the
same size (i.e., average illumination efﬁciency of 95%) and
with relatively high power efﬁciency averaging 63% for steer-
ing up to ±60◦. On the other hand, the beamforming sector
patterns displayed good matching with full-wave simulations.
For all cases of varying beamwidth, the variation along the
angular pass range was at or below 3dB, whereas the SLL
was maintained below −10.9dB and the estimated power
efﬁciency was slightly over the constraint of 50%. Overall, the
proposed work paves the way to realize RISs with enhanced
beamforming capabilities that allow not only to steer the beam
but fully control its characteristics with high ﬁdelity.
APPENDIX A
CALCULATION OF MEASURED RIS EFFICIENCY
As mentioned in the main text, the receiving antenna records
the S21(θ) coefﬁcient in different angles at a constant radius
R2. Given that |S21|2 is analogous to the power transmitted
towards each angle θ, the directivity pattern is directly calcu-
lated as:
Dmeas(θ) = 2π
|S21|2
R π/2
−π/2 |S21(θ)|2dθ
,
(18)
where the integration is performed numerically. Subsequently,
the measured illumination efﬁciency ηil is calculated through
Eq. (12) by using the measured directivity Dmeas(θ = θout) as
the nominator. The illumination efﬁciency quantiﬁes how di-
rective is the beam compared to a uniform-amplitude aperture
of the same physical size that radiates towards θout. Of course,
such a metric is relevant only in the beamsteering case that the
aim is to maximize the received power at a single direction
θout.
Furthermore, a total efﬁciency can be obtained. This is
affected not only by the broadening of the beam in the yz-
plane, but also by all other factors that limit the received
power compared to an ideal lossless RIS reﬂecting towards
the desired angle θout. The bi-static radar equation dictates
that the transmission coefﬁcient between the transmitting and
receiving antenna ports is:
|Sideal
21
(θout, θi)|2 = Pr
Pi
= σ(θout, θi)GtGr
4π

λ
4πR1R2
2
,
(19)
where Pr, Pi are the received and incident power, respectively,
Gt, Gr are the gains of the transmitting and receiving antennas
and R1, R2 are their distances from the center of the RIS.
Finally, σ(θr, θi) is the radar cross-section (RCS) of the RIS,
which for an ideal case is [12]:
σ(θout, θi) = 4π (LxLy)2
λ2
cos(θi)cos(θout),
(20)
where Lx, Ly are the RIS’ lengths along the x and y axis,
respectively. By replacing the ideal RCS value of Eq. (20)
into Eq. (19), an ideal |Sideal
21
|2 transmission coefﬁcient can
be calculated. Finally, the total efﬁciency is deﬁned as the
ratio between the measured and ideal values:
ηtot =
|S21(θout)|2
|Sideal
21
(θout, θi)|2 .
(21)
Assuming that uniformity is maintained along the the x-
axis, so that no excessive broadening exists in the elevation
plane, the other factor that limits the total efﬁciency is the
power losses of the RIS. Therefore, an estimation of the power
efﬁciency for each beamsteering case is obtained as:
ηp = ηtot
ηil
.
(22)
