Cryptographic hardware and software in use today has been developed under a set of industry stan-
dards that help maintain a consistent and high level of security across different systems and networks. This
involves defining industry-wide guidelines, best practices, compliance and regulatory criteria, as well as
interoperability parameters. In the US, standards for IT equipment are produced by National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) as Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) and approved by
the Secretary of Commerce. In Europe, the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) devel-
oped the Common Criteria standard (ISO/EN 15408) (http://www.commoncriteriaportal.org/index.cfm).
These standards provide a mechanism for certification of IT and security devices.
QKD equipment, protocols and methods need to be standardized, so that they can be certified for use
by government agencies and/or third parties. Standardization should be realized with QKD protocols
and security proofs that closely match the real-world conditions of the QKD implementation. While
almost all QKD systems in operation today implement some form of device-dependent prepare and
measure QKD, these efforts are equally important to the future deployment of DI-QKD in that they will
accelerate its adoption as the relevant technology comes to maturity, since many of the technical issues
related to integration, interoperability and standardization will have already been solved at least partially.
Government security agencies have noted the need for standardization of QKD before the technology can
considered for adoption on a broad scale [505–507]. This includes developing protocols for connectivity
and interoperability, so that QKD systems can be linked with cryptographic key management systems and
the application layer. These standards not only ensure quality and security, but ensure that equipment
from different future vendors can interoperate together, and are important to establish an industry supply
chain by defining interfaces and technical specifications for components and modules in various systems
or distributed networks.
The successful deployment of QKD testbeds and proof-of-concept integration with cybersecurity hard-
ware demonstrated that QKD technology and networking was sufficiently advanced for the standardiza-
tion process to begin. In 2008, the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) created the
industry specification group for QKD (ISG-QKD) [538], which has produced recommendations regard-
ing QKD architecture, use cases, certification, security proofs and assurances, integration into standard
optical networks, interoperability and interfacing, among other topics [539]. Notably, in 2023 a Common
Criteria Protection Profile for QKD was recently published (GS QKD 016), which “will help manufactur-
ers to submit pairs of ‘prepare and measure’ QKD modules for evaluation under a security certification
process. Such modules can be used by telecom operators and enterprises in securing their networks with
the knowledge that certified products have been subjected to the scrutiny of a formal security evalu-
ation process” [540]. The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) have developed the ISO/IEC 23837 series, which specifies security
requirements, testing procedures, and evaluation methods for quantum key distribution (QKD) mod-
ules [541, 542]. This series is structured under the framework of the ISO/IEC 15408 series, commonly
referred to as the Common Criteria for Information Technology Security Evaluation. By establishing
rigorous standards and assessment methods, the objectives of the ISO/IEC 23837 series are the security
and reliability of QKD technologies for practical and secure implementations. These standards were de-
veloped under subcommittee 27 of joint technical committee (JTC) 1 (Information security, cybersecurity
and privacy protection) [543]. In 2024, a ISO/IEC JTC on quantum technologies was established [544].
The International Telecommunications Union (ITU) have also published documents containing definitions
and recommendations in the ITU-T Y.3800 series (quantum communication) and ITU-T X.1700 series
(QKD networds). An overview of standardization processes and documents can be found in Ref. [108],
and on the organization websites [539, 543–545]. The certification of MDI-QKD devices has been studied
in Ref. [546], in which it is noted that similarities between these findings and ETSI GS QKD 016 sug-
gest that a generic framework could be created to permit certification of various implementations and
protocols, including MDI-QKD.
6.4.2. Quantum key distribution network architecture
Part of the challenge of implementing real-world QKD is determining how this new quantum layer will
integrate into the existing cybersecurity infrastructure. The field tests realized over the last two decades
have been important in accelerating this integration. A number of authors have discussed network layer
architectures for QKD systems [501, 547–549, 107, 108], and similar models have appeared in technical
recommendations by international agencies, such as the ITU (documents Y.3800-Y.3805) [545].
Fig. 19 shows a simplified illustration of a QKD network architecture containing only three users,
similar to the model put forth in Recommendation ITU-T Y.3800 [550]. The network consists of a QKD
layer, a key management layer, a QKD control layer and the application layer. The users reside in the
79
