 
3 
ferromagnets, which is the necessity for an external in-plane magnetic field, thus hindering 
the scalability of antiferromagnetic SOT-MRAM. 
The discovery of van der Waals (vdW) magnetic materials has established an 
unprecedented platform for the research of emergent spin-related phenomena23,24. In 
particular, owing to their intrinsically clean surface without dangling bonds, these 
cleavable magnetic materials hold the potential to tailor the spin symmetries and to 
construct superior heterostructures at the atomic scale. In this work, we synthesize a 
metallic A-type vdW antiferromagnetic crystal (Fe,Co)₃GaTe₂ (FCGT) with perpendicular 
magnetic anisotropy (PMA), and fabricate the Pt/FCGT heterostructure serving as the 
experimental system to study SOT switching mechanism in antiferromagnets. The intrinsic 
net magnetic moment δm//n in Pt/FCGT can be precisely modulated by the even/odd parity 
of vdW layers (Fig. 1c). Combining with the theoretical macrospin model, we reveal a 
layer-dependent parity effect that governs the switching dynamics and experimentally 
demonstrate that the Néel vector of FCGT with odd-number vdW layers can be 180° 
switched via current-induced SOTs. In addition, by constructing an all-vdW, all-
antiferromagnet heterostructure of FCGT/CrSBr with noncollinear interfacial spin textures 
which induces the necessary mirror symmetry-breaking to realise deterministic switching, 
we achieve field-free 180° switching of Néel vector when applying currents along the in-
plane easy axis of the antiferromagnet semiconductor CrSBr.  
Crystal growth and basic characterization 
The plate-like FCGT single crystals with sizes of about 2 × 2 × 0.02 mm are grown 
by the self-flux method (details seen in Methods). The crystalline structure of FCGT with 
P63/mmc space group is shown in Fig. 1d, where the (Fe,Co)3Ga slabs are sandwiched by 
two Te layers25-27. According to the energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) results, 
the ratio of Fe and Co atoms is estimated to be ~4: 1 (Fig. S1). The high-resolution 
transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) image confirms the layered atomic structure 
of FCGT with a vdW gap is ~0.3 nm (Fig. 1e). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the 
FCGT bulk presented in Fig. 1f shows only (0 0 l) peaks, which reveals the high 
crystallinity and crystal surface being the crystallographic ab-plane. In addition, the 
temperature-dependent magnetization is measured with the magnetic field applied along 
the out-of-plane (H//c) and in-plane (H//ab) directions, using zero-field-cooling (ZFC) and 
