G is replaced by a Turaev-Viro TFT on the fusion category C [15–21] or equiv-
alently a Reshetikhin-Turaev TFT on the Drinfeld center of the fusion category
C, see for example [19–21]. (In the special case that C = Vec(G,α) for a ﬁnite-
group G, the Turaev-Viro theory on C reduces to Dijkgraaf-Witten theory for the
group G with twist α.) The idea is that the Drinfeld center contains information
about topological line operators and their braiding and linking relations in three
dimensions, and hence can deﬁne a TFT, as discussed in e.g. [19–21]. The choice
of fusion category, speciﬁcally the associator in the fusion category, encodes the
anomaly (analogously to the diﬀerence between Vec(G) and Vec(G,α), both of
which are associated to the same symmetry group G, but which deﬁne diﬀerent
fusion categories).
Next, let us turn to anomaly resolution. In the language of SymTFT’s, to
resolve an anomalous fusion category C, we construct a ‘club sandwich’ [9], in which
one half of the club sandwich is a SymTFT corresponding to the original fusion
category C, and the other half is the SymTFT corresponding to the resolution ̃C.
Between the two halves is an interface. In the corresponding algebraic construction,
we write
C = Rep(H),
̃C = Rep( ̃
H),
(5.1)
where H, ̃
H are (quasi-)Hopf algebras.
The two halves of the club sandwich
correspond to each of the terms in the sequence
Rep( ̃
H)
∗
Ð→Rep(H),
(5.2)
and the interface between the two halves of the club sandwich corresponds to the
morphism ∗.
In the case of ordinary groups ˜G →G, with kernel K, the interface of the
club sandwich can be understood in terms of a boundary deﬁned by gauging the
one-form symmetry BK = K(1), as gauging the ˜G Dijkgraaf-Witten theory by
BK results in the G Dijkgraaf-Witten theory. For fusion categories, we expect
an analogous interpretation, involving a gauged BK for K the kernel of the map
̃C →C.
One possible formulation for the BK analog for fusion categories is the sus-
pension construction ΣC for a braided fusion category C presented in [22]. Given
a braided fusion category C, one can construct a pointed presemisimple 2-category
BC with a single object ●such that End(●) = C. The braiding of C allows to
endow BC with a prefusion structure, which upon linear completion becomes a fu-
sion 2-category ΣC. This fusion 2-category can be equivalently formulated as the
fusion 2-category of C-module linear categories. Given a ﬁnite abelian group K,
the fusion category C = Vec(K) is not only braided but strict symmetric, and the
suspension 2-category ΣVec(K) = 2Vec(BK) is equivalent to the fusion 2-category
of BK-graded 2-vector spaces.
18
