19
FIG. 11. Microwave spectroscopy approaches. Schematic diagram
of (a) flip-chip method where a large-scale ASI is placed on top of
microwave antenna. Adapted from Ref. [202]. (b) On-chip integra-
tion of ASI by patterning the nanostructured array directly onto the
signal line of a coplanar waveguide. Adapted from Ref. [31].
techniques. This property was recently used to study nonlin-
ear magnon-magnon scattering processes and their coherence
in artificial spin ice, see Fig. 10(e). It was shown that scat-
tering events are determined by each nanomagnet’s mode vol-
ume and profile as well as the coupling between the dynamics
of the two sublattices that exhibit dissimilar frequency-field
behaviors. These result indicate that ASI can facilitate tun-
able directional scattering, with intriguing possibilities in re-
configurable magnonics and neumorphic computing (see also
Sec. VIII).
2.
Microwave spectroscopy
Microwave-based techniques are standard tools to study
magnetization dynamics in magentic materials including ASI.
The measurement takes a shorter time compared to most op-
tical techniques such as BLS. Several different measurement
modalities can be employed for microwave spectroscopy on
magnetic materials. Ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) spec-
troscopy is typically used to investigate magnetic nanostruc-
tures. FMR is either measured using a vector network an-
alyzer (VNA), referred to as VNA-FMR or using a lock-in
technique, where the microwave signal is provided by a mi-
crowave source and detected by a microwave diode, while the
magnetic field is modulated using Hemholtz coils. The output
signal is then rectified using the microwave diode detector and
detected by the lock-in. Alternatively, a voltmeter can be used.
VNA-FMR is usually the preferred choice to obtain a broad-
band spectrum; however, this technique is significantly more
expensive than the simpler lock-in technique. Both methods
can be used in a ‘flip-chip’ geometry, where the ASI covers a
large sample area that is placed up-side-down on a microwave
antenna4,25,204 or in an ‘on-chip’ geometry, where the ASI pat-
terned directly onto the antenna31,205–207. Figure 11 compares
the two configurations. The advantage of the flip-chip geome-
try is that it is versatile and does not require any wirebonding
or probes to connect the microwave antenna. On the flip side,
the ASI network needs to cover a much larger area as com-
pared to an on-chip integration, which makes the EBL writing
process much time-consuming and, hence, more costly.
A microwave signal is then applied to the microwave an-
tenna. This microwave signal is accompanied by a microwave
magnetic field that exerts a torque on the magnetic moments
in the ASI islands. The torque is maximal when the moments
are perpendicular to the microwave magnetic field. If the res-
onance condition is fulfilled, the moments start to precess, see
Eq. (1), and less microwave power is transmitted/reflected.
The transmitted or reflected microwave signal is then mea-
sured by the vector network analyzer or microwave diode. By
varying the bias magnetic field and excitation frequency, it is
possible to experimentally access the different modes in the
magnetic nanostructures. Figure 12(a) presents a summarized
broadband FMR spectra measured on a large array of inter-
connected 2D kagome ASI25. All modes exhibit a monotoni-
cally increasing behavior with the magnitude of H, except for
mode D in the range of 0 to -300 Oe. The abrupt change in
frequency and slope of mode D indicates the onset of mag-
netization reversal in the ASI. The signal strengths of modes
C and D are also depicted right panel in Fig. 12(a). Addi-
tionally, by engineering the geometrical arrangement of ASI
or anti-ASI structures, the resonance frequencies can be tai-
lored due to significant changes in the spin configurations4.
A few representative FMR absorption curves for various ar-
tificial spin ice and anti-spin ice structures at saturation are
shown in Fig. 12(b). Now an interesting question arises: are
these SW modes or nanobars interacting? Gartside et al. ad-
dressed this question by analyzing different microstates in a
width-modulated bi-component ASI71.
They demonstrated
that mode hybridization between reversed and un-reversed
wide bars leads to the formation of distinct upper and lower
frequency v-shaped branches, as shown in Fig. 12(c), using
broadband FMR in a flip-chip configuration. Furthermore,
Lendinez et al.
studied two dissimilar ferromagnetic met-
als (Ni81Fe19 and Co90Fe10) arranged on complementary lat-
tice sites in a square ASI115. They found that the interac-
tion between the two sublattices produced unique spectral fea-
tures attributed to each sublattice. The variation of switch-
ing field values as a function of in-plane angle, presented in
Fig. 12(d), highlights that the interaction and dynamics can be
fine-tuned by appropriately selecting materials. In contrast,
single-element lattices exhibit switching of both sublattices at
similar field values, demonstrating the absence of such distinct
interactions.
Another technique that has gained widespread popularity
is the spin torque-ferromagnetic resonance (ST-FMR) tech-
nique. Here, a microwave charge current is directly passed
through a heterostructure208,209 that consists of a ferromag-
net, in our case an ASI, capped with a heavy metal layer with
significant spin-orbit coupling. A radio-frequency charge cur-
rent is then applied in the bilayer which creates an oscillat-
ing transverse spin current in the heavy metal layer due to the
spin Hall effect. This spin-polarized electron current is then
injected into the ferromagnet leading to the onset of the pre-
cession of the magnetization. When the spin precession of the
ferromagnetic layer is driven into resonant oscillations, this
results in a concomitant oscillation of the bilayer resistance
due to the anisotropic magnetoresistance. The time-varying
-resistance R(t) change leads to a dc spin rectification sig-
nal V(t) across the length of the sample from the mixing of
