variable QKD systems developed by several different groups and institutions. The SECOQC network
demonstrated compatability and interoperability of these different systems, and employed a “hop-by-
hop” relay scheme, in which a cypher key (to be used for classical encryption) is sent along the chain
of trusted nodes using one-time pad encryption between each connected pair of nodes. Routing and key
consumption were also addressed. From 2009 to 2011, the three-node SwissQuantum network was de-
ployed in Geneva, Switzerland [500]. The keys generated were tested for various applications, including
high-speed commercial OS layer 2 encryptors (10 Gbit/s Ethernet), research platforms for encryption
and authentication, and IPSec encryptors.
In 2010, high-speed QKD systems running at GHz clock
rates were developed and deployed in Tokyo, enabling encrypted video conferencing over 45km using a
one-time pad (OTP) [501]. In addition, a key management layer was included to control and coordinate
key consumption. To date, China has constructed the largest QKD network, spanning over 2,000 km
and linking cities from Beijing to Shanghai using trusted relays [496]. Furthermore, in 2016 the Micius
quantum science satellite was launched. Micius has facilitated quantum key distribution between various
locations in China [496] and Europe and enabled real-time encrypted video calls between Beijing and
Vienna [502]. The Cambridge quantum network achieved ∼2Mbps key rates coexistent with 100Gbps
data traffic over metropolitan distances, and used link redundancy to mitigate denial of service risk. A
thorough overview of QKD networks implemented to date can be found in Ref. [108].
In terms of DI approaches, MDI-QKD has been field tested in a metropolitan network, where three
users in a star configuration could communicate with each other through a central untrusted relay [423].
MDI-QKD systems have been realized in fiber optical links together with classical IP network signals [424,
425]. Recently, free-space satellite links and fiber optic channels have been integrated for MDI-QKD [503],
showing improvement to background noise when compared with BB84, and which could greatly increase
transmission distances. There has also been considerable progress in CV MDI-QKD [504].
Though these field-tested QKD networks and other important advances have propelled QKD towards
real-world use, there are still many challenges to be faced before QKD (of any type) can be fully inte-
grated into the existing cybersecurity infrastrucure. Despite the progress mentioned above, many national
security organizations and regulatory agencies worldwide still do not classify QKD as a viable replace-
ment for key distribution based on public-key cryptosystems. To protect against the threat of quantum
computation, post-quantum cryptography is currently seen as a more cost effective and robust solution
to key agreement [505–507]. In one form or another, the critical issues most often cited are:
1. Implementation security - specialty hardware and implementation particularities (laser pulses are
not single photons, detectors can be vulnerable to side-channel attacks) can introduce additional
vulnerabilities that may not be considered into theoretical security proofs.
2. Authentication - Unlike public key cryptosystems, QKD does not provide a method for authenti-
cation protocols, which are widely used for handshaking, signatures, etc. Moreover, the security of
QKD relies on a an authenticated classical channel for post-processing.
3. Trusted Relays - without quantum repeaters, extending QKD to large distances requires interme-
diate trusted relays, where security depends upon a classical hardware device.
4. Denial of service risk - If a private key cannot be established, the QKD protocol aborts, opening
the door to denial-of-service attacks in which the communication channel is shut down.
5. Cost - special-purpose equipment is required for QKD. These devices, such as single-photon detec-
tors, are typically expensive, raising costs of installation, operation and maintenance.
6. Compatibility - QKD needs to coexist and integrate with classical encryption systems and networks,
which is complex due to the different operational frameworks of quantum and classical cryptography.
Here we provide a brief description of how these issues are currently being tackled by QKD community.
Implementation Security. Quantum cryptographic protocols can be shown to be information-theoretic
secure in principle. However, practical implementations can open the door to a wide range of vulner-
abilities that might not be considered in security proofs [32, 508]. Thus, implementation security is of
paramount importance in taking QKD into the real world. Of course QKD is not special in this regard,
the same is true for all encryption techniques, which are based on security claims or assumptions that
might not be valid upon implementation. It is essential that all components of any cybersecurity system
be extensively vetted and routinely tested.
The effort to achieve implementation security in QKD has been two-fold. On the one hand is the
effort to remedy the practical issues with specific solutions, either by including additional techniques to
QKD protocols (as in the case of decoy-state QKD, for example) and/or characterization of the devices,
or by adapting security proofs to include these practical details. In addition, there has been effort to
76
