4
3.43
3.44
3.45
3.46
3.47
Frequency (GHz)
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
Transmission (dB)
4r
3r
2r
1r
1d
50 m
(b)
(c)
(a)
1r
1d
tt1
2r
tt2
3r
tt3
4r
tt4
Fig. 3.
(a) A representative optical image of a pulley coupled microring
resonator with ring radius 180 µm, gap (g) 200 nm, and coupling length
(lcp) 80 λ. (b) A time-domain representation of the transmission data of a
pulley coupled microring device with lcp of 102 λ. The labelling of the pulses
follows the nomenclature of Fig.2. (c) The transmission spectrum of the pulley
coupled ring, showing the build-up of the resonance as subsequent ring transits
are accounted for. The legend (and colour scheme) correspond to the peaks
indicated in (b) and indicates the width of the temporal bandpass filter: ir
means the time domain trace from t = 0 until the end of ir is taken to
generate the corresponding spectral response.
and the first pulse (1d) corresponding to a direct waveguide
transit (skipping the ring). We have removed the EM crosstalk
by applying a Hann-shaped notch filter (center 0 ns, span
100 ns) [14] to the time domain data. Fig.3(c) shows the
change in the spectral transmission response of the device
as each subsequent ring transit pulse is accounted for. We
perform this operation by applying a bandpass filter to the
time domain data, centred at t = 0, with increasing filter width
to accommodate subsequent pulses, before transforming the
data back to the frequency domain. We note that the bandpass
filtering includes the triplet transit pulses in addition to the
ring transits. A zoom-in to one of the resonances is shown
in the inset of Fig. 3(c) which clearly shows the evolution
of the resonance lineshape from a broad background (green
curve, corresponding to the direct transit) to a sharp Lorentzian
lineshape whose spectral width reduces and extinction depth
increases as more pulses (each delayed by one cavity round
trip) are combined together by increasing the temporal band-
pass filter width. While this result is well understood from
Fourier analysis, being able to empirically measure this result,
and explicitly verify the device operation is illuminating.
As Fig.3(c) (and the inset, which zooms into one of the
modes) clearly show, the (subsequent) pulses from the ring
resonator arrive in phase (modulo 2π) and are always ≈π
out of phase with the direct transmission (green curve). The
π phase difference is usually understood by treating the
waveguide resonator coupling region as a partially transmitting
beam splitter [17] and using unitarity to impose a π/2 phase
shift between the reflected and transmitted beams referenced to
two suitably chosen reference planes. Given the ring channel
encounters the coupler twice while coupling in and out,
the (overall) phase difference with respect to the waveguide
channel is π. While this result is well understood analytically
[5], [16], [17], it is still notable that it holds in a real device
like in Fig.3(a), which does not fit the blackbox model of
a lossless beam splitter with point coupling [18], wherein
such general symmetry considerations can be invoked. More
precisely, the observation of multi-cycle interference (between
subsequent round trips of the cavity) shows that insertion loss
and mode conversion are negligible even in a long distributed
pulley coupling interface like Fig.3(a). Moreover, we can also
conclude that (residual) surface roughness in the waveguide
does not induce appreciable mode conversion, and effectively
single-mode propagation and interference can be observed in
an intrinsically multimode system, with the caveat that the
IDTs are in practice mode-selective receivers, and we can not
distinguish between mode conversion and excess attenuation
in these experiments.
In addition to providing a graphic visualization of how the
cavity resonance builds up, the ability to selectively isolate
features in the time domain data allows us to infer the spectral
distortion induced by unwanted (parasitic) processes. PnIC
platforms provide a natural route towards spectral shaping
and control of microwave transmission by cascading multiple
resonant elements together in arbitrary geometries. However,
the desired spectral response can only be achieved if the differ-
ent interfaces are close to lossless, i.e. the different elements
can be concatenated without significant signal back-reflection.
