Abstract
Naturally-occurring whistler-mode waves in near-Earth space play a crucial role in accelerating
electrons to relativistic energies and scattering them in pitch angle, driving their precipitation into
Earth’s atmosphere. Here, we report on the results of a controlled laboratory experiment focusing
on the excitation of whistler waves via temperature anisotropy instabilities–the same mechanism
responsible for their generation in space. In our experiments, anisotropic energetic electrons, pro-
duced by perpendicularly propagating microwaves at the equator of a magnetic mirror, provide the
free energy for whistler excitation. The observed whistler waves exhibit a distinct periodic excita-
tion pattern, analogous to naturally occurring whistler emissions in space. Particle-in-cell simula-
tions reveal that this periodicity arises from a self-regulating process: whistler-induced pitch-angle
scattering rapidly relaxes the electron anisotropy, which subsequently rebuilds due to continuous
energy injection and further excites wave. Our results have direct implications for understanding
the process and characteristics of whistler emissions in near-Earth space.
Whistler-mode waves are naturally occurring electromagnetic emissions widely found in
planetary magnetospheres and many other plasma systems. Propagating below the electron
gyrofrequency, these waves play a crucial role in electron dynamics across multiple contexts.
In tokamaks, runaway electrons can drive whistler waves unstable, leading to pitch-angle
scattering that mitigates these runaways [1–3]. In the solar wind, whistler waves regulate the
nonthermal features of the electron velocity distribution, such as strahl electrons, thereby
influencing energy transport and solar wind energetics [4–8]. In Earth’s magnetosphere,
whistler-mode chorus waves serve as a key mechanism for accelerating radiation belt electrons
[9, 10] and scattering them into the loss cone [11–13], contributing to auroral precipitation.
Whistler-mode waves are introduced into laboratory plasmas either by direct antenna
injection [14–17] or excited through velocity-space instabilities, such as beam [18–22], loss-
cone [23, 24], and temperature anisotropy distributions [25, 26]. Of particular importance,
whistler-mode chorus waves arise from temperature anisotropic electrons with T⊥/T∥> 1
injected from the plasma sheet into the inner magnetosphere (T⊥and T∥being the perpen-
dicular and parallel electron temperatures to the background magnetic field, respectively)
[e.g., 27–33]. Despite many spacecraft observations of whistler wave excitation in near-Earth
space, there have been far too few laboratory studies of this important process.
2
