GreenOx
Cat
Horse
Lays
RedOx
RGB
GT
Ours
GT
Ours
GT
Ours
GT
Ours
GT
Ours
Mesh and Normal 
back view
front view
Figure 3. Qualitative results of captured datasets. For each sce-
nario, the top row shows the input reference image, ground-truth
mesh (obtained by painting and scanning), and corresponding nor-
mals; the bottom row demonstrates our resolved results, including
the rendered image and extracted mesh.
method stands out in rendering out the higher-quality sur-
face reconstruction. While multi-view consistency assump-
tions tend to break down when dealing with glossy surfaces
in certain scenes, our polarization setup allows for the ef-
fective modeling of RGB information from various perspec-
tives through polarization rendering, as denoted by Iout
ϕpol ear-
lier. This unique representation seamlessly integrates both
the object’s normal vector and material properties, facilitat-
ing the deduction of geometric characteristics and material
properties within a unified framework. By progressively en-
hancing the accuracy of Iout
ϕpol through the minimization of
rendering loss, we implicitly refine the accuracy of normal
vector and subsequently elevate the quality of geometry.
4. Experiment
4.1. Datasets and Results
To meet our requirements, we build a simple data acquisi-
tion system using off-the-shelf products, which includes an
RGB camera (SONY A6400 with 4K resolution) and a lin-
ear polarizer, as shown in Fig. 1. We select several complex
objects with varying materials, such as ceramics, metal, and
plastic, see examples in Figs. 1 (RedOx) and 3 (GreenOx,
NeuPIL
Normal
PhySG
NVDR
InvR Ref-NeuS NeRO
Ours
Cat
Diffuse
Specular
GT
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Figure 4. Qualitative comparison with SOTA methods. Our ap-
proach excels in reconstructing intricate features such as beard and
tail segments, due to the advantage of the polarization information.
Cat, Horse and Lays). In practice, we fix the orientation of
polarizer across all the captured views and hold the device
to collect images approximately evenly around the object,
see example camera poses in Fig. 2. The multi-view im-
ages are captured under uncontrolled indoor lighting envi-
ronments, and about 40 images are enough for each object.
In all cases, we first downsample the image by a factor of 4
and apply COLMAP [23] to obtain the initial poses.
Results tested on RedOx model and others are shown in
Figs. 1 and 3. Note that, for a variety of different materials
(ceramics, metal, etc.), with varying lighting conditions, our
method still recovers the surface geometry reasonably well.
Moreover, the fact that polarization cues behave differently
for the diffuse and specular components greatly aid in un-
derstanding material properties and facilitating radiance de-
composition, which is an inherently ill-posed problem. As
depicted in presented examples, our results reasonably sep-
arate the diffuse and specular components. Additionally, the
estimated polarimetric cues align with our intuition, i.e., the
AoP is orthogonal for the diffuse and specular components,
while the DoP is higher for the specular regions.
4.2. Assessments against Counterparts
Comparisons with non-polarization methods.
We have
conducted a comparison of our approach with several state-
of-the-art radiance decomposition and surface reconstruc-
tion methods.
For instance, as depicted in Fig. 4, Neu-
ralPIL [2] and PhySG [34] are the baseline methods of
PANDORA [7], InvRender [35] accounts for indirect light-
ing in the BRDF estimation and employs the Spherical
Gaussian to represent direct or indirect lighting.
NVD-
iffRec [13] utilizes differentiable Monte-Carlo sampling
sampling with a denoiser. Ref-NeuS [9] aims to reduce am-
biguity by attenuating the effect of reflective surfaces, while
NeRO [18] proposes to reconstruct the geometry and BRDF
of objects with strong reflective appearances.
