4
a strong susceptibility to external perturbations that couple to
the photon field and break the Z2 symmetry [121].
In spin language, the photon coherence can be viewed
as an effective dynamical transverse field Bx(t) ∼−⟨ˆa + ˆa†⟩.
For Bx = 0, the resulting effective Hamiltonian is diago-
nalizable in the local basis given by the eigenstates of ˆsz
i,
implying absence of thermalization. In contrast, when this
self-consistent field is nonzero for a sufficiently long time
window, cf. Fig. 3a (upper left panel), we get an effective
two-dimensional transverse-field quantum Ising model which
quickly thermalizes [17, 20, 23].
Quenching to smaller values of the long-range coupling, we
reach a point where the system does not realize a superradiant
phase anymore. This can be inferred both from the evolution
of the photon condensate, which decays while showing strong
oscillations (upper middle panel of Fig. 3a), and more impor-
tantly, from the trivial photonic spectrum featuring a narrow
line at the cavity frequency at late times (upper middle panel
of Fig. 3b), which has to be contrasted with the broad pho-
tonic spectrum in the superradiant phase (upper left panel of
Fig. 3b). While the ground state of the post-quench Hamilto-
nian is superradiant, the critical temperature is nearly an or-
der of magnitude smaller in this case compared to regime I,
and the order melts due the excessive injected energy by the
quench. Up to intermediate times the effective field Bx is dom-
inated by strong temporal fluctuations (upper middle panel of
Fig. 3a) that act as a fast noisy drive which heats up the atoms.
The weak long-range coupling allows the stabilization of an-
tiferromagnetic order in the system supported by λ, as can
be seen from the behavior of staggered magnetization which
saturates to a finite value (lower middle panel of Fig. 3a).
However, the most notable feature is the emergence of a long-
lasting prethermal state in which spins and photons coexist at
different temperatures (middle panel of Fig. 2b). The presence
of this state, which is in stark contrast with behavior of generic
interacting systems [9–11], can be attributed to the lack of
proper energy resonances between the spin and photon sectors
(after the initial fast energy transfer enabled by Bx(t)). At such
late times (dashed lines in Fig. 2(a)), the energy exchange rate
between spins and photons is, according to the Fermi’s golden
rule, proportional to the overlap of spin and photon spectral
densities as dE/dt ∝
R
dω ω [. . .] ρph(ω) ρs(ω), where [. . .]
represents inconsequential spin and photon occupation func-
tions. Considering the small overlap of these two in regime
II, as compared to regime I (cf. Fig. 3b left and central pan-
els), we expect inefficient energy transfer between spins and
photons at late times, in agreement with the observed prether-
mal plateaus. The spectral argument is further supported by
our observation that upon adding photonic losses, the photon
spectral line broadens and the prethermal state disappears at
long times with all subsystems reaching the same tempera-
ture.
Prethermalization at negative temperatures
Finally, when
Rydberg interactions are dominant, regime II crosses over
to regime III, with persisting prethermalization of light and
matter. Once again this can be attributed to the absence of
resonances between the spin and photon subsystems at late
times (right panel of Fig. 3b). The distinct feature of regime
III, however, is the emergence of a negative temperature spin
state coexisting with positive temperature photons. Usually,
a negative temperature indicates an inverted state in systems
with a bounded energy spectrum, with a total energy close
to the upper edge of the spectrum. This observation is high-
lighted by the late-time spin spectral function switching signs,
as shown in Fig. 3(b) (right panel). At thermal equilibrium,
the spin spectral function follows from ρs(ω) ∝P
i j(p j −
pi)| ⟨i| ˆsz | j⟩|2δ(ω −Ei + E j), and the property ωρs(ω) > 0 can
be traced back to the condition that lower-energy states have a
larger population than higher-energy states, p j ≤pi whenever
E j ≥Ei. A violation of this condition indicates the existence
of population inversion, a hallmark of negative-temperature
steady states [107, 111, 122].
The inverted state is formed due to the excessive energy in-
jected into the spin sector during the quench. This can be un-
derstood by observing the steady-state behavior of Ts in terms
of g. Starting from regime III and approaching regime I, the
spin temperature approaches Ts →+∞on the right side of
the transition (marked by the vertical dashed line in Fig. 2b),
followed by a sharp drop to Ts →−∞on the left side, be-
fore reaching finite negative values in regime III. This behav-
ior is strikingly similar to the dependence of a single spin’s
temperature on its average energy [123], which is given by
T(ϵ) = δ/arctanh(ϵ/δ), where 2δ is the energy splitting of the
spin. The temperature approaches T →±∞when ϵ →0∓,
and becomes negative for ϵ > 0. Accordingly, regime III
describes a spin ensemble which is trapped in a highly ex-
cited state due to the lack of efficient mechanisms to lose its
energy.
Under realistic circumstances, the cavity loss and
the spontaneous atomic decay are finite and eventually de-
stroy the inverted state. However, compared to other energy
scales in the system, both of these energy scales can be made
typically small for high-finesse cavities and Rydberg-dressed
atoms [59–65]. Therefore, the inverted state can be realized
as a sufficiently long-lasting transient state in Rydberg-cavity
platforms.
Perspectives
From the point of view of statistical mechan-
ics, we have demonstrated that the two-dimensional quantum
Ising model can exhibit prethermalization for a broad range
of parameters when its transverse field becomes dynamic and
is self-consistently determined by light-matter interactions. In
particular, light and matter can equilibrate at distinctly dif-
ferent temperatures, and notably, matter may sustain nega-
tive temperatures over extended periods of time. Our prether-
malization is reminiscent of its original formulation in high-
energy physics [68], where distinct system components tran-
siently equilibrate at separate temperatures before achieving
global thermal equilibrium. Such phenomenon has been also
predicted for quench dynamics in low-dimensional quantum
condensates [69, 70].
At the same time, our findings put forward Rydberg arrays
in optical cavities as a promising new class of quantum
simulators for spin models, characterized by the unique
