a pivotal role in the production of the majority of all manufactured goods today [1]. Industrial catalysts are
heavily used for petroleum refining, synthesis of base chemicals (e.g., ammonia, ethylene, methanol), and
petrochemicals production. Faced with growing energy demand from industrial catalysts and the growing
need for clean fuels to replace fossil-based fuels, major research efforts are underway to pursue lower-cost,
earth-abundant, and environmentally sustainable classes of catalysts, including electrochemical catalysts
(e.g. for electrolysis, fuel cells, etc.), and photocatalysts and plasmonic photocatalysts (e.g. for green H2
production, pollutant degradation, etc.). Organocatalysts and biocatalysts are also being investigated for
both biotechnological applications (e.g. synthetic biology) and non-biological applications such as fuels pro-
duction, plastics degradation, and pharmaceutical production. Catalyst formulations are diverse, ranging
from metals and metal oxides to zeolites, transition metal complexes, metal-organic frameworks, and other
organic compounds [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7].
In the ubiquitous case of heterogeneous catalysis [8], a reaction pathway typically involves three elemen-
tary processes at the atomic level: (1) Reactant molecules are adsorbed onto the catalyst surface (2) Bonds
of the reactant molecules are reconfigured through key intermediate states (often called transition states)
(3) Newly reconfigured products desorb from the surface. Each of these processes individually, along with
surface diffusion to and from the catalytically active surface sites, are constantly occuring and modeled at
the ensemble-level by a microkinetic model of the system, whose rate constants are typically derived from
the underlying statistical-mechanics of the system, e.g. the Eyring rate from transition state theory which
relates the reaction temperature and the free energy difference of an elementary process to a kinetic rate.1
The design and development of catalysts that are both reactive and selective is an extremely challenging
problem. The physics involved spans a wide range of spatiotemporal scales and requires a delicate interplay
of angstrom/nanometer scale quantum dynamics for elementary atomic-level processes over fast timescales,
and micro/mesoscopic scale statistical mechanics/kinetics over slow timescales. Conventional studies [9, 8]
of heterogenous catalysis rely on chemical intuition to construct reaction networks that specify the relevant
chemical species and their elementary reaction processes, with the energy barriers required to compute the
corresponding rate constants given by approximate electronic structure calculations. Microkinetic models are
then developed for the reaction network and either evolved in time to predict ensemble dynamics or solved
for steady-state ensemble properties. This First-Principles Micro Kinetic (FPMK) [9] modeling procedure
is both partially heuristic and cumbersome. To complicate matters further, for a full reactor model of a
catalytic reaction, local FPMK models must be coupled to macroscopic transport models that govern the
heat and mass flows determining the local environment conditions throughout the reactor.
At the atomic scale, the fundamental challenge is accurate computational modeling of the quantum be-
havior of electrons and ions [10]. The current catalysis simulation pipeline gives an atomic-scale description
of elementary chemical processes utilizing various computational tools. For example, most catalytic studies
utilize density-functional theory (DFT), a formally exact formalism for computing the total ground-state elec-
tronic energy which depends primarily on the charge density ρ(r). DFT maps the real, strongly-interacting
electronic problem to an effective weakly-interacting problem – the Kohn-Sham system. However, this map-
ping critically depends on a quantity, the exchange-correlation functional, which can only be approximated
in practice [11]. While DFT can accurately give relative structural energies, vibrational frequencies, and
formation energies, it is typically less accurate when dealing with heterogeneous systems and bond recon-
figuration, which involve a higher degree of electronic correlation. More accurate methods that explicitly
capture the correlated nature of the electronic wavefunctions, such as quantum chemistry expansions and
quantum Monte Carlo, can address some of these shortcomings and are sometimes utilized for catalytic
studies, although are often limited to smaller systems due to their higher computational complexities and
difficulty in describing chemical bond reconfiguration [12, 13]. Besides the challenges of accurately comput-
ing the electronic structure, one must couple electronic motion with atomic motion to accurately describe
realistic chemical physics. A common approach is to utilize the Born-Oppenheimer (BO) approximation,
which decouples these degrees of freedom, and even allows one to treat the atomic motion classically. This
allows one to more straightforwardly perform BO molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, which address the
evolution of atoms when electrons are approximately always in an instantaneous lowest-energy configuration.
Clearly, this approximation fails precisely when there is feedback between the electronic and atomic degrees
1In transition state theory, the Eyring rate k for an elementary process involves the Gibbs free energy difference ∆GTS
between the initial state and the transition state of that process, k = κ(T) kBT
h e−∆GTS/kBT where κ(T) ≤1 is a transmission
coefficient (Eq. 4.26 in [8]) dependent on the temperature T, h is Planck’s constant, and kB is Boltzmann’s constant.
3
