EDP convergence for nonlinear RDS
April 10, 2025
G. Heinze, A. Mielke, A. Stephan
Remark 4.10 (L∞bounds via bounding boxes). It can be easily checked that the proofs given
below hold for general stoichiometric vectors αr and βr, if we know that the discrete solutions
cN are bounded uniformly in L∞. Indeed, in this case the limit solution ρ is also bounded in
L∞and we can set pcrit = ∞and check that all proofs work similarly.
We highlight this fact since for several classes of reaction-diﬀusion systems there exist so-
called positively invariant regions in the sense of [Smo94, Cha. 14§B]. In the simplest case such
a region is a rectangular set, also called bounding box:
B :=
Y
i∈I

0, bi
 :=

c ∈[0, ∞)I  0 ≤ci ≤bi for all i ∈I
	
.
Positive invariance means that solutions starting inside a region (i.e. c(t, x) ∈B) remain inside
the region for all t > 0. In the case of a box the invariance follows, if for c ∈∂B the reaction
vector R(c) points inwards, i.e., ci = 0 implies Ri(c) ≥0 and ci = bi implies Ri(c) ≤0.
Consider a reaction systems where all reactions are of the type αiXi ⇋βıXı which is
additionally in detailed balance for w = (wi)i∈I. Then, it can be shown that B = Q
I[0, wi] is
indeed a bounding box. Often there is a family of detailed-balance equilibria w, which then allow
for arbitrary large bounding boxes.
5
Proof of convergence
The aim of this section is to prove Theorem 4.7, the convergence of the discrete gradient
systems to the continuum gradient system. We split the section in two parts, ﬁrst focusing on
the compactness in Section 5.1, before establishing the lower limit in Section 5.2.
To show compactness, we rely on the N-uniform L∞-bound for the energies and the N-
uniform bound of the dissipation functionals to obtain suitable a priori estimates for the em-
bedded discrete concentrations ρN = ιNcN. We introduce a new and eﬃcient method to show
equi-integrability of the ﬂuxes F N and JN in Proposition 5.5. Finally, an argument based on
the Aubin-Lions-Simon lemma allows us to derive strong compactness of ρN in Proposition 5.8.
One of the biggest advantages of our approach is its ability of handling non-convex dependencies
on ρN of the dissipation functionals.
The lower limit inequalities are then obtained for each rate and each slope term, inde-
pendently, relying either on Ioﬀe’s liminf theorem or, for the diﬀusive rate, on a dualization
argument.
Throughout this section, we ﬁx a time horizon T > 0 and denote by ΩT := [0, T] × Td the
parabolic cylinder.
5.1
Compactness
We start our considerations from the N-uniform L∞-bound on the energies and the N-uniform
bound on the dissipations. We introduce the explicit constants KA
x that will make it easier to
see the inﬂuence of the diﬀerent bounds throughout the section.
We start with the a priori bounds
KE := sup
N∈N
sup
t∈[0,T]
EN(cN(t)) < ∞,
(5.1a)
KD := sup
N∈N
DN(cN, F N, JN) < ∞.
(5.1b)
21
