1
Introduction
The CP or equivalently time-reversal invariance is a very attractive solution to the strong
CP problem in QCD. However, it was argued that the vacuum angle θ is shifted from 0 by the
diagonalization of quark mass matrices if arg [det Md detMu] is not vanishing, where the Md and
Mu are the mass matrices for the down- and up-type quarks. Recently, it was pointed [1] that
we can naturally build three-zeros textures for the quark mass matrices whose determinants are
always real [2]. The model is based on the six-dimensional spacetime with the T 2/Z3 orbifold
compactification.
In the previous paper [3] we extended the above LOY model [1] to the lepton sector to
predict the CP violating phase δCP in the neutrino oscillation. And the key mass parameter
mββ for double β decay amplitudes of nuclei was also predicted.
However, even two zeros textures can provide a solution to the strong CP problem as pointed
out in [1] . We show, in this paper, a systematic construction of the two zeros textures for the
quark and lepton mass matrices in the same setup with the T 2/Z3 orbifold compactification of
the extra two dimensions. We show that only three types of the mass matrices can explain the
observed CKM matrix, the masses of the quarks and the charged leptons and the small enough
vacuum angle θ < 10−10.
We extend the mass construction to the neutrino sector and discuss the predictions on the
CP violation parameter δCP measurable in the neutrino oscillation experiments and the key
parameter mββ as done in [3], introducing three right-handed neutrinos Ni (i = 1, 2, 3). We
find the normal hierarchy (NH) is naturally realized as expected.
We stress here, however, that the inverted hierarchy (IH) in the neutrino masses is even
naturally built in the limit of the Majorana mass M3 = ∞where the M3 is the mass of the
third right-handed neutrino, against the long standing folktale.
The δCP is predicted in a
broad region. On the other hand we realize naturally the normal hierarchy (NH) in the limit of
Majorana mass for the first family right-handed neutrino being infinity M1 = ∞. In this case
we have a strict prediction on the δCP ≃200◦or 250◦. It is also very interesting that we can
naturally explain the correct (positive) sign of the baryon asymmetry in the present universe.
We consider, throughout this paper, the CP invariance at the fundamental level, which is,
however, spontaneously broken down at some intermediate scale such as 1012 GeV, for example.
The spontaneous CP violation is necessary to explain the observed CP violation in the CKM
matrix and to generate the baryon asymmetry in the present universe.
2
Construction of two-zeros textures for the quark and
lepton mass matrices
The LOY construction [1] of three-zeros textures for quark mass matrices is based on the
orbifold compactification T 2/Z3 of the six dimensional space-time and a Z2 flavor symmetry.
2
