(assuming in addition that the variation in ϵj is normal, i.e., g(vj, TΣ) = 0). Above, g = gαβ is
the induced metric on the minimal surface (which we aim to recover), and q is a certain geometry
dependent function on the minimal surface. If the area data of two-dimensional minimal surfaces
is known, it is possible to recover g up to a conformal transformation by studying solutions to the
linearized equation (2.7) as was shown in [28]. In other words, the first linearization allows us to
recover the minimal surface up to a conformal transformation. (In fact, this recovery corresponds
to a solution [28] to a Calder´on inverse problem on Riemann surfaces.) Due to the coordinate
invariance of the problem, the recovery of g is, at best, possible only up to an isometry.
To recover the remaining unknown conformal factor, the argument in the compact case proceeds
to higher-order linearizations. By applying the area data to the second linearizations
∂2
∂ϵj∂ϵk

ϵ=0uϵ1F1+ϵ2F2+ϵ3F3,
(2.8)
one can recover quantities such as the extrinsic curvature, i.e., the second fundamental form.
Roughly speaking, the recovery of the quantities here relies on demonstrating that products of
three complex geometric optics (CGO) solutions, along with their gradients, to the linearized equa-
tion (2.7) form a complete set. Once the coefficients of the second linearization of the minimal
surface equation are determined, one proceed to the third linearization. The conformal factor can
then be recovered from the third linearization and the area data. See [28] for these steps.
To construct the full three-dimensional bulk metric, the recovered two-dimensional minimal
surfaces must still be glued together. For this, one at least needs to assume that all of the bulk can
be reached by some minimal surfaces, which are anchored on the boundary entangling regions.1 In
[39], this gluing was achieved under specific curvature and foliation assumptions.
In summary, the recovery process of the bulk metric in the compact case proceeds as follows:
1. First linearization: Recover the minimal surface up to a conformal transformation.
2. Second linearization: Solve the second linearized problem to prepare for the third linearization.
3. Third linearization: Recover the conformal factor, completing the recovery of the minimal
surface up to an isometry.
4. Gluing: Combine the recovered minimal surfaces to construct the full 3-dimensional bulk
metric.
We anticipate that these steps can ultimately be extended to the non-compact case as well. It is
worth noting that the solutions to each of these steps are not very explicit.
To the best of our knowledge, it remains unknown how any of the four steps outlined above
can be accomplished when the spacelike hypersurface under study is non-compact and possesses an
asymptotic infinity. In this work, we demonstrate that these steps can be applied at the perturbative
level in certain physically motivated special cases. Due to the special form of the metric we study
(see (3.1) below) the isometry in the recovery is in fact just the identity.
Interestingly, at the
perturbative level, we also find that the steps outlined above can have surprisingly explicit solutions.
2.2
References to mathematical literature
Recent mathematical developments in bulk reconstruction include the work [45], which reconstructs
the bulk metric from renormalized areas of minimal surfaces in asymptotically hyperbolic manifolds
by ”Taylor” expanding the metric at asymptotic boundary. In compact settings, inverse problems
1We note that holographic geometries have so called entanglement shadows [42, 43], which are regions which
cannot be probed by any minimal or extremal surfaces. The study of such geometries may require additional input
beyond spatial entanglement data [44].
– 10 –
