exponent β +ϵ. The power of the epsilon expansion is that the coupling remains small throughout.
How does the flow of the coupling influence the state? As reviewed in Appendix A, (A.2), the
scaling exponent of the state is determined in part by β: γ = d.+2β/3−α/3 for an inverse cascade.
Therefore, a state that scales as nk ∼k−γ at the UV scale µ0 has scaling [29]
nk ∼k−γ−2
3 ϵ
(4.6)
in the IR, as a result of β →β+ϵ in the IR.
This conclusion requires that the initial coupling is positive, λ(µ0) > 0, as otherwise, at low
enough µ, λ(µ) in (4.4) becomes large and we lose perturbative control. Likewise, while the IR
scaling exponent (4.6) was derived for a specific functional form of the interaction — products of
magnitudes of momenta to a power — the result is more general. As long as the coupling remains
small as one flows into the IR, λ(µ0) will drop out of λ(µ) as µ →0 and, on dimensional grounds,
this must be replaced by µϵ, as we saw in (4.5).
5. Discussion
The beta function in vacuum quantum field theory encodes the scale dependence of the cou-
pling as a result of the interaction between a particle and quantum vacuum fluctuations, causing
screening or anti-screening. In a far-from-equilibrium state, the beta function reflects the interac-
tion between the particle and the quantum statistical fluctuations in the background state. We
computed the beta function for several classes of theories in states with scale-invariant occupation
numbers nk, starting with a relativistic scalar in Sec. 2 and then considering more general quar-
tic interactions with arbitrary power law dispersion relations in Sec. 3. The flow of the effective
coupling with scale backreacts on the state, causing nk to become stepper or less steep in the IR,
depending on whether the coupling decays or grows in the IR, respectively.
A frequent question in quantum field theory is the endpoint of RG flow, with options including:
a mass gap, a massless particle, or scale invariance. We may likewise ask: starting with the scale
invariant state nk ∼k−γ in the weakly-coupled UV, what is the behavior of nk in the IR? In
Sec. 4 we constructed an example of a nearly marginal interaction, with dimension ϵ, that induces
a transition from one scale-invariant state in the UV to another in the IR, with scaling exponents
differing by an order ϵ amount. This can be regarded as analogous to RG flow from a UV fixed
point to an IR fixed point within the epsilon expansion.
Recent work [14] addressed a similar problem as the one in this paper: Do one-loop corrections
decrease or increase the strength of the interaction and make nk steeper or less steep, in the context
of the nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation? Explicitly computing the one-loop corrections to the four-
point function showed that nk becomes steeper in the defocusing case (positive coupling) and less
steep in the focusing case (negative coupling). The interaction in this case was relevant, with
17
