2
This is what is addressed in this work. We prescribe a
method to calculate these dynamical response functions
from an integrand that is only ‘available’ at points of
a coarse grid. We emphasize that in condensed-matter
systems, the new ground state can be non-commensurate
with the lattice [28, 29] and, hence, it is not possible to
choose the special points of the BZ a priori, as required
by some of the above methods. To be definite, we are
interested in computing integrals of the type
χ(ω) =
Z
dDk
(2π)D I(⃗k, ω),
(1)
where D is the spatial dimension, the k-integration is
over the BZ, and the integrand I(⃗k, ω) contains a line or
a surface of poles at different ⃗k values. We will assume
that I(⃗k, ω) is only available at a coarse set of ⃗k-points.
Our solution to the problem of accuracy stems from
recognizing the nature of the singularity in the inte-
grand.
It has been known that it is possible to ex-
tract the asymptotic form of the singularity of the in-
tegrand [19, 20, 22] in multidimensional integrals. This
singularity is usually not a simple pole. However, analo-
gous to an integration around a simple pole, we use the
knowledge of the asymptotic singularity to introduce an
integration scheme based on the ‘residue’ of this modified
pole. We call this the modified-residue prescription. The
modified-residue serves as the weight needed to sum over
the coarse set of points to reproduce an accurate result.
We demonstrate the validity of the method by calculating
several response functions of anisotropic superconductors
that are relevant to Raman scattering and their density of
states. In particular, we show that it provides an order-
of-magnitude improvement in the error when compared
with a Riemann sum over the ⃗k points (which is often
the only resort). We argue that if one knows the nature
of the singularity, this prescription can be effectively in-
corporated with other general integration methods such
as the method of quadratures.
In Sec. II, we derive and state the modified-residue
prescription and demonstrate its validity with a quick
example.
In Sec. III, we demonstrate the use of our
prescription on spectral functions that are used in the
Raman response of superconductors, in a related many-
body collective mode problem and in the calculation of
the density of states. In Sec. IV, we quantify the error of
the prescription and explain an interesting characteristic
of our prescription: it outperforms the standard routines
up to a minimum threshold size of the grid.
We ex-
plain this behaviour and show that the threshold is at an
impractically small grid size, rendering this prescription
useful in almost all practical scenarios. Finally, in Sec. V,
we summarize our findings and discusses the scope for fu-
ture use of this method. In Appendix A, we discuss the
specific form of the residue that is used in the text.
II.
THE MODIFIED-RESIDUE PRESCRIPTION
Let us start with a function χ(ω) that is obtained after
a 1D integration:
χ(ω) =
Z b
a
dx I(ω, x),
(2)
where the integrand I has an integrable singularity at
x = x∗∈[a, b). Since such a singularity is fast varying,
it can be well approximated by a local asymptotic form
s(ω, y) such that I(ω, x) = R(ω, x)s(ω, x −x∗) in the
neighbourhood of the singularity at x = x∗. This local
asymptotic form can always be deduced, even if the inte-
grand itself is obtained from a separate integration (see,
e.g., [22], which discusses such a method).
The value
R(ω, x∗) is nothing but limx→x∗I(ω, x)/s(ω, x −x∗) and
can be called as the ‘residue’ of the singularity s(ω, y).
This is a generalization of the conventional residue from
a simple pole where s(y) = 1/y and we refer to it as a
‘modified residue’.
We can then identify R(ω, x) ≡I(ω, x)/s(ω, x −x∗) as
the (modified) residue function that takes on the value
of the residue at x = x∗. Of course, note that R(ω, x),
by construction, is a slow varying function relative to
s(ω, x −x∗) near x = x∗. With these new definitions, we
can then evaluate Eq. (2) as
χ(ω) =
Z x∗−δ/2
a
dx I(ω, x) +
Z x∗+δ/2
x∗−δ/2
dx
I(ω, x)
| {z }
R(ω,x)s(ω,x−x∗)
+
Z b
x∗+δ/2
dx I(ω, x)
≈
Z x∗−δ/2
a
dx I(ω, x) + R(ω, x∗)
Z x∗+δ/2
x∗−δ/2
dx s(ω, x −x∗)
|
{z
}
S(ω,x∗)
+
Z b
x∗+δ/2
dx I(ω, x),
(3)
where δ is a suitable value that controls the size of the
sub-interval over which the singular part is to be inte-
grated over. In the second line, we have used the fact
that the residue R(ω, x) is slowly varying and pulled it
