14
mate given known mirror properties, but is unknown for
the experimental conditions we intend to run the device
at. When driven harmonically with a frequency ω0, the
scan position is given as
x(t) = laθdsin(ω0t),
(B12)
and we expect the velocity to be highest when the mirror
is centered at x = 0, giving a maximimum scan velocity
of
vmax = d
dtx

t=0
= laθdω0 = laξ
(B13)
We thus take ω0 as an effective angular speed for the
mirror, which in principle is correlated with deflection
angle for larger drive amplitude. We will see later that
the product ξ = θdω0 = 2θmω0 is inseparable in our pulse
timing calculation, and should be the relevant parameter
to compare mirrors.
Using the results from the previous section, we thus
get the scan speed
vmax = f0ξ dr
d0
= ξ dr
2NA
f0
fc
(B14)
Thus scan speed is determined by intrinsic mirror char-
acteristics (frequency and mirror size, which in general
are anti-correlated) as well as the area and focal length
of the focusing optics.
The expected pulse duration is given by tpulse =
dpulse/vmax. Using equations derived earlier, this gives a
diffraction limited pulse width of
tpulse,diff =
1
fcξ
1.22λ
2NA
d0
dr

= 1
ξ
1.22λ
dr
(B15)
This is the smallest pulse that a mirror with given ξ and
dr can produce for a very small sensor, assuming mirror
size is smaller than the initial beam diameter.
Including divergence effects as in the previous section,
we find an effective pulse duration for a realistic geometry
of
teff ≈deff
vmax
=
p
(2NA · df)2 + (1.22λ)2
ξdr
, dr ≤d0
(B16)
The pre-factors here are now the same as the previous
calculation, but the fiber diameter will dominate the tim-
ing if it is substantially larger than the wavelength of the
light. Single-mode fibers will therefore always produce
diffraction-limited chopping in the optical regime, but we
are focused on producing a broad-band design, which re-
quires light guides to admit multiple modes; this restricts
some of our optimization to utilize larger collimators and
longer focal lengths.
We note that the scaling with mirror size only holds
until dr ≥d0, after which d0 becomes the limiting fac-
tor.
This leads to some confusing performance in the
case of small numerical aperture, as the above derivation
assumes this also allows the mirror to be placed further
from the slit, canceling out the increased spot size due
to diffraction effects. In this case, our maximum velocity
becomes
vmax = f0ξ
(B17)
which gives the equation
tmin ≈
p
(df)2 + (1.22λ/2NA)2
ξfc
, dr ≥d0
(B18)
This is the relevant behavior for a scan-optimized setup,
where the MEMS mirror is located as close to the fo-
cusing optic as possible. Readily available MEMS mir-
rors are typically much smaller than focusing optics, and
larger mirrors tend to have lower values of ξ, meaning
that a realistic optimization needs to take into account
the range of mirror sizes and ξ values to determine which
will best match timing requirements.
Appendix C: System Performance Improvements
To date, we have produced and tested two versions of
the fully enclosed MEMS scanner system, incorporating
improvements based on initial cryogenic tests. The v1
design, described in detail in Ref [14], achieved spot sizes
of around 170 µm at fixed wavelength using a commercial
refractive focusing system. The v2 design, for which the
focuser described in this paper was designed, substan-
tially improved the performance of the system, reducing
spot size by a factor of 2 and introducing broad-band
operation, allowing for warm interchange of light sources
across a wavelength range of 300 nm to 1 µm limited only
by optical fiber transmission cryogenically. The design
shown in this paper was an intermediate design, using
the focuser of the v2 system with modified v1 body, to
demonstrate cryogenic performance. The remainder of
the v2 system also decreased total copper volume to fit
into a 5” diameter cryoperm can in order to test state
of the art devices, like superconducting qubits, in an op-
timal environment. Results from this system are forth-
coming with active cryogenic devices.
We are in the process of finalizing designs for a third
version which will simplify alignment, reduce manufac-
turing cost, and improve reproducibility between devices.
This will reduce the number of parts in the system, sim-
plifying alignment, and allow for easier customization of
magnification factor and scan range. The main improve-
ment to the optics chain involves fixing the astigmatism
in the focusing unit described in the body of the pa-
per by manufacturing a unibody focuser, which allows
for more precise angular alignment of the collimator and
primary focusing mirror.
The improvement in focuser
performance is summarized in Figure 9, where the astig-
matism is drastically reduced compared to the existing
