11
Figure 5: The 21 coherence factor curves for the 7 eigen-
states with Sz ≈0 of the AFM system (in blue). The
uncoupled-spins curve, in black, is used to define the time
scale arbitrary unit.
is applied to the gyromagnetic ratio tensors.
To single out the contributions of the eigenstate struc-
ture to decoherence, all the simulations have been per-
formed considering the same bath used for the system
described in section V B. In order to highlight the effect
of interactions, we have considered an isostructural sys-
tem with uncoupled spins, thus setting the Dij tensor in
equation 2 equal to zero ∀i, j. The corresponding tem-
poral decay is shown as a black curve in figure 5. The
time instant at which the coherence factor assumes the
value of 0.001 is taken as a reference to set the timescale,
which is approximately 30 µs.
We selected 7 eigenstates with Sz ≈0, more details on
the expectation values of the spin operators are given in
supplementary material VI D. We calculated the coher-
ence factor for each of the corresponding 21 pair superpo-
sitions and reported the results with blue curves in figure
5. Note that the coherence factor curves for all 21 super-
positions show longer coherence factor times with respect
to the reference non-interacting system. Moreover, the
molecule exhibits full connectivity among all the levels,
as the transition dipole moment for each pair of states
is sufficiently large to enable transitions within a lim-
ited time. This nontrivial feature is highly advantageous
for fully harnessing the potential of qudits, and is essen-
tial for implementing certain quantum algorithms. For
instance, some quantum error correction algorithms de-
signed for qudits, require an all-to-all connection among
levels. We stress that this last system does not repre-
sent the optimal example of molecular spin qudit.
In
principle, coherence times could be significantly extended
through the optimization of the Hamiltonian parameters
and the appropriate selection of the states.
However,
this system can be seen as a prototypical example that
embodies all the ingredients for the theoretical design of
molecular spin qudits.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we addressed the problem of decoherence
in molecular spin systems at low temperatures. In par-
ticular, we focused on the pure dephasing resulting from
the interaction of the central system with the surrounding
nuclear spins bath. To do so, we developed a microscopic
model of decoherence and implemented the CCE method
to simulate the coherence decay over time numerically.
This approach allowed us to demonstrate a key result:
the coherence of a superposition of two eigenstates |α⟩
and |β⟩is preserved if and only if the two Hamiltonian
operators that describe the associated conditional bath
dynamics commute with each other. For molecular spin
systems, this condition translates into requiring identi-
cal expectation values of local spin operators for the two
eigenstates.
While this ideal condition is rarely met in real systems,
we introduced a parameter ∆to quantify the deviations
and we explored its impact on coherence times. Through
numerical simulations,
we validated our theoretical
framework and demonstrated its applicability to systems
ranging from single giant spins to composite structures
with competing interactions. These insights allowed us
to define a recipe for the theoretical design of molecular
spin qudits.
As a paradigmatic example, we proposed
a composite system made of six spins 1/2, interacting
with each other through antiferromagnetic exchange
interactions.
We showed that it is possible to exploit
competing interactions to create a viable qudit candi-
date, with many low-energy states characterized by full
connectivity. This is crucial for implementing quantum
error correction schemes and other quantum algorithms,
making such systems highly advantageous for quantum
technologies.
While the proposed system represents a
significant step forward, it is important to note that
it does not yet constitute the optimal molecular spin
qudit. In principle, further optimization of Hamiltonian
parameters and state selection could extend coherence
times and improve qudit performance.
However, this
system serves as a prototypical example to demonstrate
how chemical tunability of spin interactions can mitigate
decoherence, offering an interesting perspective for more
robust quantum information processing platforms. The
strategy developed here can be exploited in synergy with
the mature approaches based on engineering the bath to
push beyond the current limitations of spin qudits.
In conclusion, this work advances our understanding
of decoherence in molecular spin systems and provides
a practical framework for designing and optimizing
molecular spin qudits, bringing them closer to practical
implementations in quantum information processing.
Acknowledgments
This
work
received
financial
support from the European Union-NextGenerationEU,
