5
FIG. 3: The Feynman checkerboard model for
the Klein–Gordon equation: The red line is the
projection of the light cone on the right half x–t plane.
The particle moves both forward and backward in time
simultaneously, in a mirror manner. The particle retains
its initial direction of motion at the final time step.
in Fig. 2. These discrepancies arise because the Feynman
checkerboard model is a discrete model. For paths lying
on the light cone, the amplitude is 1, which, in fact, is a
δcτ,∆x and should be δ(cτ −∆x) in the continuous limit.
For the 3 + 1D Dirac equation, we shall substitute the
Green function Eq. (19) into Eq. (27) to obtain the 3+1D
Dirac–Green function and then use it to evaluate the
Dirac propagator Eq. (26). Note that the γ matrices are
now 4×4 objects. The 3+1D Dirac propagator Eq. (26)
again differs from the one given in earlier works (e.g.
Ref. [17]), which make use of a 3 + 1D Feynman checker-
board model, as evident from the presence of Bessel and
delta functions in Eq. (19). Furthermore, when τ = 0,
the propagator should be a delta function whereas the
one in Ref. [17] is 1, which is, in fact, δcτ,∆x—the same
issue discussed above, arising from the discrete nature
of the Feynman checkerboard model. We can conclude
that the propagator in Eq. (26) is the correct one, as it
is derived directly from the wave equation itself without
relying on any model.
Now, having introduced the Feynman checkerboard
model for the Dirac equation, let us return to our ear-
lier discussion of the 1 + 1D Klein–Gordon equation. We
can now see that the 1 + 1D Klein–Gordon propagator
Eq. (22), when neglecting the δ terms, is equal to the
sum of the trace of the time–forward and time–backward
1 + 1D Dirac propagator Eq. (24). Therefore, the 1 + 1D
Klein–Gordon propagator Eq. (22) can be interpreted us-
ing the Feynman checkerboard model as follows. Con-
sider a particle that moves in one dimension and is only
allowed to move forward or backward at the speed of
light. If the particle initially moves forward (backward),
it must also move forward (backward) at the final time
step, namely, the particle must retain its initial state of
motion when observed. Moreover, the particle must move
both forward and backward in time simultaneously, in a
mirrored manner, as illustrated in Fig. 3. That is, if the
particle moves forward in time to travel from (xB, 0) to
(xA, tA), it will simultaneously move backward in time
to travel from (xB, 0) to (xA, −tA) in a mirrored man-
ner. For each path connecting (xB, 0) to (xA, ±tA), the
wave function, just like the Dirac equation, carries an
amplitude of
ϕ = (iMϵ)R
(30)
with ϵ the small time step and R the number of cor-
ners. Also, we do not need to distinguish the spin of the
particle, since there is no spin information in the Klein–
Gordon equation.
Therefore, the propagator is simply
the sum of K++, the propagator for paths that start and
end with a forward move, and K−−, the propagator for
paths that start and end with a backward move. Finally,
the propagator should be
K =
X
R
N(R; tA)(iMϵ)R + N(R; −tA)(iMϵ)R
(31)
where N(R; tA) is the total number of paths with R
corners from (xB, 0) to (xA, tA) while N(R; −tA) the
total number of paths with R corners from (xB, 0) to
(xA, −tA).
The propagator Eq. (31) can be evaluated
using the method in Ref. [22] and is equal to the prop-
agator Eq. (22) without those δ terms. Those δ terms
represent the amplitude of the paths lying on the light
cone. However, since the Feynman checkerboard model is
discrete, the amplitude of paths on the light cone is given
as 1 which is actually δcτ,∆x and it fails to be correctly
generalized as δ(τ −|∆x|/c) in the continuous limit, as
we discussed above.
III.
CONCLUSION
Based on the Rayleigh diffraction integral in spacetime,
we find the propagators of both the Klein–Gordon equa-
tion and the Dirac equation.
Additionally, we explain
the propagator of the 1 + 1D Klein–Gordon equation us-
ing the Feynman checkerboard model, finding that the
particle moves forward and backward in time simultane-
ously in a mirrored manner and must retain its initial
direction of motion at the final time step.
As for the
Feynman checkerboard model, we compare our 1 + 1D
Dirac propagator Eq. (29) with the propagator given by
the Feynman checkerboard model [15, 22] and find an is-
sue that the δ functions’ terms have been neglected in the
Feynman checkerboard model. This leads to the defect
that its propagator cannot be reduced to a δ function
when the time step vanishes. Moreover, in the case when
the mass vanishes, the Feynman’s propagator [22] also
vanishes. This is not correct since those δ terms are sim-
ply related to the free propagation with a retarded time
|∆x|/c. In fact, this problem results from the amplitude
being 1 on the paths on the light cone, which should be
δ(τ −|∆x|
c ) in the continuous limit. We also discuss the
3+1D Dirac’s propagator and find that the 3+1D prop-
agator derived from the 3 + 1D Feynman checkerboard
model Ref. [17] has the same problems.
