arXiv:2504.06739v1  [cond-mat.str-el]  9 Apr 2025
Selective Kondo screening and strange metallicity by sliding Dirac semimetals
Hanting Zhong,1, 2 Shuxiang Yang,3 Chao Cao,2, 4, 5 Xiao-Yong Feng,1, ∗and Jianhui Dai1, 5, †
1School of Physics, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036, China
2School of Physics, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China
3Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou 311121, China
4Center for Correlated Matter, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China
5Institute for Advanced Study in Physics, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China
Kondo screening of local moments in normal metals typically leads to hybridized conduction
and valence bands separated by a Kondo gap, resulting in an insulating state at half-band ﬁlling.
We show a dramatic change of this scenario in a Dirac-semimetal-based correlated system — a
bilayer honeycomb lattice heterostructure where the local moment lattice is stacked on a Dirac
semimetal breaking the inversion symmetry.
This system is modeled by an extended Anderson
honeycomb lattice involving the real-space dependence of major interlayer hybridization parameters
on the relative sliding distance along the armchair direction. First, we unveil the multiple Kondo
scales and the successive Kondo breakdown transitions in this correlated heterostructure under
sliding. Second, we demonstrate the existence of a genuine selective Kondo screening phase which
is stabilized near the A-B stack pattern and is accessible by applying the interlayer voltage. Third,
we ﬁnd a nearly ﬂat hybridized band located concomitantly within the Kondo gap, resulting in an
unprecedented metallic state at the half-band ﬁlling. This unconventional heavy fermion state is
characterized by the violation of Luttinger theorem and the appearance of a Van Hove singularity
at the Fermi energy. The general sliding-driven band structure landscape and the implications of
our results for the broad context of multiorbital Kondo physics are brieﬂy discussed.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The heavy fermion (HF) physics driven by Kondo
eﬀect is among the most intriguing quantum phenom-
ena in the strongly correlated electron systems ranging
from conventional f electron alloys to synthetic quan-
tum structures [1–4]. In the simplest situation, Kondo
screening (KS)—the coherence of the single-ion Kondo
eﬀect— develops with the formation of an entangled sin-
glet state composed of periodic arrays of local moments
and metallic bath [5]. Such situation can be captured by
the Kondo lattice model (KLM) or the periodic Anderson
lattice model (ALM)[6], with a local Kondo coupling or
inter-orbital hybridization as the driving force. As long
as the Kondo coupling is non-vanishing, the electronic
band structure of this model system is reconstructed re-
sulting in hybridized conduction and valence bands sep-
arated by the Kondo gap. This in turn leads to a Kondo
insulator (KI) or HF metal at or away from the half-band
ﬁlling, respectively.
However, while various Kondo couplings exist ubiqui-
tously in realistic f-electron-active materials, whether or
how KS actually develops remains puzzling. Indeed, KS
is sensitive to material’s band structures and variable in-
teractions.
The variations of these microscopic causes
could conspiringly lead to the breakdown of KS. In the
present work, we will propose a theoretically lucid and
experimentally controllable mechanism of the selective
Kondo screening (SKS) driven by a partial breaking of
∗fxyong@hznu.edu.cn
† daijh@hznu.edu.cn
crystalline symmetries.
Before this, we should explain
two additional motivations of this work.
Theoretically, it is worthwhile to recall the Kondo
breakdown transition driven by strong magnetic ﬂuctua-
tions [7–10]. This transition is accompanied by a trans-
formation of Fermi surfaces within or at the boundary
of the magnetic phase in HF materials, enriching the
global phase diagram [11–13]. In the terminology of Mott
physics, it can be interpreted as an orbital/band-selective
Mott transition driven by variable parameters such as
bandwidth, occupation energy, or Coulomb interaction
in the multiorbital Hubbard model [14–16]. More gener-
ally, the Kondo breakdown or dehybridization of f elec-
trons can take place independent of magnetic ﬂuctua-
tions, such as when the density of states at the Fermi
level is depleted.
This situation is in analogy to the
single-ion Kondo problem in a pseudo-gap or graphene-
like metallic bath where a ﬁnite Kondo coupling larger
than a threshold value is required for the occurrence of
Kondo eﬀect [17–19].
In contrast to these situations,
the SKS addressed here occurs when two degenerate f
orbitals (or sublattices) hybridize to a Dirac semimetal
(DSM) bath. Its characteristic feature is the existence
of a region where only one of f orbitals is driven to the
Kondo phase, while outside this region the f orbitals are
both in the decoupled or coupled phases, respectively.
Experimentally, there is a particularly suitable plat-
form to investigate this new phenomena, namely, the
correlated bilayer systems such as the transition metal-
dichalcogenide heterostructures 1T-TaSe2/1H-TaSe2 and
MoTe2/WSe2 [20–25]. By applying the electric ﬁeld and
gate voltages, one monolayer could be tuned to the Mott
insulating phase with localized electrons while another
remains metallic with itinerant electrons.
Both elec-
