A&A proofs: manuscript no. output
Table 1. Basic features of the ‘standard’ and ‘topological’ mechanisms of the magnetic reconnection.
Standard reconnection
Topological reconnection
1.
Source of the magnetic field
Local electric currents
Superposition of the remote sources
2.
Geometrical structure of the
Determined by the local
Determined by the global configuration
reconnecting region
magnetic field lines
of the magnetic field
3.
Speed of propagation of the
Limited by the Alfvenic
Irrelevant to the Alfvenic velocity
reconnection in space
velocity
4.
Heat release in the spot of
Substantial
Insignificant
reconnection
Fig. 1. Sketch of development of the magnetic reconnection in the stan-
dard (left panel) vs. the topological (right panel) scenarios.
magnetic field in the entire space; and just this effect will be
substantially employed below (for a particular example of the
unstable configuration, see Fig. 2 in Dumin & Somov 2024).
A few topological models of another type were developed in
late 1990’s and early 2000’s by the group of E.R. Priest (for ex-
ample, Brown & Priest 1999; Inverarity & Priest 1999; Brown &
Priest 2001). They assumed a rather regular arrangement of the
sources in the photospheric plane and then considered the emer-
gence of a new null point as a result of its ‘squashing’ out of this
plane, when the above-mentioned sources converged. Unfortu-
nately, eruption of the null point in such models turns out to be
rather slow (of the same order as velocity of the sources); and,
therefore, they are less appropriate for the description of CMEs.
(For application of the topological methods to various solar phe-
nomena, see review Longcope 2005, and references therein.)
The first—and most important—reason why the topological
models look very promising for the description of stealth CMEs
is illustrated in Fig. 1: In the ‘standard’ scenario, development
of the magnetic reconnection leads both to a heat release due to
the dissipation of the local current system j (resulting in the so-
lar flare) and a detachment of the plasma bunch from the null
point (the CME eruption). On the other hand, in the ‘topologi-
cal’ scenario, the reconnection is caused by the motions v of the
photospheric sources, without any currents immediately at the
spot of reconnection. This results solely in the CME eruption.
Moreover, apart from the above-mentioned ‘energetic’ argu-
ment, there are two additional ‘geometric’ arguments in favor of
the topological mechanism as explanation of the stealth CMEs.
They follow from the simulations presented in Fig. 2. The mag-
netic field was assumed to be formed by the two pairs of the
point-like sources of equal magnitude but opposite signs located
in the plane of photosphere or somewhat below it. From the
physical point of view, they represent open ends of the magnetic-
flux tubes originating in the deeper layers of the Sun (for addi-
tional discussion, see the introductory section in Zhuzhoma et
al. 2022). The global magnetic field in this situation is described
by the so-called ‘two-dome structure’, which separates the en-
tire space into the four topologically distinct subregions (e.g.,
Fig. 3 in Somov 2008). Some further mathematical details for
the simulations can be found in Appendix A of paper by Dumin
& Somov (2019) and Appendix A of the present paper.
As was predicted in the pioneering work by Gorbachev et al.
(1988), there are specific ‘topologically unstable’ arrangements
of the magnetic sources, when a tiny shift of one of them re-
sults in a dramatic reconstruction of the entire magnetic field.
The most studied configuration of the unstable type is formed
when the sources are located approximately in the vertices of
the slanted letter ‘T’, as illustrated below in Fig. 4; see also right
panel of Fig. 2 in paper by Dumin & Somov (2024). So, if the un-
stable configuration is realized, the above-mentioned two-dome
structure experiences a sudden flipping, as is seen in the left pan-
els of Fig. 2 and, especially, in Supplementary movies. To avoid
cluttering the pictures with unnecessary details, we represent
only the ‘topological skeletons’, which are the sets of magnetic-
field lines connecting the sources and null points; two different
colors (red and blue) refer to the field lines emanating from the
sources of two different polarities.
Next, which is the most important, the above-mentioned
flipping leads to the emergence and fast motion of a new null
point high above the plane of the sources, as shown by the yel-
low curves. Therefore, a magnetic reconnection—unrelated to
any local currents—should develop along this trajectory; and a
plasma blob can detach and escape away somewhere in the end
of this curve. Just this effect might be a reasonable explanation
for the formation of the stealth CMEs, since it is not associated
with any heat release.
One can also see in the simulations two important geometri-
cal properties of the null-point trajectories:
1. They are strongly bended. Therefore, even if such an erup-
tion occurred on the back side of the Sun, it might be well
observable from the Earth, as illustrated in Fig. 3.
2. Directions of the outbursts are crucially dependent on the
particular type of motion of the sources in the region of topo-
logical instability. Namely, if the central source is shifted
to the right, the eruption originates somewhere inside the
source region and is directed outwards (two upper panels in
Fig. 2). On the other hand, if the central source is shifted
(almost from the same position) to the left, then the erup-
tion originates quite far away from the source region and is
directed towards this region. Such a behavior is illustrated
more pictorially in Fig. 4. Therefore, approximately in 50%
of cases the eruption looks ‘detached’ from the sources (i.e.,
the active region on the Sun).
Article number, page 2 of 4
