players’ behaviour, (2) their interactions with others and the environment, (3) variations in their behaviour
across groups, and (4) the effects of interventions in behaviour on performance. Each of the four areas has
been studied in the literature on football. Regarding individual behaviour, previous research considered diverse
factors including sprint motion [23,24], the change of direction [25], and anthropometric, physical, psychological
and technical characteristics [26–29]. Since football is a team sport, interactions among players have attracted
considerable attention. The literature on intra-team interactions focused on formation [30–32], passing net-
works [33–36], and motion alignment among teammates [37–40]. Interactions with the opposing team have
also been analysed [41–43].
Players’ response to the environment, which is often referred to as situational
variables [44], has been a central topic as well. Previous studies examined influences of temporal [12, 36, 44],
spatial [4, 31, 44], and strategic [32, 44–46] factors. Variations in behaviour across groups have been actively
studied, with groups being defined in various ways, including competitive levels [6, 7, 27, 28, 39, 47], field posi-
tions [25, 27, 31, 43, 48], and confederations [49]. Finally, in the literature on effects of interventions, one finds
two major approaches. The first is a direct approach through experiments, as seen in the research on training
programs [50, 51]. The other approach involves comparison between competent and less competent players.
These studies aim to extract characteristics that are associated with performance, which are sometimes called
performance variables [20]. Associations between explanatory variables and performance are considered to be
suggestive of causal effects [28,47]. Despite these contributions on each area, studies examining their interplay
remain scarce. Furthermore, it has been difficult to discuss causality between behaviour and performance. A
difference in a certain quantity does not imply its causal effect.
That is, even if a certain quantity differs
between players at different competitive levels, this difference may well not be the origin of the difference in
performance. Indeed, Yokoyama et al. reported an interesting result from their experiment: although they
succeeded in modifying novice players’ motion to exhibit a similar synchronisation pattern to that of the expe-
rienced, the performance of the novice did not improve [39]. It suggests the possibility of spurious correlation
between motion synchronisation patterns and teams’ competence. Due to these limitations, it still remains
unclear how one can enhance team performance in football.
In this research, we analyse influence of football players’ behaviour on ball possession performance by
constructing and analysing a dynamical model.
Building on a previous work by Yokoyama et al. [39], we
developed a dynamical model describing the motion of the players and the ball in 3v1 ball possession game.
There are three advantages in our modelling approach. Firstly, the use of dynamical models is a direct and
natural strategy to take dynamic and emergent aspects of team-level processes into consideration. Among the
literature on team effectiveness, it has been argued that, although conventional team effectiveness research
has examined team processes in static frameworks, more focus should be put on their dynamic, complex,
and emergent aspects [2,52]. Team processes dynamically arise through microscopic interactions among team
members. Hence, there is a need for methodologies that can incorporate the dynamic interplay among individual
behaviour and their interactions. Secondly, the modelling approach spans the four key areas of focus mentioned
above.
That is, the use of dynamical models allows us to study not only each of the four areas but also
the interplay among them, as we demonstrate in this article. A model mathematically represents hypotheses
about individual behaviour (area 1) and interactions with others and with the environment (area 2). Variations
in behaviour across groups (area 3) can be described by different parameter values of the model.
Effects
of interventions (area 4) can be analysed through sensitivity analysis, where effects of model parameters are
examined.
Lastly, our approach has another significant advantage: it allows us to discuss causal effects of
behaviour on performance by drawing a clear distinction between behaviour and outcome. In this research,
we consider that model parameters, each of which controls a certain aspect of players’ motion, characterise
behaviour. A simulation of the model generates time series data of positions of the players and the ball, similarly
to a tracking system. Various outcome quantities, including performance, can be calculated from the simulated
position data. This means that we can control a specific aspect of players’ behaviour in our model, measure
its effect on outcomes, and discuss causality between behaviour and outcome.
We note that our approach
shares motivations with what is referred to as dynamical systems approach [21,30,53,54] or ecological dynamics
approach [4, 20, 31] in sports science. Studies adopting these approaches typically conduct statistical analyses
with empirical data in terms of quantities that reflect the temporal and interacting nature of team dynamics,
such as distance between players at each time frame and cross-correlation among players. Nevertheless, our
research strategy is distinct from these approaches in that we construct a dynamical model for our specific
purpose, as has been done in the physics and computer science literature related to football [15,24,34,39–42].
In the remainder of this article, we first report the experimental result of 3v1 ball possession games. The
participants were grouped into high- and low-level teams. We compared the two teams based on the motion
of OFs, quantified by the offensive team area (OF area), and their performance, measured by the number of
successful passes. We then present an overview on the constructed model which describes the motion of the
players and the ball. The model represents our hypotheses about behaviour of players and their interactions.
In the next subsection, we evaluate the plausibility of our model by comparing the two outcome quantities, OF
2
