8
Unit cell
Motion along line
8 couplings along line
...
...
...
...
100 x 100 x 100 lattice
(periodic boundary)
a)
b)
c)
Time (ps)
0
10
20
30
Position     (Å)
Velocity     (Å/ps)
Time-local solution
Full solution
0
-5
5
10.0
10.5
11.0
Trapped Dissipation
FIG. 4. Dissipation. (a) A particle constrained to move along
one of the edges of the unit cell, interacting with four frame-
work masses ahead of it and four behind via the Yukawa
interaction with λ = 1/2 ˚A and U0 = 150 meV. We com-
puted the full solution using Eqs. (2) and (3) using the fifth-
order Runge-Kutta method with δt = 5 × 10−3 ps. We also
computed the time-local result using fifth-order Runge-Kutta
from Eqs. (18)–(20) with rH = ˙rH = 0. The calculated posi-
tions and speeds are given in (b) and (c), respectively, showing
a very good agreement between the two methods.
particle quite well. Therefore, when exploring dissipa-
tion and diffusion in the following sections, we make use
of this simplified form of Eq. (16).
V.
DISSIPATION
Employing the time-local, quasistatic, homogeneous-
motion approximation, we set ˙r and r to zero on the
right-hand side of Eq. (25) (as in Sec. IV), which yields
r = wU ′(R) −lU ′′(R) ˙R .
(26)
Since we already assumed the deflection is small, we em-
ployed a series expansion for the force exerted on the
mobile particle,
M ¨R = −U ′(R −r)
≈−U ′(R) + U ′′(R)
h
wU ′(R) −lU ′′(R) ˙R
i
= −U ′(R) + wU ′′(R)U ′(R) −l [U ′′(R)]2 ˙R .
(27)
The first term is essentially the force on the mobile parti-
cle from the undeflected framework, the second is a cor-
rection due to the framework relaxation, and the third
is a force proportional to the speed and directed against
the motion—a drag force.
To demonstrate the ability of our formalism to cap-
ture drag, we computed two trajectories. First, we used
the full set of equations of motion in Eqs. (2) and (3)
for a cubic system of 100 × 100 × 100 masses with pe-
riodic boundary conditions and rH = ˙rH = 0. Second,
we used the time-local, quasistiatic, homogeneous-motion
approximation of Sec. IV given by Eqs. (17)–(20) with
rH = ˙rH = 0.
As before, the calculations were per-
formed using the fifth-order Runge-Kutta method.
To make the results easier to compare, we set up the
initial conditions in a manner which produced a one-
dimensional path. In particular, we initialized the mobile
particle on one of the edges of a cubic unit cell, halfway
between the corners, moving along the edge. We allowed
the particle to interact with eight framework masses: four
positioned along the edge ahead of its initial position and
four behind [see Fig. 4(a)]. We excluded the closer-lying
masses not positioned along the edge to speed up the cal-
culation. Although this restriction does not lead to physi-
cally realistic mobile ion trajectories, it does demonstrate
dissipation in our model.
Integrating over momenta (Eq. (22)) is computation-
ally costly, so prior to running the simulation, we precal-
culated
↔
W j−k(0) for all index pairs j, k that are required
to connect all the framework masses that interact with
the particle at any given time.
For this demonstration,
we employed a screened
Coulomb interaction with λ = 1/2 ˚A with U0 = 150 meV.
We chose this smaller interaction strength to lead to more
oscillations before the particle came to rest. Additionally,
because we introduced the particle at a highly energetic
position, we wanted to avoid the effects of the boundary
term that we dropped from Eq. (11). In Figure 4, we see
the position and velocity of the particle computed using
the time-local formalism and the full system of equations.
The two solutions show a very similar decay profile, with
the full solution decaying slightly faster. A tiny phase
difference is visible at later times, which we attribute to
the framework motion present in the full-solution case
and absent from the time-local approach. In short, dissi-
pation is not affected much by our simplifications, even
in a more realistic scenario.
VI.
DIFFUSION
Finally, we introduced thermal motion to the frame-
work to check its influence on mobile particle motion.
The computational procedure was essentially identical to
the previous section, but with a preliminary procedure
and two additional steps. Prior to the calculation, we
generated a set of mode excitation levels nj and corre-
sponding phases ϕj. For the first additional step during
the trajectory simulation, whenever we needed to cal-
culate the force exerted on the mobile particle, we be-
