1150
1200
1250
]
2c
 [MeV/
Corr
m
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
)
2c
Candidates/(5.0 MeV/
LHCb 1
−
5.4 fb
Data
Full model
0
π
p
→
+
Σ
Background
Figure 3: Distribution of the corrected mass for Σ+ →pπ0 decays in data for the TOS sample
with the result of an extended unbinned maximum-likelihood fit (blue solid line). The Σ+ →pπ0
(red dashed line) and background (green dotted line) components are also shown.
NΣ+→pµ+µ−= 237 ± 16.
No structure is seen in the dimuon invariant-mass distribu-
tion, which is compatible with expectations from the SM. The Σ+ →pµ+µ−branching
fraction, when combined with the Run 1 result, is measured to be
B(Σ+ →pµ+µ−) = (1.09 ± 0.17) × 10−8,
which is compatible with the SM and represents the rarest baryon decay ever observed.
From the combined experimental and theoretical z-scores, this result favours the lowest
predicted degenerate branching fraction [3], which is also qualitatively favoured by the
structure measured in the mµ+µ−distribution. Comparing the measured branching fraction
with the eight theoretical predictions [3], the next largest is disfavoured by at least 3.7σ,
while the remaining two are rejected at over 6.1σ. This comparison also shows that,
in general, heavy-baryon χPT predictions are disfavoured by at least 3.1σ compared to
relativistic χPT predictions.
With the collected signal yield, a measurement of additional observables such as the
differential branching fraction, charge-parity symmetry violation and forward-backward
asymmetries is envisaged and left for a future publication.
Acknowledgements
We express our gratitude to our colleagues in the CERN accelerator departments for
the excellent performance of the LHC. We thank the technical and administrative staff
at the LHCb institutes. We acknowledge support from CERN and from the national
agencies: ARC (Australia); CAPES, CNPq, FAPERJ and FINEP (Brazil); MOST and
NSFC (China); CNRS/IN2P3 (France); BMBF, DFG and MPG (Germany); INFN (Italy);
NWO (Netherlands); MNiSW and NCN (Poland); MCID/IFA (Romania); MICIU and
AEI (Spain); SNSF and SER (Switzerland); NASU (Ukraine); STFC (United Kingdom);
DOE NP and NSF (USA). We acknowledge the computing resources that are provided
by ARDC (Australia), CBPF (Brazil), CERN, IHEP and LZU (China), IN2P3 (France),
KIT and DESY (Germany), INFN (Italy), SURF (Netherlands), Polish WLCG (Poland),
IFIN-HH (Romania), PIC (Spain), CSCS (Switzerland), and GridPP (United Kingdom).
7
