Non-Hermitian Numerical Renormalization Group:
Solution of the non-Hermitian Kondo model
Phillip C. Burke and Andrew K. Mitchell
School of Physics, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland and
Centre for Quantum Engineering, Science, and Technology, University College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland
Non-Hermitian (NH) Hamiltonians describe open quantum systems, nonequilibrium dynamics, and
dissipative processes. Although a rich range of single-particle NH physics has been uncovered, many-
body phenomena in strongly correlated NH systems have been far less well studied. The Kondo
effect, an important paradigm for strong correlation physics, has recently been considered in the NH
setting. Here we develop a NH generalization of the numerical renormalization group (NRG) and
use it to solve the NH Kondo model. Our non-perturbative solution applies beyond weak coupling,
and we uncover a nontrivial phase diagram. The method is showcased by application to the NH
pseudogap Kondo model, which we show supports a completely novel phase with a genuine NH
stable fixed point and complex eigenspectrum. Our NH-NRG code, which can be used in regimes
and for models inaccessible to, e.g., perturbative scaling and Bethe ansatz, is provided open source.
The past two decades have seen immense interest in
open quantum systems, with non-Hermitian (NH) Hamil-
tonians describing the effective dynamics of dissipative
systems playing a key role [1–5].
NH Hamiltonians
present certain unique challenges, such as dealing with
complex eigenvalues, non-orthonormal eigenvectors [6, 7],
and exceptional points [8–18] – singularities in parame-
ter space at which eigenvalues and eigenstates coalesce.
NH systems with PT -symmetry [19–21] are somewhat
simpler, having real eigenvalues; but many systems of in-
terest do not fall into this class. Much attention has, to
date, focused on single-particle NH systems [3, 4], while
many-body counterparts remain far less well explored.
Although recent work has begun to address strongly-
correlated NH physics, non-perturbative numerical meth-
ods beyond exact diagonalization remain limited [22, 23].
The Kondo model [24] is a classic paradigm for strong-
correlation physics in the standard Hermitian scenario, so
the solution of its NH generalizations is naturally of im-
portance for understanding NH physics in the many-body
context. Furthermore, as shown in Ref. [25], ultracold
atom systems undergoing inelastic scattering with two-
body losses can be described by an effective NH Kondo
model. These factors have stimulated considerable inter-
est in a range of NH quantum impurity models [25–35].
The non-Hermitian Kondo model reads,
ˆH = ˆHbath + J ˆSi · ˆS0 ,
(1)
where J = JR −iJI is taken to be complex, ˆSi is a
spin- 1
2 operator for the impurity, ˆHbath = P
k,σ ϵkc†
kσckσ
describes a continuum bath of non-interacting conduc-
tion electrons labeled by spin σ =↑, ↓and momentum
k, and ˆS0 =
1
2
P
σ,σ′ c†
0στ σ,σ′c0σ′ is the local conduc-
tion electron spin density at the impurity position (here
c0σ = P
k αkckσ and τ is the Pauli vector). The bath is
characterized by its density of states (DOS) at the im-
purity, ρ(ω). For a standard metallic flat band, we take
ρ(ω) = ρ0Θ(D −|ω|).
Eq. (1) does not possess PT -
symmetry, so generically has a complex eigenspectrum.
The standard Hermitian Kondo model is recovered for
JI = 0. For antiferromagnetic coupling JR > 0, the im-
purity spin is dynamically screened by surrounding con-
duction electrons via the Kondo effect [24] at low tem-
peratures T ≪TK, with TK ∼De−1/ρ0JR the Kondo
temperature. The physics is non-perturbative and non-
Markovian: even for small bare JR, the impurity becomes
strongly coupled to the bath at low T by formation of a
many-body Kondo singlet state inside a large entangle-
ment ‘cloud’ [36–38]. The Kondo effect can be under-
stood in the renormalization group (RG) framework [39]
as a flow from the unstable local moment (LM) fixed
point, corresponding to a free spin on the impurity de-
coupled from the bath, to the stable strong-coupling (SC)
fixed point in which the impurity is bound up in the
Kondo singlet. A full, non-perturbative solution of the
Kondo problem is provided by Wilson’s numerical renor-
malization group (NRG) technique [40, 41], which can
also be applied to generalized quantum impurity prob-
lems, and works with arbitrary bath density of states.
The Hermitian Kondo model in the wide flat-band limit
can also be solved exactly by Bethe ansatz [42].
The NH Kondo model was studied in Ref. [25] using
a combination of perturbative scaling and Bethe ansatz,
which provides a rather complete picture of the weak-
coupling physics up to |J|/D ≲0.25, beyond which the
methods break down.
It was shown that sufficiently
strong dissipation (tuned by increasing JI) can produce
a quantum phase transition between the standard Kondo
SC phase and an unscreened LM phase, via a mechanism
analogous to the continuous quantum Zeno effect [43]. A
reversion of the RG flow was observed in the LM phase,
which violates the g-theorem for Hermitian systems [44].
The low-energy fixed points were found to be real, mean-
ing that the metallic NH Kondo model has an emergent
Hermiticity.
However, this scenario has recently been
challenged, with the alternative Bethe ansatz results of
Ref. [28] appearing to show a different phase diagram,
with a new phase intervening between SC and LM.
arXiv:2504.07019v1  [cond-mat.str-el]  9 Apr 2025
