2
Laser
(a)
ND
LPF & Lens
Sensor Head
Fibre
Coaxial
Cable
DM
BD
99:1
Lock-In Amplifier
MW Source
Computer
Diamond
Outer Rubber Heatshrink Cap
9 mm
Thermal 
paste
MW Loop
Fibre
Bias Magnet
(b)
10 mm
Coaxial Cable
(c)
FIG. 1: (a) Diagram of the scanning magnetometry setup
(ND - neutral density filter, BD - balanced detector, DM -
dichroic mirror, MW - microwave, LPF - long-pass filter).
(b) The diamond is directly coupled with glue to the end
of a polished fiber. An MW loop is attached and glued in
place and soldered to a coaxial cable. A bias magnet is
placed and secured in place to provide resonance splitting.
(c) Photo of the probe head with ruler for scale.
connector on one end and a cut bare fiber exposed on the
other end.
The diameter of the fibre is larger than the
size of the diamond to increase light collection. The FCPC
connector is fastened to a Thorlabs SM1FC 2.2 mm wide
key FCPC terminated fiber adapter inside the optics box.
The fiber is fed through and out the back of the optics
box.
The diamond is directly coupled to the bare-fiber
end, seated and secured in place using glue (Loctite 401).
During the seating process, the laser was on and photolu-
minescence (PL) was collected from the diamond. While
the glue was still viscous, the diamond was gently adjusted
using tweezers to maximize the PL collection, measured us-
ing a PicoScope 5442D Series oscilloscope. Once the best
PL level was achieved, the laser was turned off and the glue
was left to cure. A coaxial cable was attached to the side
of the fiber, running the length of the fiber but separating
off before the fiber goes into the optics box, with the coax-
ial cable connecting to the microwave source. The coaxial
2 . 7 5
2 . 8 0
2 . 8 5
2 . 9 0
2 . 9 5
  
  
  
0
2 0
4 0
6 0
S i g n a l  ( m V )
F r e q u e n c y  ( G H z )
FIG. 2: Optically detected magnetic resonance spectrum
after the neodymium magnet was aligned close to a [100]
orientation and secured in place.
cable has a SMA (SubMiniature version A) adapter on one
end and exposed metal shielding and copper core on the
other.
The coaxial cable was attached to the fiber such
that the exposed copper core of the coaxial cable was as
close as possible to the diamond. A length of 0.4 mm di-
ameter copper wire was wrapped fully around the diamond
with one turn, and the ends were soldered to the metallic
shielding and the core of the coaxial cable.
Microwaves
were then sent to the probe head through the copper wire
to produce an ODMR spectrum, measured by the Pico-
Scope using the LIA scaled demodulated output. The cop-
per wire was adjusted in shape using tweezers to maximize
the ODMR contrast. Further glue was then used to secure
the copper wire in place around the diamond. The tip of
the fiber, including the diamond and coaxial cable is coated
in thermal paste to help with heat transfer away from the
diamond to prevent the glue from failing and to increase
PL collection by using the paste to scatter light into the
fiber. The fiber end and coaxial cable is then covered with a
heatshrink cap (HellermannTyton Polyolefin Cross Linked
(POX) 10 mm expanded diameter) to protect the diamond,
copper loop and thermal paste as well as make the device
light-tight. The resulting maximum diameter is 10 mm.
Both the laser excitation light and red PL from the di-
amond travel through the same fiber. The PL from the
diamond is separated out using a dichroic mirror (Thorlabs
DMSP650) to be focused using an aspheric lens, onto one
of the two photodiodes of a balanced detector (Thorlabs
PD450A). The other photodiode takes a reference beam
from the laser, directed using a beam sampler and mirror
and passing through a neutral density (ND) filter. This is
done to cancel common mode noise from the laser. The
input power of both photodiodes is balanced when the
microwaves are on resonance to get the best cancellation
when magnetically sensitive. The balanced detector out-
put is passed to a Zurich MFLI DC 500-kHz lock-in am-
plifier (LIA). The microwaves are provided by an Agilent
N5172B. A microwave power of 10 dBm was used for all
data taken in this paper. The diamond used was a 0.5-mm-
cube, low-strain, 99.995%-12C chemical-vapor-deposition
(CVD)-grown diamond by Element Six, polished on all
sides.
A single N42 neodymium-iron-boron 2.5 × 7 × 2.5 mm
