6
Panel (a) of Figure 5 shows χ′′(ω) from T=1.7 K data
integrated over various high-symmetry q-regions shown
in its inset; all are scaled such that the maximum of
the DHO component is 1.
The panel shows that be-
low ∼0.8 meV, the scaled χ′′ curves behave similarly
and adhere well to a common DHO which captures the
energy-dependence of the impurity scattering. Panel (b)
shows scattering data with the DHO component sub-
tracted and without scale normalization. The indepen-
dently fit sigmoid components all center at similar ener-
gies 1.1(2) meV and have similar widths.
From our correlation analysis in the previous section,
we know that nearest impurity-to-kagome bonds con-
tribute significantly to the low-q scattering and that the
nearest-neighbor kagome spin correlations yield intensity
at the depicted K-regions (also see Figure 9 in Extended
Data). This is consistent with the intensities of the DHO
function capturing the impurity scattering and the sig-
moid function capturing the kagome correlations. The
results shown in panels (a, b) of Figure 5 are hence
indicative of a gapped QSL state in Zn-barlowite with
gap energy ∼1.1 meV. Figure 10 in Extended Data fur-
ther shows this model applied to the derived q-integrated
χ′′(ω) with higher statistics, again showing a ∼1.1 meV
energy gap.
Figure 5(c) shows a similar analysis without any ex-
plicit assumption of a DHO impurity fit.
Using the
T=1.7 K data, the χ′′(ω) corresponding to low-q is
scaled to match χ′′
K(ω) in the energy range ℏω
=
[0.35, 0.75] meV and subtracted from χ′′
K(ω). This scaled
difference (magenta) follows a sigmoid with a similar
∼1.1 meV center to those in panel (b). The same pro-
cess is applied to the T=40 K data and shown in orange.
Interestingly, the high temperature data shows diminish-
ment of the scattering intensity below ∼1.1 meV, however
the intensity does not fall to zero. While this behavior
indicates the system is not gapped at T=40 K, consistent
with NMR results that show the gapped singlet fraction
only grows below T=40 K [28], the reduction in scatter-
ing intensity suggests the persistence of a pseudo-gap-like
energy scale on the order of the spin gap energy at ele-
vated temperatures.
CONCLUSION
Our inelastic neutron scattering data affirm that Zn-
barlowite exhibits signature features of a QSL, and com-
parison with results on herbertsmithite allows us to iden-
tify universal behavior common to these leading kagome
QSL materials.
The spin excitations of the kagome
moments, at energies above the impurity-dominated
regimes, are strikingly similar and take the form of a
spinon continuum. Our pair correlation model allows us
to clearly distinguish intrinsic kagome correlations from
impurity-induced correlations. In Zn-barlowite, the in-
tensity pattern is dominated by relatively short-range
kagome correlations, shows little change with energy (at
least for energies below J1/5), and persists to at least
T=150 K. Our results also point to a spin gap with
∆= 1.1(2) meV, which, along with similar evidence
in herbertsmithite, [12–14] lends credence to a gapped
ground state for this family of S=1/2 kagome QSL mate-
rials. While the intensity of the dynamic structure factor
changes appreciably with q, the measured energy gaps
and gap widths are relatively independent of q.
Fu-
ture measurements to uncover finer-grained details on
the distribution of gap features over q would aid our un-
derstanding of the gap inhomogeneity deduced in recent
NMR measurements on these materials [14].
The measured first, second, and third nearest-neighbor
kagome-kagome correlations place Zn-barlowite within
the QSL phase of the extended phase diagram (involv-
ing J2 and Dz) calculated by DMRG. This implies con-
straints on the interactions where |J2| and |Dz| are both
small (< J1/10), indicating the Hamiltonian is well de-
scribed by the nearest-neighbor Heisenberg model to
first approximation. This is consistent with other mea-
surements refining the Hamiltonian of herbertsmithite
[36, 39]. Although the interactions are small, the combi-
nation of negative J2 and positive Dz serves to stabilize
the QSL phase. This information sheds light on compar-
isons with theoretical dynamic structure factor results.
DMRG [40] and variational Monte Carlo [41] calculations
on the kagome AFM system assuming J2 = Dz = 0 pre-
dict neutron intensities that show some quantitative dif-
ferences with our data, such as higher intensity near the
Γ position relative to our results in Figure 5. Including
the effects of negative J2 and positive Dz would likely
flatten this intensity variation to more closely match the
data. A small easy-axis exchange anisotropy similar to
that in herbertsmithite [36] may also be needed. Theo-
retical work which includes coupling between spinons and
vison excitations has also been proposed to explain exci-
tations in herbertsmithite [42] and appears to match our
results. Adjustment of the phenomenological parameters
in this model could lead to even closer alignment.
A virtue of both herbertsmithite and Zn-barlowite is
that the spin Hamiltonians are relatively well character-
ized [26, 36] with the effects of the interlayer impuri-
ties having been well studied [13, 14, 33]. As a result
of our finding that both have a similar spinon contin-
uum, it is important to investigate whether this univer-
sality pertains to other candidate kagome QSL materi-
als such as Zn-doped claringbullite (ZnCu3(OH)3FCl)
[43, 44].
Identifying behavior that is truly universal
would also help us understand the differences with re-
cent results within the kagome family that includes
YCu9(OH)19Cl8 [45] and YCu3(OH)6Br2[Br1−x(OH)x]
[46–48].
While YCu9(OH)19Cl8 orders around 2.1 K,
YCu3(OH)6Br2[Br1−x(OH)x] does not order down to 50
mK and has been studied as another QSL candidate with
an entirely different type of structural disorder.
Both
materials show dispersive spin excitations measured by
inelastic neutron scattering emanating from Q = ( 1
3, 1
3)-
type positions.
Improved understanding of the spin
