Equating quantum imaginary time evolution, Riemannian gradient flows, and
stochastic implementations
Nathan A. McMahon,1, 2, ∗Mahum Pervez,3 and Christian Arenz3, †
1⟨aQaL⟩Applied Quantum Algorithms, Leiden University, Netherlands
2LIACS, Leiden University, Netherlands
3School of Electrical, Computer, and Energy Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 85281, USA
We identify quantum imaginary time evolution as a Riemannian gradient flow on the unitary
group. We develop an upper bound for the error between the two evolutions that can be controlled
through the step size of the Riemannian gradient descent which minimizes the energy of the system.
We discuss implementations through adaptive quantum algorithms and present a stochastic Rie-
mannian gradient descent algorithm in which each step is efficiently implementable on a quantum
computer. We prove that for a sufficiently small step size, the stochastic evolution concentrates
around the imaginary time evolution, thereby providing performance guarantees for cooling the
system through stochastic Riemannian gradient descent.
Introduction – Imaginary time evolution (ITE) is a
powerful classical method for determining properties of a
many-body Hamiltonian H. For example, various quan-
tum Monte Carlo methods [1] aim to find the spec-
tral characteristics of H by solving the time imaginary
Schr¨odinger equation [2] whose normalized solution is
given by the state
|ψ(β)⟩=
e−βH |ψ0⟩
∥e−βH |ψ0⟩∥,
(1)
where β is the “imaginary time” and |ψ0⟩is the initial
state of the system. The appeal of such methods is the
fact that if the initial state has non-zero overlap with the
ground state |E0⟩of H, i.e. ⟨ψ0| E0⟩̸= 0, then under suf-
ficiently long evolution times β the state |ψ(β)⟩is given
by |E0⟩.
Due to the exponential overhead in implementing
imaginary time evolution on classical computers, over
the last years there has been a growing interest in de-
veloping quantum algorithms that aim to create the ITE
state (1) on a quantum computer. Such methods face
the challenge that the evolution e−βH that leads to the
state (1) is not unitary, and therefore not directly im-
plementable with unitary gates on a quantum device.
Several approaches [3–13] have been proposed to over-
come this challenge by designing unitary evolutions that
approximate |ψ(β)⟩. For instance, the quantum imagi-
nary time evolution algorithm [3–10] and its probabilistic
modifications [11, 12] Trotterize ITE to approximate each
Trotter step by a unitary that is identified through classi-
cal optimization. Similarly, in variational approaches to
ITE [14, 15] classical optimization routines are used in
conjunction with a quantum computer to optimize a pa-
rameterized quantum circuit that prepares |ψ(β)⟩. While
these algorithms are often powerful heuristics, quantum
algorithms that implement ITE with performance guar-
antees remain scarce in the literature.
∗n.a.mcmahon@liacs.leidenuniv.nl
† carenz1@asu.edu
Figure 1.
Schematic representation of the correspondence
between imaginary time evolution (ITE) described by e−βH
and Riemannian gradient descent (RGD) minimizing the en-
ergy of the system. A unitary evolution e−∆βgradJ (red) is
created by the retraction (green) of the Riemannian gradi-
ent gradJ with respect to a cost function J where ∆β is the
step size. We show that the error between the ITE state and
the state |ϕ1⟩created through one step of RGD is of the order
O(∆β−2) (Lemma 1). Building upon this, we prove that after
n steps the state |ϕn⟩approximates the ITE state with an er-
ror O(∆β) (Theorem 1). We use this observation to develop a
stochastic Riemannian gradient descent algorithm (gray line)
whose evolution concentrates around ITE (Theorem 2).
In this work, we address this challenge by identifying
ITE as a Riemannian gradient flow [16–20] on the uni-
tary group, which can be implemented through adaptive
quantum algorithms [19–26] on quantum computers. The
relationship between ITE and gradient flows has been ob-
served before in the literature [27] and has recently been
leveraged [28] to provide fidelity bounds for ground state
preparation and energy minimization. Here, we derive
rigorous bounds for implementing the full ITE, thus pro-
viding performance guarantees for implementing the ITE
state for generic imaginary evolution times β and for con-
vergence to excited states (when ⟨ψ0|E0⟩= 0).
We first prove that the state created by the unitary
evolution that describes the Riemannian gradient flow
can be made arbitrarily close to the ITE state |ψ(β)⟩.
This is achieved by appropriately choosing the step size
arXiv:2504.06123v1  [quant-ph]  8 Apr 2025
