Clearly the constraint that is needed for getting rid of the translational part of the theory,
with a coordinate transformation making up for them, is the vanishing of the torsion,
˜Rµν
a = 0 .
(88)
Similarly, the difference between a diffeomorphism and the gauge transformation ˜δfµa −
δfµa leads to
Rµν
a = 0 ,
(89)
while the corresponding difference ˜δωµab −δωµab results to
Rµν
ab = 0 .
(90)
As already mentioned in Section 4.1, the generators Pa and Ka are broken due to the SSB of
the scalar 15-plet, i.e. the two torsionless conditions are resulting from the SSB of the scalar
15-plet.
Therefore the two torsionless conditions and the vanishing of the curvature tensor, which
is satisfied on-shell guarantee the equivalence of the diffeomorphisms and gauge transfor-
mations. In other words, the gauge theory based on the SO(2, 4) group describes the 4-d
conformal gravity.
At this point, it should be noted that eq. (72), which eventually leads to WG, is an
additional constraint and is not necessary in order to guarantee the equivalence of the dif-
feomorphisms and gauge transformations.
5
Noncommutative Gauge Theory of 4D Gravity - Fuzzy
Gravity
5.1
Gauge theories on noncommutative spaces
In this section we include the basics regarding the construction of gauge theories on non-
commutative spaces, since it is fundamental for our purposes. In noncommutative geometry,
gauge fields arise in a very natural way and are intertwined with the notion of covariant
coordinate [75], that is the noncommutative analogue of the covariant derivative as we will
stress later. Let us now begin with considering a field ϕ(Xa) on a fuzzy space, depending on
the noncommuting coordinates Xa. The field belongs to a representation of a gauge group
G, therefore an infinitesimal gauge transformation δϕ with gauge transformation parameter
λ(Xa) is given by:
δϕ(X) = λ(X)ϕ(X) .
(91)
In case the transformation parameter λ(X) is simply a function of the coordinates, Xα, then
it is considered as an infinitesimal Abelian transformation and the gauge group is G = U(1),
while in case λ(X) is a P ×P matrix, then it can be viewed as a gauge transformation of the
non-Abelian gauge group G = U(P), i.e. the group including all hermitian P ×P matrices. It
is worth noting that the coordinates are invariant under transformations of the gauge group,
G, that is δXα = 0. In turn, let us perform a gauge transformation on the product of a
coordinate and the field:
δ(Xaϕ) = Xaλ(X)ϕ ,
(92)
17
