23 
Engineering. His research interests include low-power VLSI design, reconfigurable computing, 
and CMOS image sensors. 
Robert K. Henderson is a Professor of Electronic Imaging in the School of Engineering at the 
University of Edinburgh. He obtained his Ph.D. in 1990 from the University of Glasgow. From 
1991, he was a research engineer at the Swiss Centre for Microelectronics, Neuchatel, Switzerland. 
In 1996, he was appointed senior VLSI engineer at VLSI Vision Ltd, Edinburgh, UK where he 
worked on the world’s first single chip video camera. From 2000, as principal VLSI engineer in 
STMicroelectronics Imaging Division he developed image sensors for mobile phone applications. 
He joined University of Edinburgh in 2005, designing the first SPAD image sensors in nanometer 
CMOS technologies in the MegaFrame and SPADnet EU projects. This research activity led to 
the first volume SPAD time-of-flight products in 2013 in the form of STMicroelectronics 
FlightSense series, which perform an autofocus-assist now present in over 1 billion smartphones. 
He benefits from a long-term research partnership with STMicroelectronics in which he explores 
medical, scientific and high speed imaging applications of SPAD technology. In 2014, he was 
awarded a prestigious ERC advanced fellowship. He is an advisor to Ouster Automotive and a 
Fellow of the IEEE and the Royal Society of Edinburgh. 
David Day-Uei Li received his Ph.D. in electrical engineering from National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan, in 2001. He then joined the Industrial Technology Research Institute, working on 
complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) optical and wireless communication 
chipsets. From 2007 to 2011, he worked at the University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, on two 
European projects focusing on CMOS single-photon avalanche diode sensors and systems. He then 
took the lectureship in biomedical engineering at the University of Sussex, Brighton, in mid-2011, 
and in 2014, he joined the University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, as a senior lecturer. He has 
published more than 100 research articles and patents. His research interests include time-resolved 
imaging and spectroscopy systems, mixed-signal circuits, CMOS sensors and systems, embedded 
systems, optical communications, and field programmable gate array/GPU computing. His 
research exploits advanced sensor technologies to reveal low-light but fast biological phenomena. 
 
Biographies and photographs for the other authors are not available. 
