Chapter 1.
Scattering Protons
This chapter is based on Refs. [22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27]
Collisions of nuclei at high center-of-mass energies have been one of the richest sources of
experimental data in particle physics. Starting from the 1960s this activity has led to the
discovery of the theory describing strong interactions, known as Quantum Chromodynamics
(QCD) and, nowadays, the extensive information that can be extracted from hadron-hadron
collisions continues to motivate physicists to operate the largest collider ever built, the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC). In order to formulate accurate predictions of such scattering processes
the knowledge of the initial state conditions is an essential theoretical input. However, this task
is non-trivial, as hadrons do not behave like point-like particles and their constituents, quarks
and gluons, become weakly interacting only in the high energy limit.
Outline.
We begin this chapter with a review of the main concepts of the current formulation
of perturbative QCD (Section 1.1), we then describe how it is possible to make predictions about
Deep Inelastic Scattering (DIS), i.e. the lepton-hadron scattering at high center-of-mass energies
(Section 1.2). In Section 1.3, we introduce the concepts of Factorization and Parton Distribution
Function (PDF) which are the main tools used to describe how the hadron constituents are
distributed inside the bound states allowing the computation of cross-sections. In the following
Section 1.4, we discuss how perturbative QCD can be used to improve the accuracy of DIS
predictions and how heavy quark mass effects can be accounted. Finally, in Section 1.5, we
sketch a generalization of the above concepts for multi hadron scattering, especially for the
proton-proton case.
1.1. Perturbative QCD
QCD is the theory describing the strong interaction which is the dominant force binding quarks
and gluons. Its formulation has been a result of many ideas and experimental data collected
from the end of the ’60s. Below, we summarize the key findings that steered the development
of current QCD theory.
The existence of quarks was first observed at SLAC [28] in high-energy electron-proton collisions,
where many hadrons were produced in the final state. Their classification was compatible with
the description given by Gell-Mann and Zweig, the eightfold way [29]. The model is based on
spin- 1
2 constituent particles, the quarks, up, down, strange which obey an SU(3) flavor symmetry
and carry a fractional electric charge. The necessity to have antisymmetric wave-functions in
1
