In physical scenarios, a full set of initial conditions at a single point is rarely the case. Rather,
we often find boundary conditions that are fixed (e.g. pinning to surface defects), free (e.g. end
of nematic region) or mixed (e.g. end of patterned surface region). In such cases uniqueness of
the solution to eq. (5) is not a priori guaranteed, however could be derived locally by means of the
shooting method or similar tools. Many systems [20–22,27] indeed show multi-stability of solutions.
Equations (4) can be derived using calculus of variations from a simple free energy functional (see
Appendix A). In addition to eq. (4a) as its Euler-Lagrange equation, such analysis gives the exact
form of the boundary term; disclination lines that end on a free boundary must do so perpendicularly
to the boundary. Additionally, it allows addressing the second variation to verify the stability of
disclination paths, which we use in the following.
Inverse problem
After solving equilibrium paths given surface patterns, we naturally turn to the inverse problem.
Given a plane curve Γ, can we design a cell with suitably chosen surface patterns θt and θb, such
that disclination line will emerge in the shape of Γ? This question can be answered promptly by
reading eq. (4a) backwards. For a given curve Γ, κ is known and eq. (4a) can simply be solved
algebraically for ∆θ, thus for θt and θb. This algorithm is not only simple but also very much
degenerate, since ∆θ is determined only on the curve Γ itself. Therefore, multiple surface patterns
may give rise to the same given curve Γ [18,23].
We thus turn to describe a system whose force balance equations eq. (4) depend on a parameter
β. For each value of β, we obtain a unique spray (eq. (5)) and its associated geodesics. Now, given
a set of plane curves {Γβ}, we aim to find a single pair of surface patterns θt and θb, that will
realize each curve Γβ at the corresponding value of the parameter β. We represent the input family
of desired plane curves with an auxiliary function B(x, y), whose level sets are the target curves:
Γβ =

(x, y) ∈R2 | B(x, y) = β
	
.
(6)
This notation implicitly assumes that Γβ that belong to different β are mutually non-intersecting
(except for isolated singular points, which we handle later). In many cases this assumption is not
necessary, and intersecting curves can be achieved for different values of β, however since it makes
the formalism simpler we assume it for clarity. We now turn to write equations (4) in terms of the
input function B(x, y) and (algebraically) solve them for θt/b (Fig. 2).
Force balance.
We interpret β as some physical parameter which alters the force equation.
Changing β can represent changes in the system parameters, e.g. the temperature, or a relative 2D
rigid transformation between the two plates which we denote by Lβ. Since for every β the path Γβ
is at equilibrium, we write eq. (4a) for all values of β:
λ(β)κ(Γβ) + f
∆θ(β, LβΓβ) = 0.
(7)
We rewrite eq. (7) in terms of B(x, y) to explicitly extract the balance at each x, y position:
f
∆θ(B, LB(x, y)) = −λ(B)κ(x, y).
(8)
The curvature κ(x, y) can be explicitly written as a function of position using B
κ(x, y) = σ B2
xByy −2BxByBxy + B2
yBxx
(B2x + B2y)3/2
,
(9)
4
