200
Bibliography
Next, I would like to thank all the members of the Nikhef theory group: Robin, Pieter, Jelle, Max,
Jaco, Coenraad, Heleen, Peter, Vaisakh, Andres, Tommaso, Tanishq, Maximilian, Sachin, Ankita,
Tommaso, Juraj, Johannes, Robert, Lucaš, Melissa, Marieke, Eric, Jordy, and Wouter. Thanks for
being always welcoming with me and create an enjoyable and friendly environment every day.
To all the wonderful people I met at Nikhef, with whom I shared evenings and fun moments
—Andrea P., Avanish, Alice, Andrea A., Andrea V., Alex, Antonella, Carlo, Enrico, Evridiki, Luca,
Lydia, Masha, Roberto, and Vlad—thank you for making my time there so enjoyable.
A special thanks go to my flatmates, Tommaso and Masha. Living with you at Zeeburgerkade
702 has been amazing. I will always remember all the dinners together-the simple ones and
the fancy ones-or enjoying the astonishing sunset view from our balcony. Thanks for being
flexible, supporting and positive. From you, I have learned a lot. If coming back home has
always been fun, it is because of you and I am grateful to have shared these years together.
From Amsterdam, I will eagerly remember the time spent playing tennis at the ATVD club in
Diemen. In particular, I am grateful to Tito, Kenneth, Etienne, Jesper and the tireless squad of
Federico and Andrea, you are the best!
Living in the Netherlands for the past four years has been an eye-opening experience, and
despite the challenging beginning, each year became better and more rewarding.
Regardless of spending my time in Amsterdam, I cannot forget to thank all the friends from
Milan. Among them, my lifelong group of friends from "Precotto and surroundings" (sorry for
not listing your names here). I met some of you when we were kids, and the fact that we still
see each other and share experiences always impresses me. You always make me feel home and
younger when back to Milan, thanks. Next, are my physicist friends from university: Alessandro,
Andrea, Federica, Laura and Tiziano. Sharing the studies and the experience of our PhD around
Europe has been really helpful and fruitful. To Laura, thanks for all the nice bike rides and trips
around the Netherlands.
Finally, I am grateful to my paranymphs Jaco and Tiziano. You have been loyal companions
during the PhD years, thank you for your support, organization and help.
Last but not least, to my family—from my parents to my cousins—I feel incredibly fortunate to
have grown up with you. You will always be an example and an inspiration in my life. Mom
Paola, dad Riccardo and Filippo thanks for all the trust and the patience you have from the very
beginning.
And to Anna—thank you for walking with me side by side.
With gratitude,
Giacomo
