where ¯F is the field strength of the constant-F solution and [µ...ν] denotes antisymmetrization
with respect to these indices. The boundary conditions on Wµ are as stated in (2.15) and
Sµ is periodic in all T4 directions. Now, we impose self-duality of (4.12) and the background
gauge condition (2.16). Before we continue with details, let us explain our strategy.
Strategy: We first note that the self-duality condition for the off-diagonal component in
(4.12), for any periodic Sµ, involves a linear differential operator acting on the complex
vector field Wµ. This operator has a background U(1) gauge field, which has a component,
¯Aω
µ, giving rise to nontrivial fluxes (or Chern classes) through the various planes in the T4, and
an unknown periodic component, Sµ, which does not give rise to nonzero Chern classes. We
shall argue below that there is an index theorem that determines the number of normalizable
solutions of the Wµ self-duality condition in terms of the U(1) fluxes, for any periodic Sµ. Each
solution of the self-duality equation for Wµ thus comes with a number of (real) moduli, which
we argue equals 4r. Plugging this solution (which depends on the unknown but periodic
Sµ in a nontrivial way) into the self-duality condition for the diagonal elements in (4.12)
then leads to a nonlinear first order equation for Sµ. Solving this equation is beyond our
means. However, consistency of this equation requires the vanishing of the integral of the
r.h.s.
over the torus and restricts the number of moduli from 4r to 4r −3.
Adding the
constant gauge transformations in the Cartan subalgebra of SU(2), which is a symmetry of
both the fluctuation equation and the gauge condition, leaves only 4r −4 extra moduli. In
addition to the 4 constant holonomies, this makes up for precisely 4r moduli. These 4r −4
ones correspond to self-dual deformations of the constant-F solution which make the field
strengths of the instanton x-dependent.
The details: We begin by stating the self-duality condition for the “field strength of Wµ,”
namely the one entering the off-diagonal term in (4.12). We introduce, in addition to the
operator Dµ entering the gauge condition, the operator Dµ which has an additional U(1)
background field, the periodic Sµ:
Dµ = ∂µ + i2πN( ¯Aω
µ + Sµ),
Dµ = ∂µ + i2πN ¯Aω
µ,
(4.13)
in terms of these operators, the self-duality of the off diagonal component of (4.12) reads:
D[µWν] −1
2ϵµνλσD[λWσ] = 0
DµWµ = 0.
(4.14)
Following [50] (see also [49]), this can be recast as a problem for finding the zero modes of a
differential operator T: Wµ →(fµν, g). T is a map from the space of complex vector fields
(Wµ) on T4, with boundary conditions (2.15), to the space of complex self-dual antisymmetric
2-tensors (fµν) and scalars (g).28 Explicitly:
T : Wµ →(fµν = D[µWν] −1
2ϵµνλσD[λWσ], g = DµWµ) .
(4.15)
28On T4, obeying boundary conditions determined by (2.15), the definition of T and eqn. (4.14).
– 31 –
