5.2
Implementing the iterative algorithm: preliminary observations
For concreteness, let us spell out the first few steps in the iterative procedure. Denote the points in
the iteration by fi. Our zeroth approximation to the unknown function f is given by f0 ≡1, which
corresponds to the pure AdS. The next steps are
f1 = F(f0) = f0 −(DA|f0)−1(Af0 −Af)
(5.12)
f2 = F(f1) = f0 −(DA|f0)−1(Af0 −Af) −(DA|f0)−1(Af1 −Af)
(5.13)
...
Thus, we are in effect constructing a series representation for the unknown f. Notice the analogy
to Newton’s method in the above algorithm; where the analogy fails is that the inverse of the
‘derivative’ is here always evaluated at the same point. Remarkably, for any function δA we have
an explicit expression for δf = D−1A |f0 δA given by (3.39) (in even dimension) and (3.33) (in
odd dimension). This is all we need in terms of metric perturbation theory; we don’t need explicit
formulas for higher order perturbations δ2f, δ3f etc.
We remark here that the series representation (5.12) applies for reconstructing metrics which
are near the Schwarzschild–AdS metric given in (3.44), at least in the low temperature regime when
zH ≫1. Indeed, since
fAdS−BH(z) =
1
1 −(z/zH)3
we see that fAdS−BH ≈1 when zH ≫1. So any metric ˆf which are near fAdS−BH when zH ≫1
are also close to 1 and therefore can be represented via (5.12).
Even though the area quantities above are in fact just the ‘finite parts’ thereof, in practice we
take Afi and Af to be the non-regularized areas and write Adata = Af0 −Af, which is actually our
regular data. Then we can augment the above procedure by writing Afi−Af = (Afi−Af0)+Adata so
that at each iteration we regularize the new area function Afi against the corresponding quantity in
pure AdS (by combining two divergent integrals under a single integral sign so that the divergences
in the integrands cancel out).
Numerical implementation of the algorithm may be rather challenging. For this, we first need
to numerically solve the full minimal surface equation in the metric involving fi for a large family
of boundary disk radii. Then we evaluate numerically the integral Afi −Af0 where we plug in
the numerical approximation for the embedding function of the minimal surface corresponding to
fi, and the hemisphere solution, and we do this for a number of radii. Finally, we need a finite
difference approximation for the first and second derivatives of (Afi −Af0) + Adata to compute the
next function fi+1 using the explicit inversion formula. Controlling the numerical error through all
these stages might require some care. The computation is probably going to be quite costly unless
we for some reason have very fast convergence towards the sought-after function.
Our iterative scheme is reminiscent of the perturbative reconstruction method presented in [8,
Sec. 6.1]. One notable difference, however, is that our algorithm is not based on a Taylor expansion
of the unknown function. Our algorithm is global in the sense that each new step integrates over
all the values of earlier iteration. As it is well-known that Taylor expansion is highly unstable and
sensitive to numerical errors, it is possible that our method leads to better stability and convergence
in the reconstruction.
6
Discussion
Our analysis has focused on reconstructing aspects of the bulk geometry from boundary data, but
several subtleties remain. One key omission in our discussion is the divergence structure of the
– 24 –
