D. Pauli et al.: New empirical mass-loss recipe for hot stars across various metallicities
content of a star, which is not expected to change during the evo-
lution. When extrapolated to intermediate-mass He stars (5 M⊙),
the mass-loss rates predicted by Nugis & Lamers (2000) are at
least an order of magnitude too high. Such strong mass-loss rates
can have substantial consequences for stellar evolution models,
as they heavily influence the evolutionary pathways and final
fates of stars, particularly in determining whether a star ends its
life as a neutron star or black hole.
Another mass-loss relation often considered for helium stars,
especially for those classified as “non-WR” (i.e., He-stars with-
out the characteristic spectroscopic signatures of WR stars), is
the prescription from Vink (2017). Assuming a fixed tempera-
ture of T = 50 kK, this recipe was purposely developed for non-
WR He-stars. The corresponding He-star models in the ˙M −Γe
plane are illustrated in the second row of panels in Fig. 5. De-
spite its simplicity – being a function solely of luminosity and
metallicity – the Vink (2017) mass-loss rates for He-stars align
remarkably well with the weaker part of the observed mass-loss
rates of WR stars across the Galaxy, LMC, and SMC. Moreover,
it agrees roughly with the mass-loss rates of partially stripped
stars included in the analysis. As discussed above, our He star
models do not reflect the higher Γe of the partially stripped stars
and thus there is a mismatch between the 5 M⊙model and par-
tially stripped stars in a similar mass regime. Despite the general
agreement of the Vink (2017) description, one has to be care-
ful in its applications in evolution models given that it contains
only a direct L and no Γe-dependence. Applying this mass-loss
relation outside its intended parameter space could lead to sig-
nificantly different mass-loss rates and thus deviations in evolu-
tionary predictions.
Sander et al. (2020) developed hydrodynamically consistent
stellar atmosphere models for He-stars, covering a broad range
of initial masses and metallicities. Their work suggests that the
mass-loss rates of He- and WR-stars can be described with a Γe-
dependence, which aligns conceptually with our findings. The
lower panels of Fig. 5 show a comparison between the updated
Sander & Vink (2020) theoretical mass-loss prescription and our
sample of WR and He-stars. One can see that the mass-loss rates
predicted by Sander & Vink (2020) are about an order of mag-
nitude higher than the average rates in our sample, but seem to
follow a similar trend. The mass-loss recipe of Sander & Vink
(2020) has a log( ˙M) ∝log(−log(1 −Γe)) dependence, making
a direct comparison to our empirical mass-loss relation difficult.
When assuming that log(1 + x) ≈x, their mass-loss recipe for
stars with Γe ≪1 can be approximated by log( ˙M) ∝log(Γe).
Following their theoretical calculations, they derive a slope of
2.93 ± 0.02 (Sander & Vink 2020, their equation 29), which
is somewhat shallower than our empirically derived slope of
4.18 ± 0.18 (Eq. (5)).
4.4. Implications for stellar evolution
To explore the impact of our newly derived mass-loss recipe
on stellar and binary evolution, we computed stellar evolution
tracks for stars at solar (GAL), LMC, and SMC metallicities.
These tracks employed two different mass-loss paradigms: a
“standard” set of recipes commonly used in stellar evolution cal-
culations, and our newly derived mass-loss rates for stars with
radiative envelopes. This investigation aims to highlight the con-
sequences of adopting a Γe-scaling on stellar evolution, particu-
larly in low-metallicity environments, rather than creating a per-
fectly realistic stellar population.
As the set of standard mass-loss recipes, we used the Vink
et al. (2001) prescription for OB-type stars with surface tem-
peratures T > 12 kK and surface H-abundances XH > 0.7.
For the He- or WR-stage, the Nugis & Lamers (2000) mass-
loss rates are employed as soon as the surface H-abundances
drop below XH < 0.4. We linearly interpolate between the two
mass-loss recipes for transition phases between the OB and WR
stages. To model red supergiant mass-loss (RSG), we employ
the prescription of Nieuwenhuijzen & de Jager (1990) for stars
cooler than T < 10 kK. For models with temperatures between
12 kK > T > 10 kK we linearly interpolate between the hot star
mass-loss rates to the RSG ones to avoid sudden jumps.
For the “new” stellar evolution models, we use our new pre-
scription for stars hotter than T > 12 kK and the RSG mass-loss
rates from Nieuwenhuijzen & de Jager (1990) for models with
temperatures below T < 10 kK. We again interpolate between
the two mass-loss recipes for stars with temperatures in between
12 kK > T > 10 kK.
The other input physics are kept fixed between the two sets of
stellar evolution models and try to mimic the setup as described
by Brott et al. (2011). Full details on the assumed input physics
are provided in Appendix B.
4.4.1. Single star evolution
In Fig. 6, we present HRDs showing our literature sample along-
side stellar evolution tracks for solar (GAL), LMC, and SMC
metallicities, calculated using the two different setups for the
mass-loss rates. The differences between the tracks and their fi-
nal evolution for each galaxy are detailed below.
In the case of the Galactic models, all stars with initial
masses above Mini ≳30 M⊙evolve into WR stars, irrespec-
tive of the adopted recipes. However, notable differences emerge
when comparing the evolutionary path that led to their final evo-
lutionary stage. For instance, in the case of the standard mass-
loss recipes, the 90 M⊙model undergoes significant mass loss
during the main sequence, which rapidly removes the hydrogen-
rich envelope. This process reduces the surface hydrogen abun-
dance below XH < 0.7, leading to a direct transition into a WR
star without an intermediate expansion toward the red supergiant
(RSG) region. Consequently, this mass-loss recipe struggles to
explain the observed luminous supergiants, as these stars skip the
evolutionary phase that places them in this region of the HRD.
In contrast, the 90 M⊙model using our new mass-loss recipe
retains its H-rich envelope for a longer duration, allowing the
star to expand temporarily into the RSG region, penetrating for
a short time the empirical Humphreys-Davidson (HD) limit, be-
fore shedding its H-rich envelope and becoming a WR star. This
evolution aligns better with the presence of luminous supergiants
in the observed sample. However, the new recipe also predicts
WR stars with luminosities above log(L/L⊙) > 6.0. Another ma-
jor difference between the two sets of stellar evolution models
is the different WR subtypes they produce. For the models using
the standard mass-loss recipes, the 60 M⊙and the 90 M⊙model
both will end their lives as WC-type stars, while for the models
using our new mass-loss recipe, they will end their life only as
H-free WN type stars.
For the LMC models, the differences between the two mass-
loss recipes are less pronounced than for the Galactic case but
remain notable. For the 15 M⊙and 30 M⊙models, the differ-
ences in their evolution are only marginal. For the more massive
models with initial masses of 60 M⊙and 90 M⊙differences still
persist. For instance, for the models using the standard mass-loss
recipe, the winds are very efficient and lead to a switch to the WR
winds during the main sequence. Such a jump cannot be seen in
the models using our new mass-loss recipe, which expands fur-
Article number, page 9 of 18
