How to Make a Pristine Tellurium Atomic Helix
George Kirczenow1
1Department of Physics, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada V5A 1S6
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
Tellurium atomic helices are currently attracting increasing attention. However, to date individual tellurium
atomic helices have only been grown encapsulated in host materials. A bare free-standing tellurium atomic
helix has yet to be realized experimentally despite the fundamental interest of these systems. Here DFT-based
simulations are presented that show that a pristine tellurium atomic helix can be drawn from a tellurium crystal
with the help of a gold STM tip, paving the way to a better understanding of tellurium atomic helices.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Tellurium crystals consist of helical chains of atoms. Indi-
vidual Te atomic helices encapsulated in various host materi-
als have been synthesized.1–9 Studies of pristine (not encap-
sulated) single Te atomic helices would also be of interest10
and are necessary for a complete understanding of Te helices.
However, to date such bare tellurium atomic helices have not
been realized experimentally. The purpose of this note is to
point out how this may be accomplished.
Scanning tunneling microscope (STM) tips have been used
to image and rearrange atoms on surfaces,11 to contact indi-
vidual molecules,12 to form atomic chains bridging electri-
cal contacts,13 and to perform electrical and thermal transport
measurements on such systems.14 The computer simulations
presented here show that it should be possible to make free-
standing pristine Te atomic helices by drawing them out from
the surface of a Te crystal with the help of a gold STM tip. Te
atomic helices made in this way would bridge a pair of elec-
trical contacts (the gold STM tip and p-type semiconductor Te
substrate) and thus be accessible to direct transport measure-
ments.
II.
METHOD
The computer simulations presented here were carried out
with the Amsterdam Modeling Suite (AMS 2024) using the
Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof generalized gradient approximation
density functional, the ZORA/TZ2P basis and including rela-
tivistic effects at the level of spin-orbit coupling. The atomic
geometries were optimized requiring the energy gradients to
be 10−4 Hartree/Bohr or less.
III.
RESULTS
A starting geometry is shown in Fig.1 where the helical Te
chain to be drawn out of the Te crystal surface is shown in
blue and the adjacent Te helices are shown in orange. The
proposed procedure is as follows: The STM locates an end
defect of the Te crystal surface where a Te helix ends, such
as at the right hand end of the blue helical chain in Fig.1 (a).
Then the gold STM tip atom shown in black in Fig.1 (c) is
brought close to the end atom of the (blue) Te atomic chain
and bonds to it. The resulting optimized geometry is shown
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1. (Color online). (a) Top view and (b) side view of the Te
atomic chain (blue) to be drawn out from the Te crystal surface. The
Te atomic chains of the crystal that are adjacent to the blue chain
are also shown and are colored orange. They are terminated at both
ends with H atoms (gray) to passivate dangling bonds. (c) Optimized
geometry: 8 atom gold STM tip bonds to the Te atom at the right
end of the (blue) Te chain in (a). Gold atoms shown in black and Te
atoms shown in blue are not constrained during optimization while
the mauve gold atom and orange Te atoms are frozen. Images pre-
pared using Macmolplt software.15
in Fig.1 (c) where the gold atoms shown in black and the blue
Te atoms were not constrained during optimization while the
mauve gold atom and orange Te atoms were frozen. The or-
ange Te atoms were frozen in the simulations in order to take
into account the fact that they are held in place by their in-
teractions with (not shown) adjacent helical Te atomic chains
that extend over macroscopic distances. Of the gold atoms
only the position of the one shown in mauve is frozen so as to
control the overall height of the STM tip while allowing the
positions of the other (black) tip atoms to relax fully. The or-
ange Te atomic chains in Fig.1 are terminated with H atoms so
as to avoid the presence of reactive dangling bonds that would
not exist in this vicinity if the orange Te chains were part of a
macroscopic crystal surface and thus would extend far beyond
the region shown in the figure.
The gold STM tip is then backed away from the Te surface
in small steps, optimizing the structure after each step while
keeping the orange Te and mauve Au atoms frozen during
each optimization. The bonds between gold atoms, between
gold and tellurium atoms, and intrachain bonds between tel-
arXiv:2504.06401v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  8 Apr 2025
