8
ratio of different vertex populations is controlled but not the
spatial distribution of the different vertex types throughout the
system. Because of the vastly degenerate energy landscape
of ASI systems it is generally not possible to access the full
microstate space using such global techniques, which tend to
favor lower energy vertex configurations.
In contrast, local techniques which use either scanning
probes, optical pulses, local microwave or magnetic fields
from striplines/waveguides or electrical control to switch is-
lands may be fully deterministic and can in principle be used
to access any microstate of an ASI array. The cost of this
greater control is that ‘writing’ the microstate of an ASI sys-
tem island-by-island typically takes significantly longer than
addressing all islands simultaneously, and requires substan-
tially harder device engineering. An ASI system limited to
a single 100µm × 100µm EBL writefield can easily contain
105 to 106 islands, so that to keep the total array writing time
below one minute – each island would have to take no longer
than 10 µs to address. This is out of reach for most scanning
probe systems and at the limit of what might be achieved us-
ing optical methods with fast-steering mirrors, though recent
advances in spatially structured light are appealing here70.
There is some scope for improving write speeds by address-
ing multiple islands simultaneously or wiring up electrical ad-
dress lines to every island in the array, but in the short term
approaches tend to be local, precise, slow and experimentally
challenging – or global, coarse, typically somewhat stochas-
tic/statistical and experimentally easy. Combined local/global
approaches are appealing, where a small number of nanois-
lands may be locally written before applying global fields to
‘seed’ some initial conditions of microstate evolution.
B.
Global Control
Magnetic field protocols (effective temperature):
A simple method to generate a reproducible state of all ‘Type
II’ vertices [e.g., field polarized, see Fig. 4 (a) and (b)] in a
square-lattice ASI system might involve applying a magnetic
field above the nanoisland coercive fields so that the whole
array is saturated along the field axis. This approach is quick
and reliably ‘deletes’ the memory an ASI sample has of its mi-
crostate history, but how can magnetic fields be used to access
a broader range of microstates than just the saturated state?
For each island in an ASI array there is some coercive
switching field Hswitch
i
at which that island’s magnetization
will reverse. If the islands in a system are identical, then they
will all reverse at the same external applied field strength ex-
cept where local dipolar magnetic fields from the nanoislands
locally effectively reduce or increase the global field magni-
tude required to switch nanoislands. Such local modulations
in the magnetic field may occur due to stray fields from neigh-
boring islands as in the case of artificial ferromganetic qua-
sicrystal tiling75, but in the example above all vertices have
the same configuration after the saturation field has been ap-
plied and hence all islands are subjected to identical fields
from neighbouring elements. If the system starts in a ran-
dom configuration before the saturation field is applied then it
may pass through some intermediate microstates as the exter-
nal field is ramped up to the coercive field, but once a system
of identical islands enters a state where all vertices have the
same spin configuration any further field looping will gener-
ally only be able to access a small set of microstates.
Thankfully, imperfections in fabrication mean that the is-
lands in experimental ASI systems are generally not identical
but rather have some distribution of switching fields. Empir-
ical work on a range of ASI systems76–78 indicates that the
effect of these imperfections, referred to as ‘quenched dis-
order’, can generally be modeled as a Gaussian distribution
of switching fields Hswitch
i
∼N (µ,σ2) where µ and σ2 are
respectively the mean and variance of the distribution. The
moments of the distribution can be estimated by measuring a
hysteresis loop and fitting a Gaussian to ∂M/∂H as a func-
tion of the applied field H. Though strictly speaking such
a measurement does not take into account the effect of local
stray fields, in practice the effect of quenched disorder typi-
cally dominates the effect of dipolar inter-island interactions
for nanoscale magnetic arrays79–81.
The randomization injected by quenched disorder into the
microstate trajectory of ASI systems responding to some mag-
netic field sequence massively expands the set of microstates
accessible by applying global fields, allowing islands with low
switching fields to act as nucleation points located at random
sites in the lattice82. For fields sequences in which the field
strength is kept below the level that forces all macrospins to
align with it (known as ‘minor loops’) the strong path depen-
dence of microstate trajectories leads to a particularly rich
ensemble of branching dynamical pathways31 which can be
used to provide the ‘fading memory’ required for reservoir
computing22,83,84. Since for most early ASI systems the en-
ergy barrier of KDV associated with shape anisotropy [from
Eq. (12)] was orders of magnitude greater than the thermal
energy scale kBT, such ASI systems were ‘athermal’ in the
sense that thermal fluctuations were generally incapable of re-
versing the magnetization direction of individual islands, pre-
venting the spin state from reaching its equilibrium configura-
tion. As a result, a large body of work has explored whether
quenched disorder can take the place of random switching due
to thermal fluctuations to direct ASI systems into ground state
configurations whose statistical properties match those of sys-
tems in thermal equilibrium. Such configurations are of in-
terest where the focus is on thermodynamic properties of ASI
systems or on the behaviour of low-energy excitations such as
monopoles.
The general strategy for achieving low-energy states is to
use alternating or rotating magnetic fields whose magnitude
is gradually decreased so that island reversals that lower the
magnetic energy are favored5, analogous to a thermal anneal.
An analogy with thermal processes has proved useful in de-
scribing the statistical properties of the magnetic configura-
tions achieved through these field protocols, for which the
number of different vertex types after certain rotating field
protocols were found to follow a Boltzmann distribution with
an effective temperature85 whose value varies linearly with the
size of the steps with which the field strength is reduced and
decreases in proportion to the strength of the inter-island inter-
