Glossy Object Reconstruction with Cost-effective Polarized Acquisition
Bojian Wu1
Yifan Peng2,∗
Ruizhen Hu3
Xiaowei Zhou1,∗
1Zhejiang University
2The University of Hong Kong
3Shenzhen University
Extracted mesh
Data acquisition system
Polarization images
DoP
Specular
Normal
Polarizer
......
Figure 1. We build a cost-effective data acquisition system for capturing multi-view polarization images, where a linear polarizer is
mounted in front of the off-the-shelf RGB camera and a single image per-view with unknown angle of the polarizer is captured, which
eliminates the need for precise alignment. For objects with a hybrid of ceramics (tummy) and metal (feet), we can still nicely recover the
specular components and estimate the polarimetric states, directly leading to high-fidelity geometry.
Abstract
The challenge of image-based 3D reconstruction for glossy
objects lies in separating diffuse and specular components
on glossy surfaces from captured images, a task compli-
cated by the ambiguity in discerning lighting conditions
and material properties using RGB data alone.
While
state-of-the-art methods rely on tailored and/or high-end
equipment for data acquisition, which can be cumber-
some and time-consuming, this work introduces a scalable
polarization-aided approach that employs cost-effective ac-
quisition tools.
By attaching a linear polarizer to read-
ily available RGB cameras, multi-view polarization images
can be captured without the need for advance calibration or
precise measurements of the polarizer angle, substantially
reducing system construction costs. The proposed approach
represents polarimetric BRDF, Stokes vectors, and polar-
ization states of object surfaces as neural implicit fields.
These fields, combined with the polarizer angle, are re-
trieved by optimizing the rendering loss of input polarized
images. By leveraging fundamental physical principles for
the implicit representation of polarization rendering, our
method demonstrates superiority over existing techniques
through experiments in public datasets and real captured
images on both reconstruction and novel view synthesis.
∗Corresponding authors.
1. Introduction
3D reconstruction has been a long-standing topic in the
graphics and vision communities. State-of-the-art methods
are mostly designed for opaque surfaces with the Lamber-
tian reflectance model and may perform sub-optimally in
non-Lambertian scenes [19, 28], posing a challenge for both
acquisition systems and reconstruction algorithms.
In particular, to deal with glossy or specular regions, ex-
cept for painting with diffuse coats, specially-tailored de-
vices are often required for recording the controlled envi-
ronmental illumination and/or reflective lighting conditions.
An alternative approach explores polarization cues, referred
to as Shape-from-Polarization (SfP) [6, 8, 36], as polariza-
tion properties are closely related to surface normals. More-
over, diffuse and specular reflectances exhibit different po-
larimetric statuses, with the specular being more polarized
than the diffuse and their polarization angles being orthogo-
nal. These physical insights can be valuable for algorithms.
The existing optimization-based SfP methods face chal-
lenges when processing irregular triangles or non-manifold
mesh, that could be largely overcome by incorporating neu-
ral implicit surfaces. Dave et al. [7] propose the first im-
plementation that integrates polarization cues into neural
radiance fields. It should be noted, however, that this ap-
proach requires an expensive polarization camera for data
acquisition to obtain full polarization states, such as Stokes
vectors, as supervision for network training. In contrast, we
arXiv:2504.07025v1  [cs.CV]  9 Apr 2025
