14
In Fig. 5, we compare the total cross-section result from our theoretical model (red thick solid
line) with that from the HFF-P3 model (blue thick dashed line) in Ref. [44]. Our result exhibits
distinct peaks around W = 2080 and 2270 MeV, while the HFF-P3 result appears smoother.
This discrepancy indicates the significant effects of molecules within our model.
In Sec. I, we
have mentioned that the bump structures near W = 1875, 2080 and 2270 MeV in differential
cross-sections for γp →K+Σ0, serve as one of the motivations for investigating the effects of
the molecules in γp →K+Σ0/K0Σ+ reactions. The final fitted results indicate that these peak
structures do contain significant contributions from the molecules.
From γp →K+Σ0 to γp →K0Σ+, the isospin factor τ of gKΣ∆changes from
√
2 to 1, while
the τ of gKΣN changes from −1 to
√
2. This is inclined to suggest that contributions from the
s-channel ∆∗resonance exchanges are more substantial for the reaction γp →K+Σ0, based on
a simple comparison of the magnitudes of cross-sections for the two reactions shown in Fig. 5
and Fig. 6, respectively. Meanwhile, the contributions from N∗and ∆∗resonance exchanges have
become comparable for the reaction γp →K0Σ+, as depicted in Fig. 6(b) through Fig. 6(d), due
to the variation of the isospin factor τ. Therefore, if we want to investigate N∗resonances, the
K0Σ+ reaction seems to be more important due to the amplified effects on isospin factors.
For the reaction γp →K0Σ+, in terms of background, as shown in Fig. 6(e), the contribution
from K1(1270) exchange becomes negligible, while the contribution from K∗(892) exchange in-
creases a lot for γp →K0Σ+ compared to γp →K+Σ0. Furthermore, the effects of the molecules
are more pronounced. Fig. 4 illustrates the substantial interference effects between the contribu-
tions from s-channel general resonance exchanges and molecule exchanges. The interference effects
arise not only from isospin factors but also from the phase factors considered in the calculation of
molecules, and these are one of the important reasons for the significant differences in the mag-
nitudes of the cross-sections for γp →K+Σ0 and γp →K0Σ+. Aside from these, most of the
contribution characteristics of cross-sections for γp →K0Σ+ are similar to those for γp →K+Σ0.
In Fig. 6, we also compare the total cross-section result from our theoretical model with that from
the HFF-P3 model, which is provided up to 2150 MeV in Ref. [44]. And our result exhibits the
additional variability around W = 2080 MeV, due to the effects of the molecules.
However, it is clear that the experimental data for the reaction γp →K0Σ+ are much sparser
compared to these for the reaction γp →K+Σ0. We improved the fitted results for γp →K0Σ+
by adjusting the weights during the fitting procedure, but we hope to obtain more experimental
data for γp →K0Σ+ in the future to strengthen the constraints on the theoretical models.
