S6
FIG. S3. Non-Hermitian Anderson impurity model (Ud = 0.3, ϵd = −0.15, Λ = 3, Nk = 400, 128-bit precision): Eigenvalue RG
flow diagrams as Im(V ) is made more negative, showing (a) SC phase; (b) LM phase; and (c) re-entrant SC phase.
the Hamiltonian in the single-particle sector (an (N + 2) × (N + 2) matrix at step N), and then constructing the
4N+2 many-particle states as simple product states from these – a trivial combinatorial exercise. As such, the full
eigenspectrum of the NH-NRG Hamiltonian ˆHN can be obtained by exact diagonalization for essentially any N of
interest, without any truncation, in this non-interacting limit. On the other hand, NH-NRG works in precisely the
same way independently of Ud and so the interacting AIM and non-interacting RLM are treated identically from an
algorithmic point of view. The non-interacting RLM therefore provides a stringent check of our NH-NRG results.
Fig. E1(a) confirmed that truncation by lowest Re(EN) correctly reproduces the exact eigenvalues at each step, for the
retained states. One can also truncate by keeping the lowest Nk states at each step, sorted by the absolute magnitude
|EN|, as shown in Fig. E1(b) – although in practice we found this to be less numerically stable. We dub this scheme
‘LowMag’.
In Fig. S1 we consider two other truncation schemes. In the top row panels (a) we show truncation (‘LowImag’)
to the lowest Nk states ordered by Im(EN), which targets a different set of kept states. While this method works
initially, after a few steps it starts to break down. For N = 5 we see that the NH-NRG eigenvalues no longer match
those from exact diagonalization.
In the bottom row panels Fig. S1(b), we use a hybrid scheme (‘LowReMag’) in which the ‘ground state’ with the
lowest Re(EN) is first subtracted, and then states are ordered by their magnitude, |EN −Egs
N |. This truncation scheme
also works very well and seems to be both accurate in reproducing the results of exact diagonalization, as well as
being numerically stable.
In both cases we plot the rescaled many-particle eigenvalues, comparing NH-NRG (red diamonds) with exact
diagonalization (black circle points).
S.III.B.
Free Wilson chain with imaginary potentials
As a further demonstration, we consider NH-NRG for the free Wilson chain (no impurity). We introduce non-
Hermiticity to the Wilson chain by using complex Wilson chain potentials. Specifically, we choose ϵn = −itn, where
tn are the usual Wilson chain hopping parameters for a metallic flat band with bandwidth D = 1 as before. For the
Hermitian symmetric flat-band Wilson chain, ϵn = 0, so introducing imaginary potentials down the chain simulates
a kind of open Wilson chain where each site is subject to dissipation and the states have a finite lifetime. This
setup can be treated in NH-NRG very simply – in practice we project out the impurity by setting Ud = V = 0 and
