8
C.
Theoretical predictions of modulated ground
states in infinite geometries
Quantum-stabilized modulated states require at least
one confined axis, see IV A 2.
Phase diagrams can
be theoretically calculated by considering partly infi-
nite systems, analogous to the approach of III B 2 for
the excitation spectrum.
Both infinite cigar (one un-
confined, two confined directions) [83, 84, 93–95], and
pancake geometries (two unconfined, one confined di-
rection) [85, 86, 90, 96, 97] can be examined. Periodic
boundary conditions in the unconfined directions ensure
that the system is effectively infinite along these axes.
The ground-state phase diagram can be computed using
the eGPE introduced in III C, provided that the system
size (or equivalently the crystal unit cell) is also adjusted
and the energy minimized with respect to this parameter.
These systems can also be simulated by other meth-
ods, in particular quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) ap-
proaches [73, 98–105]. QMC methods are exact and ac-
count for fluctuation effects non-perturbatively.
How-
ever, they are numerically intensive, limiting so far their
exploration to relatively small N.
Therefore, reaching
density-modulated states in QMC simulations typically
requires higher mean densities than those used in experi-
ments. In this regime, QMC simulations have confirmed
the existence of supersolid states, and the crystal struc-
tures identified are analogous to those predicted with the
eGPE and discussed below [99–104].
Figures 3(d-f) present eGPE phase diagrams as a func-
tion of as and n for different infinite-geometry con-
figurations.
In all cases, the ground state transitions
from a uniform MF-stable superfluid for as ≥ac(n) to
a quantum-stabilized modulated state for as < ac(n)
with ac(n) being the density-dependent critical scatter-
ing length.
1.
Tube geometries
In a tubular trap, the crystal structure is always linear,
but the nature of the transition changes depending on
n [83]. The transition is predicted to be discontinuous at
low and high densities, but continuous at intermediate
densities, see Fig. 3(b).
In the intermediate density regime, the continuity of
the transition implies that the density modulation con-
trast evolves continuously from C = 0 above the transi-
tion (as ≥ac) to C > 0 below it (as < ac). Therefore,
a supersolid ground state exists within an intermediate
range just below the transition (as ≲ac).
The width
in as of this supersolid region varies with n and nar-
rows towards the intermediate-density range edges, see
Fig. 3(b). The transition here occurs as the roton mode
fully softens, meaning ac = a∗
rot. Thereby, the emerg-
ing modulated state directly connects to the softened ro-
ton mode and inherits its structure. Discontinuities in
the first derivative of the dispersion relation occur at the
transition, indicating its second-order character, see later
discussion in V [93, 95]. As as decreases further below ac,
C increases until the system transitions into an insulating
droplet array.
Beyond the intermediate-density-range lower edge, in
the low-density regime, the system transitions directly
to an array of well-isolated droplets with C ∼1 and no
supersolid can form, see Fig. 3(b). This happens because
quantum stabilization, i.e. MF attraction being overcome
by the LHY repulsion (7), requires locally high densities.
These densities are here achieved by concentrating many
atoms in the center of the droplets at the expense of their
overlap.
Beyond the intermediate-density-range upper edge, in
the high-density regime, instead, a supersolid ground
state (i.e. a modulated state with C
< 1) can exist
just below the transition despite being discontinuous, see
Fig. 3(b). The structure of this state differs from the ro-
ton mode of the MF-stable superfluid, and the transition
involves a rearrangement of the transverse density profile.
For the first-order transitions encountered at high and
low densities, bistability occurs, with the ground state on
one side of the transition remaining a metastable state on
the other side. In particular, the uniform state persists as
a metastable state on top of the modulated ground state
for as < ac (white line in Fig. 3(b)) down to as = a∗
rot,
when its roton mode fully softens (red line in Fig. 3(b)).
The intermediate density regime is particularly favor-
able for creating supersolid states via an interaction ramp
as the transition continuity minimizes excitations dur-
ing its crossing.
Furthermore, the critical scattering
length ac increases with n in the low-density regime, de-
creases in the high-density regime, and the intermediate-
density regime develops around the maximum of ac(n),
which is likewise favorable for experiments, see also III C.
Refs. [15–17] realized this intermediate regime, see also
Refs. [39, 83, 106, 107] and IV B.
2.
Pancake geometries
In pancake traps, not only the order of the uniform-
to-modulated phase transition but also the structure
of the modulated states themselves varies with n and
ϵdd, see Fig. 3(c).
This, in turn, implies the exis-
tence of additional structural transitions between mod-
ulated ground states of different crystal configurations.
Density-modulated ground states may adopt three dif-
ferent configurations illustrated in Fig. 3(c): triangular
(also sometimes called hexagonal) at low densities, stripe
at intermediate densities, and honeycomb at high densi-
ties [86, 90, 97].
Most transitions in the diagram of Fig. 3(c) are pre-
dicted to be of first order, except at the tricritical point
where the transition is of second order and the uniform
state may transition directly to a stripe state [85, 86, 90].
Despite the discontinuous nature of these transitions,
all three crystal structures can host supersolid states,
