Threshold-less and Flexibly Tunable Frequency Comb via Floquet Engineering
Sihan Wang,1, 2, 3, 4 Cheng Wang,5 Matthijs H. J. de Jong,5 Laure Mercier
de L´epinay,5 Jingwei Zhou,3, 4, ∗Mika A. Sillanp¨a¨a,5 and Yulong Liu1, 2, †
1Beijing academy of quantum information sciences, Beijing, 100193, China
2Beijing Key Laboratory of Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computing, Beijing 100193, China
3Hefei National Research Center for Physics Sciences at Microscale,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China
4CAS Key Laboratory of Microscale Magnetic Resonance,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China
5QTF Centre of Excellence, Department of Applied Physics, Aalto University, FI-00076 Aalto, Finland
(Dated: April 9, 2025)
Frequency combs have revolutionized communication, metrology and spectroscopy.
Numerous
efforts have been dedicated to developing integrated combs, predominantly relying on Pockels or
Kerr mechanisms. In this work, we propose and demonstrate a new type of frequency comb—Floquet
cavity frequency comb—that does not rely on intrinsic non-linearity. By periodically modulating
the resonance frequency of a cavity, a giant-mode cavity with multiple equally spaced frequency
components is created. The pump tone interacts with the pre-modulated cavity, generating the
output frequency comb. This approach offers a flexible tuning range and operates in a threshold-
less manner, obviating the need to overcome nonlinear initiation thresholds. We implement this on
a microwave cavity optomechanical system on-chip. Compared to Kerr optomechanical combs, this
approach efficiently generates comb with pump signal far from the cavity’s intrinsic frequency, and
the power required for detection is reduced by approximately a factor of 106, providing a promising
platform for frequency comb generation.
Introduction
Frequency combs, composed of discrete, equally spaced
frequencies [1], have contributed to advancements in op-
tical communication [2, 3], precision metrology [4, 5],
spectroscopy [6, 7], and atomic clock [8–10].
The
compact on-chip frequency combs (microcombs) include
microresonator-based combs [11–13] and electro-optic
(EO) combs [14–18]. Microresonator combs relying on
Kerr nonlinearity have been successfully demonstrated
in silica [11], silicon nitride [19], silicon carbide [20], di-
amond [21], and lithium niobate (LN) [22]. Integrated
EO combs utilize the Pockels effect, which have also
recently been realized in thin-film LN devices [14–16]
and lithium tantalate [18]. Despite these remarkable ad-
vances, EO and microresonator combs face limitations
of their generation efficiency [14, 23, 24] or tuning preci-
sion [19, 25]. However, emerging paradigms for frequency
comb generation [26–28], which do not rely on intrinsic
medium properties, are anticipated to further broaden
the range of applications and facilitate integration with
diverse physical systems, such as silicon photonic sys-
tems [29], quantum information [30–33]. They are also
promising routes to overcome the power limitations of
lasers in fields like astrocombs [34, 35] and molecular fin-
gerprinting [6, 36]. Floquet engineering [37], involving
the periodic time-dependent modulation, has the capa-
bility to control and generate new multi-mode sidebands
by tuning energy spectra [38–40], as well as to induce in-
teractions between modes [41, 42]. These sidebands, act-
∗zhoujw@ustc.edu.cn
† liuyl@baqis.ac.cn
ing as new frequency components, demonstrate that Flo-
quet engineering is a promising although underexplored
approach for frequency comb generation, without neces-
sitating Kerr nonlinearity or Pockels effect.
In this work, we propose and demonstrate a previ-
ously unknown type of frequency comb, termed the Flo-
quet cavity frequency comb. Specifically, by periodically
modulating the resonance frequency of a cavity, we cre-
ate a giant-mode cavity with multiple equally spaced fre-
quency components. Then, a single-frequency pump tone
is added, interacting with this pre-modulated multi-mode
structure to generate the output frequency comb. Ad-
ditionally, the absolute positions of the comb teeth are
referenced to the frequency of the pump tone, with the in-
tensity approximately symmetrically distributed around
the cavity’s intrinsic frequency. Furthermore, in contrast
to Kerr or EO combs, which require precise frequency
tuning to match the free spectral range, our approach
offers a flexible tuning range.
The frequency compo-
nents of the Floquet cavity are predefined, enabling the
frequency comb to exceptionally operate threshold-less:
without the need to overcome nonlinear initiation thresh-
olds.
Based on the proposed theoretical framework, such a
frequency comb can be realized across a wide range of
physical systems. Here, we demonstrate its implemen-
tation for modulating the resonance frequency of a su-
perconducting microwave cavity via a tunable capacitor,
which is realized through a mechanical oscillator.
To
achieve sinusoidal (cosinusoidal) modulation, we addi-
tionally employ an auxiliary cavity to establish a con-
ventional optomechanical coupling, driving the mechan-
ical oscillator from thermal state into self-induced oscil-
arXiv:2504.05877v1  [quant-ph]  8 Apr 2025
