range≤15Mev.
The resonance energy and decay width obtained for the 3D1 state is Er = 6.64 MeV and ΓCoM = 2.18 MeV ,
while the experimental value is 5.7 MeV and 1.9 MeV [35], respectively. This slight discrepancy arises due to errors
in the phase shift data. However, according to Ref.[34], the resonance energy for the 3D1 state is expected to fall
within the range of 4–7 MeV , indicating that the observed resonance is consistent with theoretical expectations.
For 3D2 resonance energy obtained from the calculation of cross section from the phase shift is Er = 4.66MeV ,
while the experimental value is 4.36 MeV . The calculated decay width in centre of mass frame is ΓCoM = 1.39 MeV
while the experimental value is ΓCoM = 1.32 MeV [35]. This shows a close agreement between the obtained and
experimental values.
Similarly, for the 3D3 state, the observed resonance energy is 2.08 MeV , compared to the experimental value
of 2.18 MeV . This close agreement between the calculated and experimental resonance energies highlights the
accuracy of the model. The correct determination of the resonance energy for 3D3 is a direct result of accurately
predicted phase shifts at low energies. Therefore, selecting appropriate potential parameters within specific bounds
is crucial.
This demonstrates the algorithm’s capability, reliability, and predictive power in modeling nuclear
interaction dynamics and explaining resonance properties.
5
Discussion
In this work, we have investigated low-energy alpha-deuteron elastic scattering using a physics-informed machine
learning paradigm. We obtain the scattering potential using an inverse method by incorporating physical laws into
the machine learning framework. An evolutionary genetic algorithm is employed to optimize the model parameters
of the reference potential. The resulting interaction potential represents the best-fit solution to the available phase
shift data up to 14 MeV .
We construct the reference potential as a combination of three smoothly joined Morse functions to represent all
possible nuclear interaction and the long range coulomb interaction. The traditional Ansatz often rely on different
approximations to model the long-range Coulomb barrier. By employing the reference potential approach together
with the phase function method, we are able to obtain a highly optimized inverse scattering potential that accurately
reproduces the scattering phase shifts, demonstrating excellent predictive capability.
The resonance energies calculated from the cross sections, derived using the obtained phase shifts, show excellent
agreement with the experimental values of the low-lying excited states of 6Li.
Due to the unavailability of expected phase shift data for the 3D3 partial wave below 3 MeV , precise mea-
surement of the appropriate resonance parameters in this region is currently impossible. The implementation of
Physics-Informed Machine Learning (PIML), however, facilitates reliable extrapolation and prediction of phase
shifts in this low-energy domain. Consequently, the resonance energies and decay widths for the 3D1 , 3D2 , and
3D3 states have been determined and found to be in good agreement with the available experimental data.
Coupling in the 3S1 and 3D1 states indicates that the nuclear structure of 6Li is mainly shaped by a cluster
arrangement consisting of an alpha and a deuteron. The major importance of tensor interaction in binding the
system is highlighted by the dominating D-Wave (L=2), pointing to a non-spherical component in nuclear shape.
12
