V.
CONCLUSION
The most straightforward extension of SM is 2HDM with a charged Higgs boson, and the ﬁnding
depends on the precise measurement of its nature and matching model parameters. Pair creation
is a key method for detecting signals across a wide range of 2HDM parameters. Our research
focuses on the production of charged Higgs bosons in 2HDM type-III. In the photon collisions,
the production cross-section is observed with three benchmark scenarios in which we see that the
cross-section is higher at lower energies but at higher energy √s = 3 TeV it is high for the RL
polarized beams of photons in all BPs. For BP1, the cross-section for UU polarized beams for
√s = 1 TeV is σUU236 fb and at √s = 3 TeV energy σUU = 32.04 fb. The cross-section for RR
beams in BP2 is 5.299 fb at √s = 1 TeV and decreases to 9.072 × 10−2 fb at √s = 3 TeV . For
RL polarized beams, the cross-sections are 236 fb at √s = 1 TeV and 32.04 fb at √s = 3 TeV .
A similar trend follows for BP2, and BP3. The branching ratios of charged Higgs in leptons τντ
higher in all BPs but most dominant at the lower values of tanβ parameter space and have a value
of 4.15123279 × 10−1. The decay width is higher for all BPs, but for BP3 it is dominant at the
higher mass of charged Higgs.
Our Machine Learning models for multivariate analysis show improved results with the applica-
tion of cuts. Signal eﬃciency (ϵsig,eff ) and background rejection (1−ϵbkg,eff ) are enhanced when
cuts are applied to the MLP, BDT, Likelihood, and LikelihoodD classiﬁers. The application of cuts
leads to an increase in the area under the AUC curve for signal eﬃciency and background rejection,
but when cuts are not applied, their values are less. Hence, the best classiﬁers that separate signal
and background noise are MLP, BDT, Likelihood, and LikelihoodD in our multivariate analysis
model. In the classiﬁer output response, MLP and BDT are the most suitable classiﬁers to dis-
criminate the optical region and show good signal purity and signiﬁcance. But with cuts applied,
all four classiﬁers responses are enhanced. The signiﬁcance values obtained from the cuts show
the eﬀectiveness of these models in distinguishing between background events related to charged
Higgs production and actual signal events. These cuts likely aid in isolating signal events associ-
ated with charged Higgs production, enhancing overall performance, and minimizing background
interference. This consistency boosts conﬁdence in the results and supports the legitimacy of the
13
