9
right hand side of Eq. (52) corresponds to the pressure of
an ideal gas. To derive the second term, we use the relation
dL/dV = L/(3V ).
Because U(¯r, L) depends on L both explicitly and implic-
itly through ¯r = ¯sL, its derivative with respect to L in Eq. (53)
naturally splits into two contributions:
A(¯s, L) =
N
X
j=1
fj · rj −L ∂U(¯r, L)
∂L

¯r
,
(55)
where fj is the force acting on the j-th particle, and we have
used the relation
∂rj
∂L

sj
= sj = rj
L .
(56)
Notably, due to the explicit L-dependence of U(¯r, L), Eq. (55)
deviates from the standard virial expression by the correc-
tion term that typically accounts for the influence of periodic
images[49, 50].
The above Eqs. (50) to (56) are valid for arbitrary periodic
systems without making any assumption to the particular form
of the energy. For the system of the one-component plasma
with the neutralizing background, if the underlying basic in-
teraction is the Coulomb interaction or the angular-averaged
interaction, both ν(r, L) and τ([ν]) necessarily scales as 1/L.
Consequently, the energy U(¯r, L), expressed as the combina-
tion of Eqs. (41), (42), and (45), scales as 1/L, leading to
the derivative identity for U(¯r, L) as in Eq. (32). A(¯s, L) of
Eq. (53) then reduces to U(¯sL, L) and thereby suggests a sim-
ple relation between the pressure and the ensemble average of
the potential energy
p = N
βV + 1
3V ⟨U(¯sL, L)⟩.
(57)
According to the pairwise formulation of the energy, the jus-
tification of Eq. (57) for the angular-averaged potential ob-
viously arises from the fact that the cutoff distance rs =
(3/(4π))1/3 depends linearly on L. Any choice of a volume-
dependent basic interaction in the form of Eq. (15) where the
parameter of the length scale is linearly proportional to L, will
consistently validate Eq. (57). In contrast, Eq. (57) no longer
holds for systems interacting via the custom basic interaction
wcd(r) whose length scale is independent of L. This remains
true even though the effective pairwise interaction under PBC
is inherently volume-dependent.
VI.
CONCLUSION
We have developed a unified pairwise framework for trans-
parently deriving the electrostatic energies of periodic systems
that include both point charges and a distribution of charge
density. This framework accommodates various underlying
basic interactions, ranging from the bare Coulomb interaction
to the angular-averaged interaction of interest, as well as other
modified Coulomb interactions.
The pairwise formulation immediately demonstrates that
the energy of the uniform background in a one-component
plasma system always vanishes. It not only clarifies the con-
tributions arising from the background but also reveals the cri-
teria necessary to preserve the simple energy-pressure relation
for periodic Coulomb systems.
This general framework relies on the introduction of the ef-
fective pairwise interaction under the periodic boundary con-
dition. When the underlying basic interaction is the Coulomb
interaction, a straightforward analysis of the infinite boundary
term—defined as the conditional limit of k →0—provides
significant insights and yields a well-defined real-space se-
ries for the effective pairwise interaction, νe3dtf. This effec-
tive pairwise interaction is now recognized as reflecting the
bulk properties of an infinite crystal lattice. The analysis ap-
plied to the Coulomb interaction can be readily extended to
existing modified Coulomb interactions. The corresponding
effective interactions exhibit universal properties that collec-
tively characterize the effects of periodic boundary conditions.
Among these properties, bulk invariance and scaling behavior
are unique to νe3dtf and the effective interactions derived from
certain modified Coulomb interactions.
The effective pairwise interaction is rigorously defined and
possesses a clear physical interpretation. The unified pair-
wise framework facilitates a straightforward and unambigu-
ous generalization of the Ewald formulation, as well as other
related methods, to systems that include arbitrary charge den-
sities. We ultimately hope that the unified formulation for en-
ergies can serve as a starting point, complementary to the tra-
ditional formulation, for addressing challenging problems re-
lated to other thermodynamic properties of periodic Coulomb
systems.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors have no conflicts to disclose. This work was
supported by NSFC (Grant No. 22273047).
APPENDIX: THE EXPLICIT FORMS OF THE PAIRWISE
INTERACTIONS
The effective pairwise interaction νe3dtf [Eq. (5)] or equiv-
alently ν∞[Eq. (12)] can be decomposed into a sum of two
absolutely and rapidly convergent series[13, 14],
νe3dtf(r, L) = ν∞(r, L) = νR(r) + νF(r),
(58)
where the real-space series, which captures the near-field con-
tribution of the Coulomb interaction, is given by
νR(r) =
∞
X
n
erfc(α|r + nL|)
|r + nL|
−
∞
X
n̸=0
erfc(αnL)
nL
+ 2α
√π , (59)
and the Fourier-space series, which captures the far-field con-
tribution of the Coulomb interaction, is expressed as
νF(r) =
∞
X
n̸=0
e−π2n2/(αL)2
πn2L

ei2πn·r/L −1

.
(60)
