PAGIONO
An ionospheric activity index
Dr.Paul.Kinsler@physics.org
ever, such a project is currently beyond our computational re-
sources.
In the next subsection we describe how we use the different
fitted widths for different band pairs during this quiet refer-
ence period to normalise out that difference, enabling us to
treat all band pairs as effectively equivalent.
G.
Normalisation of dTEC values
Recall that the code calculates TEC values from all possi-
ble band-pair combinations received by any one ground sta-
tion from any one satellite. These uncalibrated TEC estimates
give rise to dTEC values that contain two significant sources
of systematic bias. These biases need to be considered, and
compensated for, and once this is done we can aggregate the
compensated dTEC values into larger slices.
Firstly, the geometry of the LOS between satellite and
ground station may have an influence: notably, LOS paths at a
lower angle traverse the ionosphere – and any irregularities in
it – at an oblique angle, and thus spend a longer time (or dis-
tance Lp) under its influence 4. This gives such signals more
opportunity to accumulate time-dependent perturbations, thus
potentially affecting the estimated dTEC.
However, it is not straighforward to justify a specific com-
pensation or correction method on physical grounds. For ex-
ample, if the dTEC was largely due to one brief local event,
then we should not expect to apply a correction; whereas if
the final dTEC resulted from a diffusion-like process then the
correction should be proportional to pLp; but if drift-like then
the correction should be proportional to just Lp. Worse, dif-
ferent receive events may produce dTEC values which have
a diversity of histories, each containing a different contribu-
tions from a variety of perturbation mechanisms. Accordingly
in what follows we take a data-driven, distributional approach
to ensure that the statistics of dTEC events at different path-
angles match as closely as possible.
Secondly, dTEC values computed on the basis of different
band pairs may have different biases; and indeed if we fit data
slices that only differ by their specification to different band
pairs, we see fitted widths which can vary by up to a factor of
two. This has a relatively straightforward fix – we can do band
pair specific fits to our reference “quiet days” as discussed
above, then use those to compute scalings for the raw dTEC
values which we can apply before slicing and fitting the data.
Nevertheless, although the band pair adjustments are ar-
guably easiest to understand, by addressing the “path-angle”
bias first it turns out that we also ameliorate the size of the
necessary band pair adjustments. We now describe the two
processes that enable us to treat the resulting corrected dTEC
values are independent of both path-angle (or length) and band
pair combination.
4 We assumed earlier that our ionosphere could be approximated as a thin
shell for the purposes of localizing an intersection on a coarse scale; but of
course the ionosphere is not thin, and any signal will interact with it over
some finite distance. Hence, this problem needs to be handled in order to be
able to compare different dTEC values obtained from ray paths intersecting
field-aligned irregularities in different ways.
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
0
1
2
3
4
log(dTEC)
log(count)
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
−3
−2
−1
0
1
log(dTEC)
log(count fraction)
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
−3
−2
−1
0
1
log(dTEC)
log(count fraction)
FIG. 2.
Histogram plots with different path-angles as different
colours, plotted using coloured markers and logarithmic scales to
improve visibility. On the left we see data for entirely uncorrected
dTEC values and unnormalised histograms, in the centre we see it
with normalised histogram data, and on the right with dTEC val-
ues additionally scaled by C1.65.
Over the most likely ranges of
log(dTEC), i.e. roughly between 0.01 and 0.3, we see that the his-
tograms for different C are now rather well matched. This data com-
prises all that from our quiet 006/007 days in 2022, but the same
behaviour was also seen for our notional “typical” day 319 in 2022,
as well as the active days 113/114 in 2023.
1.
Path-angle correction
Here we take a large set of data (i.e. our two quiet days),
and create a set of dTEC frequency histograms distinguished
only on the basis of path-angle. To define the path-angle bins
we use the cosine of the intersection angle of the LOS path
with the ionosphere (“path-cosine”, C), as taken to two dec-
imal places (2dp). For the dTEC bins in each histogram we
discretise at intervals of 0.005 TECU/s.
If we overlay the resulting set of dTEC histograms we see
that they are similar in form, but not identical – notably that
they get wider as the path-cosine becomes smaller (see Fig.
2). We found that multiplying the dTEC values at a given
path-cosine by a power of that cosine can improve the sim-
ilarity between different dTEC histograms. The best match
was estimated to be at (or near) a power of η = 1.65, although
the matching was not highly sensitive to the exact value of η.
This means we will adjust the raw dTEC values to corrected
ones, in analogy with mapping functions, as
dTECcorrected = dTECrawCη.
(10)
The steps in the process to justify this correction mechanism
are shown on Fig. 2, where we see that we can remove the
bulk of path-angle effects for the important – and most fre-
quent – range of binned dTEC values, i.e. those in the range
0.01 and 0.3 TEC/s.
It is interesting that the best match power η = 1.65 does
not fall into any of the no-correction (where we would have
η = 0), diffusion (η = 1
2), or drift (η = 1) cases we sug-
gested above. Indeed, it would seem that the η = 1.65 in-
dicates that however irregularities in the ionosphere affect the
eventual dTEC, the effect is enhanced at lower path-angles.
This could be interpreted to mean that dTEC disturbances are
more pronounced if passing through ionospheric irregulatities
more horizontally, but reduced if the path is closer to vertical.
Remember, however, that our η = 1.65 results from a statisti-
cal comparison, and so can (or will) encompass the effects of
many possible perturbation histories.
7
