2
geometry [4], [6] as a model device to illustrate these ideas.
II. ACOUSTIC MICRORING RESONATORS
Fig. 1(a) shows an optical microscope image of a repre-
sentative acoustic microring resonator device fabricated in a
gallium nitride (GaN) on silicon carbide (SiC) platform [6],
with radius (R) of 115 µm side-coupled to acoustic waveguides
with width (wwg) of 1.8 µm and thickness (twg) of 1.5 µm.
The waveguide resonator gap (g) is ≈600 nm. Focusing in-
terdigitated transducers (FIDTs) are used to convert microwave
fields at ≈3.4 GHz into propagating acoustic fields that are
focused at the waveguide entrance for efficient mode matching.
A finite element method (FEM) simulation of the waveguide
mode is shown in the inset of Fig.1(a). At the output port
of the waveguides, the process is reversed and the FIDTs are
used to reconvert the acoustic field exiting the waveguide into
the microwave domain. The microwave signal is generated
and detected in a standard swept-frequency scattering matrix
(S-parameter) measurement using a vector network analyzer
(Keysight E5063A).
The resonator transmission spectrum (S21) measured in the
through (T, red) and drop (D, blue) ports are shown in Fig.1(b).
This device has a coupling length (lcp) of 6 λa where the
acoustic wavelength (λa), which determines the IDT period, is
1.6 µm. The waveguide resonator gap in this case is 500 nm.
Both transmission spectra show a periodic series of resonance
peaks in D (dips in the T), that correspond to successive
resonant modes of the ring resonator. The resonance condition
can be stated approximately as mλR = 2πR where m is an
integer, λR is the acoustic wavelength in the ring and R is
the ring radius. Each of the successive resonances correspond
to successive integer values of m. As noted previously [6],
acoustic ring resonators relying on total internal reflection
of acoustic waves can have very low intrinsic damping,
approaching the underlying material limits, and can exceed
the loss performance of traditional SAW and bulk acoustic
wave (BAW) [12] based resonators at the same frequency.
We can numerically transform the complex spectral data into
the time domain [13]. The signal transmission as a function of
time is shown in Fig.1(c) with the T and D ports indicated in
red and blue respectively, and the T port data has been offset
by 20 dB for clarity. We would like to note that the T and D
port measurements are not done simultaneously because we
are limited to a 2-port VNA. The ringdown of the resonator is
clearly seen in both the T and D port data, with each successive
temporal pulse corresponding to one additional round trip
of the cavity. The difference in arrival time of subsequent
pulses allows us to estimate the group velocity (vg) to be
3534±25 m s−1 which agrees well with the frequency domain
estimate of 3526 ± 33 m s−1 calculated from the measured
cavity free spectral range (FSR ≈4.754 ± 0.045 MHz). The
difference is mainly due to the finite temporal resolution (5 ns)
in the system which bounds the fidelity with which we can
estimate the arrival time of each pulse. This time resolution is
given by:
dt =
1
n · df
,
(1)
(b)
(c)
50 m
D
L
T
(a)
3.38
3.39
3.4
3.41
3.42
Frequency (GHz)
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
Transmission (dB)
Drop
Through
GaN
z-displacement 
+
_
z y
m
SiC
Fig. 1. (a) Microscope image of a representative acoustic microring resonator
device. Inset shows an FEM simulation of the z-displacement of the propa-
gating waveguide mode. Focusing interdigitated transducers (IDTs) are used
to convert microwave fields at ≈3.4 GHz into propagating acoustic fields
(launch port, L) which can be efficiently routed using on-chip waveguides.
The acoustic field in the waveguide can couple into and circulate in an
acoustic microring resonator. The power leaking out from the resonator can
be measured in both the through (T) and drop (D) ports. (b) The transmission
spectrum of the device in the T (red) and D (blue) ports. (c) Time domain
transform of the data in (b) for the T (red) and D (blue) ports. The time-
domain T port data is shifted by 20 dB for illustration clarity.
