April 10, 2025
0:43
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
arxMs
A Few Remarks Concerning Application of the Lifshitz Theory
3
Now we deal with the application conditions (3) of the long-range Casimir-
Polder potential (note that at T = 0 the thermal wavelength λT = ∞). In several
papers,7–10 which consider the case of zero temperature, the conditions (3) are
replaced with
7.26 nm = a0
α ≪z.
(5)
The condition (5) again disregards the material properties of the plate. In ac-
cordance with (5), the long-range regime of the Casimir-Polder potential starts at
separations exceeding 70 nm, whereas in reality it starts at much larger separations
in accordance with the condition (3).
3. General Requirements to the Model Dielectric Permittivities
Used in Calculation of the Casimir-Polder Interaction
As discussed in Sec. 1, the imaginary part of any physically meaningful dielectric
permittivity must be positive. Recently, the previously considered in the literature
Lorentz-Dirac and Clausius-Mossotti models were used in an “attempt to ﬁnd a uni-
form, simple, temperature-dependent analytic model for the dielectric permittivity
of monocrystalline (intrinsic) silicon”.8 For this purpose the available experimental
data for the real and imaginary parts of the dielectric permittivity of Si over the
wide frequency and temperature ranges have been ﬁtted to the analytic expressions
suggested by both models. It was claimed that the Clausius-Mossotti model with
two oscillator terms and obtained values of the ﬁtting parameters reproduces the
experimental data for the dielectric permittivity of Si in the ranges of temperature
293 K < T < 1123 K and frequency 0 < ω < 0.16 a.u. = 6.6 × 1015 rad/s with an
excellent accuracy. The resulting permittivity was applied for computation of the
Casimir-Polder interaction potential between a He atom and a Si plate at short and
long separations by means of the Lifshitz theory.
Below it is demonstrated that in the wide ranges of positive frequencies and
temperatures the dielectric permittivity of Si found in Ref. 8 using the Clausius-
Mossotti model possesses the negative imaginary part. This is in contradiction to the
fact that dissipation of energy is accompanied by the emission of heat and, thus, is in
violation of the second law of thermodynamics which is applicable to all bodies in the
state of thermal equilibrium in the absence of electromagnetic ﬁeld.6 Therefore, in
these frequency and temperature ranges, the found permittivity8 cannot reproduce
the valid measurement data with an excellent accuracy. Thus, the Casimir-Polder
energy and other physical quantities computed using this permittivity are also under
doubt.
In the framework of the Clausius-Mossotti model, the dielectric permittivity of
