degrades the formation of the offensive team by putting excessive weight on evasion of DF, undermining ball
possession performance. In addition to the sensitivity analysis, the process of constructing the model offered
insights into the effect of DF’s behaviour on the number of passes. At first, we focused on modifying behaviour
of OFs in the previous model [39]. Then, it turned out that DF was hardly able to intercept the ball. The
average number of passes exceeded 1000, when we turned off the maximum-pass termination condition. This
was how we learned that we needed to revise the behaviour not only of OFs but also of DF. Since the previous
model [39] incorporated only the ‘chase’ motion mode of DF, we added the second motion mode of ‘wait’, which
allowed DF to intercept passes more frequently, considerably reducing the average number of passes. In light
of this experience, we presume it to be essential in ball possession dynamics that DF has the possibilities to
both run and stay still. In the previous agent-based model for 2v1 ball possession [15], while DF always moved
towards the ball, the running speed was drawn from an exponential distribution at every time step. Their choice
for an exponential distribution could have been a key to their success, since its high probability density around
0 would give rise to a motion similar to the ‘wait’ mode.
Among the psychological literature on team effectiveness, it has been argued that more focus should be put
on dynamic, complex, and emergent nature of team processes [2, 52]. To this end, Kozlowski and Chao [52]
described computational modelling as one of promising methodologies. They discussed three potential difficulties
for computational modeling, which we summarise as difficulties in (1) constructing computational models based
on theories expressed in natural languages, (2) balancing parsimony and complexity, and (3) validating the
models. The first concern points to an inherent limitation of our approach. That is, if one tries to incorporate
existing insights into a model, they must be reformulated mathematically, through which the original nuance
may well be lost. This was the reason why we opted for physical analogy, such as elastic spring between players
and viscosity. Nevertheless, our study circumvented the second and third problems. We concentrated on a
specific case of 3v1 ball possession game, which made it easier to determine what needed to be modelled. For
instance, we incorporated two motion modes of DF, because it was the simplest choice to reproduce the empirical
average number of passes. In this way, we were able to keep our model from becoming too complex to interpret,
addressing the second concern. Finally, our model generates position data that are comparable with empirical
tracking data. As such, our model can be validated in terms of any quantity that is calculated from position
data, including the OF area we showed in Fig. 3. This significantly mitigates the third concern for verifiability.
We maintain that, to realise these advantages in studies using dynamical models, it is crucial to define a specific
context, such as 3v1 ball possession game, and to simulate data that is as close to raw as possible, for instance
position data from tracking systems in our case.
We owe the basic modelling framework, where a game is decomposed into pass scenes and transitions, to the
previous work by Yokoyama et al. [39]. Nevertheless, our model is distinct from the previous one because the
motivation is different: while their interest lay in synchronisation patterns among OFs, our work concerns the
number of passes. Our major novelties include termination conditions, motion modes of DF, and the strategic
choice of pass direction. We also made technical modifications to enhance efficiency and stability. For instance,
the ODE system [eq. (1)] in our model can be integrated by numerical solvers with adaptive time steps, unlike
the previous model, where the time step size of the Euler method, ∆t, appears in the model equation. In
this article, we have discussed advantages of dynamical modelling for analysing influence of behaviour on team
performance. Accordingly, we hope to facilitate the use of dynamical models in future studies. To this end, we
aimed to present a model that is easy to modify, so that researchers can employ and adapt our model to suit
their needs. A salient possibility for revision lies in the social force term ⃗G in the equation of motion (1e) of
Passer and Mover. One may even formulate social forces specific to each of Passer and Mover, which would
come with the cost of the increase in the number of parameters. Another possibility is to change the algorithm
to determine the pass destination ⃗dn+1
B
. For instance, the pass angle θn may follow a distribution whose mean
is not zero. On the contrary, we would be discouraged to modify the confinement mechanism ⃗F return + ⃗F viscous
and DF’s motion until it turns out necessary. As we discuss in ‘Details on the dynamical model’ in Methods
section, designing the confinement mechanism was challenging. Moreover, details of the confinement mechanism
should not influence the result as long as it works as expected. Hence we do not see any reason for modification
so far. In this research, our focus is on the team performance of the offensive team. Therefore we regard DF as
a part of the environment, which we wish to model in the as simple manner as possible, and we have not found
the need for revision.
Although we were able to reproduce the average number of passes and OF area for the high- and low-level
teams, there is still room for improvement in our model to enhance plausibility. A closer look at the simulated
dataset suggests that τ must to be small, i.e. DF must run faster, to mimic the empirical result of the low-level
team. This was contrary to our expectation that smaller τ would correspond to more competent DF. It is
probable that the OFs in our model are too competent and thus the only way to reduce the number of passes is
to enhance the DF’s capability. A different kind of social forces which hinders the offensive team performance
is apparently necessary to more accurately reproduce the dynamics of the low-level team. There might be
9
