4.2
Checking the trans-series solution
In this subsection we argue that, if the perturbative objects Aα,β and aα satisfy the the dif-
ferential equations in (52), then the trans-series (54), (57) of Oα,β, χα, constructed from these
objects, are a solution to the differential equations (31) and (34). In fact, since the differential
equations are not independent it is sufficient to check only (33) and (34). Details on these checks
are given in the Appendices A.2 and A.3, respectively. For the latter one, we also construct the
form of the non-perturbative corrections to F.
Similarly, we aim to prove that the trans-series of ϕℓconstructed in (63) satisfies the differ-
ential equation (35) for any ℓ. For the interested reader, we present the technical details of this
check in Appendix A.4.
For these checks, we substitute the trans-series solutions into the respective equation. Fur-
ther, we assume that the perturbative versions of these equations hold. Since the non-perturbative
corrections are build from the perturbative basis, we can show, that the trans-series ansatz in-
deed solves the equations (31)–(35).
4.3
Alien derivatives and median resummation
In Section 5 of [18], the cancellation of imaginary ambiguities in the resummed trans-series for
Oα,β suggested a formula for the so-called alien derivative4 of the perturbative part Aα,β:
∆κjAα,β = 2SκjAα,−κjA−κj,β.
(74)
This formula was backed by numerics, and also through the work in Section 9 of [21]. Applying
this result to (60), after commuting ∆κj with the β →0 limit and the derivative, we arrive at
∆κjAα;ℓ= 2SκjAα,−κjA−κj;ℓ.
(75)
We will numerically verify this formula in Section 7.
In a similar fashion as it was done in [18], it can be shown that the Stokes automorphism
S = exp


∞
X
j=1
e−2bκj∆κj


(76)
is able to generate the full5 trans-series of ϕℓ(63) from its perturbative part only:6
S1/2A0;ℓ= ϕℓ.
(77)
Since we can only determine Aα,β and Aα;ℓ(the building blocks of the trans-series of ϕℓ)
in terms of asymptotic series, whether the trans-series of ϕℓindeed reconstructs the correct
function is a remaining question. In Section 7, we test the difference between the lateral Borel
resummation (S+) of the trans-series (63) against a high-precision numerical solution to the
4Here by the notation ∆ω we mean the alien derivative of an asymptotic series in terms of integer powers of
the coupling v, together with a slight modification compared to the standard definition ∆(st)
ω
∆ω = eωLv−aω∆(st)
ω
.
(73)
For more details see Appendix B of [21] and also [26] as a review.
5The special alien derivatives ∆α, ∆β of Aα,β are in general non-vanishing (see Appendix C of [21]). By
definition, they should appear in the Stokes automorphism as well, if the latter would act on Aα,β. For Aα;ℓit
also means that ∆α could be non-vanishing, and thus we had to include it in S. However for the α,β-independent
object A0;ℓ, they should have no effect at all.
6This is in contrast to the energy density of the relativistic O(3) non-linear sigma model, which can be extracted
from O1,1. In this case, the last 3 terms of (54) give exponentially suppressed real contributions that cannot be
recovered from the perturbative part A1,1 by asymptotic analysis.
15
