III.
RESULTS
We begin with a comparative experiment to assess the effect that the presence/absence
of the combination of an advantageous social environment and resource transfer have on the
macroscopic fraction of cooperation, as shown in Fig. 2. In the presence of resource dynamics
(ϵ = 0.1), the existence of an advantageous environment enhances cooperation relative to
the case where there is not such an advantage (µ = 0). The same occurs in the absence
of any resource transfer (ϵ = 0), where the case with µ = 0.2 shows a somewhat higher
cooperation than that of µ = 0. In any case, an increasing temptation parameter b leads
to a decrease in cooperation. As cooperation levels collapse to zero, the critical value of bc,
separating these phases coincides, respectively, for the scenario with and without resource
transfer. We find that bc ≈1.225 for the cases µ = 0.2 and µ = 0 with ϵ = 0, and bc ≈1.325
for the cases µ = 0.2 and µ = 0 with ϵ = 0.1. Compared with previous studies [50], our
findings demonstrate that an advantageous social environment, induced by the adaptive
control mechanism, and the presence of resource transfer significantly enhance cooperation
within the system. Moreover, both factors effectively increase the threshold bc at which
cooperation vanishes, making cooperation more resilient to increasing temptation levels.
Having established the positive effect of both, a nonzero coupling to the advantageous
social environment (µ ̸= 0) through adaptive control and the resource transfer dynamics,
we now investigate how the fraction of players participating in each game (determined by
ω) and the sucker’s payoff σ influence cooperation levels in the system.
In Fig. 3 a collection of heatmaps showing the fraction of cooperators in control parameter
space (σ, ω) is depicted, for selected values of b: (a) b = 1.05 , (b) b = 1.10, and (c) b = 1.15.
We can found that as expected, increasing b negatively impacts cooperation levels. Indeed,
this change makes cooperation collapse in the region of low σ, for any ω, as can be observed
from Fig. 3(a) to Fig. 3(c). Consistently, with low to very low ω, cooperation is also zero
for practically any σ value (except for very low σ and b = 1.05). Contrarily, across any
section of b, cooperation levels stay at around 0.5 or higher for the medium-low to high ω
and the entire range of σ, except very low values as b is increased. As the fraction of players
playing SDG increases (high σ) and the payoff obtained in C-D interactions of the SDG
grows positively (+ω), cooperation is promoted and ends up being massively adopted across
the system. Compared to traditional single game models [48], our multi-game framework
10
