56
Tools and methodology
The polynomial part in Eq. (2.27), referred as preprocessing, ensures that the PDF has the correct
behavior in the large-x and small-x limit, speeding up the training of the neural network. In
particular, the factor (1 −x)βk guarantees the convergence at x = 1; x1−αk is based instead on
Regge theory arguments [157], which imply that the singlet and non-singlet have a different
small-x behavior: the non-singlet has a finite integral, while the singlet first moment diverges.
The small-x preprocessing is not imposed in a flavor basis fit. The numerical values of the
parameters αk and βk are determined with an iterative procedure [154], but are not fitted
during the neural network training.
Finally, the normalization constants Ak are needed to impose the constraints coming from sum
rules. At any scale Q, momentum conservation impose a constraint on the first moment of
unpolarized quark and gluon total content
Z 1
0
dx x [g (x, Q) + Σ (x, Q)] = 1 ,
(2.28)
while from proton charge conservation we can infer the three valence sum rules:
Z 1
0
dx V (x, Q) =
Z 1
0
dx V8 (x, Q) = 3 .
Z 1
0
dx V3 (x, Q) = 1 .
(2.29)
Integrability and Positivity.
Additional constraints on the allowed PDFs space, such as
positivity and integrability can be imposed during the fit, by means of Lagrange multipliers as
explained below. In this case the cost function is supplemented by
χ2
tot(θ) →χ2
tot(θ) +
NC
X
i=1
λihi(θ) ,
(2.30)
where the sum runs over the number of constraints NC, λi are a set constant and hi(θ) are
real functions of the PDFs parameters. If the term λihi(θ) is allowed to be much larger than
χ2
tot(θ) for some specific PDF configurations, this effectively act as a penalty and make such
configurations less favorable upon minimization.
We can distinguish two types of positivity conditions. First, the PDFs we aim to determine
should have a physical meaning, i.e. for each flavor they should correspond to positive definite
observables. Following Ref. [109], one imposes positivity of the structure functions F u
2 , F d
2 , F s
2 ,
F c
2, and FL and of the flavor-diagonal Drell-Yan rapidity distributions σDY,u¯u, σDY,d ¯d, σDY,s¯s. 5
Second, in Ref. [158] it has been shown that in the MS scheme at sufficiently large Q2 massless
PDFs are positive defined. Thus, one can require the gluon, the up, down and strange quark and
antiquark at Q2 = 5 GeV2 to be positive (see [109, Sec. 3.1.3] for more details). This additional
constraints help the convergence of the fit especially in the very large-x region.
5A positivity condition on the physical cross-section corresponds to a direct positivity condition on the PDF only
at LO. In this case, partonic matrix elements are δ(1 −x), thus the physical cross-sections can be directly
proportional to the PDF.
