Evidence for Intrinsic charm in the proton
87
network outputs. In our previous analysis, the assumption of vanishing intrinsic valence was
enforced by setting V15 = V = P
i q−
i in the evolution basis or ¯c = c in the flavor basis at the
scale Q0.
In addition to experimental constraints, a non-zero charm valence must, as mentioned, satisfy
the sum rule
Q15 =
Z 1
0
dx V15(x, Q0) = 3 ,
(3.9)
Qc =
Z 1
0
dx (c −¯c)(x, Q0) = 0 ,
(3.10)
in the evolution or flavor basis respectively. This sum rule is enforced in the same manner as
that of the strange valence sum rule. Finally, to ensure cross-section positivity (at Q2 = 5 GeV2)
separately for charm- and anticharm initiated processes, we replace the neutral current F c
2
positivity observable (sensitive only to c+) with its charged current-counterparts F c,W −
2
and
F ¯c,W +
2
. The charm PDFs xc and x¯c themselves are not required to be positive-definite [49, 50].
Integrability and preprocessing are imposed as in NNPDF4.0. We have verified that results are
stable upon repeating the hyperoptimization of all parameters defining the fitting algorithm,
and thus we keep the same settings as in [109].
As explained in Section 3.2.1, intrinsic charm is the charm PDF in the 3FNS, where charm is
treated as a massive particle that does not contribute to the running of the strong coupling
or the evolution of PDFs. In the absence of intrinsic charm (i.e. “perturbative charm” only)
the charm and anticharm PDFs in the 3FNS vanish identically. In the 4FNS, in which charm is
treated as a massless parton, these PDFs are determined by perturbative matching conditions
between the 3FNS and the 4FNS. In our data-driven approach, the charm and anticharm PDFs,
instead of being fixed by perturbative matching conditions, are determined from data on the
same footing as the light quark PDFs. The deviation of data-driven charm from perturbative
charm, i.e., in the 3FNS the deviation of the charm and anticharm PDFs from zero, is identified
with the intrinsic component. In practice, we parametrize PDFs at Q0 = 1.65 GeV in the 4FNS,
and then invert the matching conditions of Eqs. (1.101) and (1.102) to determine the intrinsic
component in the 3FNS.
In Fig. 3.15 we show xc+ and xc−in the 4FNS at Q = 1.65 GeV, i.e. just above the charm mass
that we take to be mc = 1.51 GeV, determined using NNLO QCD theory. The bands are 68 %
confidence level (CL) PDF uncertainties. We show both the purely perturbative and data-driven
results, in the latter case both for c = ¯c and c ̸= ¯c. Note that the purely perturbative valence PDF
vanishes at Q = mc at NNLO, and only develops a tiny component at one extra perturbative
order (N3LO), or at higher scales. Hence, a non-vanishing valence component in the 4FNS
provides already evidence for intrinsic charm.
Upon allowing for a vanishing valence xc−component, the total charm xc+ is quite stable,
especially around the peak at x ∼0.4. This total charm PDF is also somewhat suppressed for
smaller x ≲0.2 as compared to the baseline result. In terms of fit quality, the χ2 per data point
