Figure 1.
CAPE calculation schematic. The black line shows the basic state buoyancy curve, with the grey
dashed line marking the basic state LCL. The red line marks the buoyancy profile of a parcel, the dashed cyan
line marks the LCL of the parcel, and the dashed magenta line corresponds to the LFC, where the buoyancy
of the parcel and the basic state are equal. The area of the blue shaded region is the positive CAPE, and the
area of the orange shaded region gives the CIN.
2.5.
Non-Dimensionalisations for Conditionally Unstable Atmospheres
The buoyancy non-dimensionalisation introduced in Vallis et al. (2019) scales buoy-
ancy with [B] = g∆T/cp, where ∆T = T(0) −T(H). The boundary conditions on
temperature (or buoyancy) and humidity were fixed at both the top and bottom
boundaries in the Vallis et al. (2019) study, so the temperature difference can be
chosen independently of the humidity, as an external parameter. The temperature dif-
ference associated with our conditionally unstable (basic state) environments is always
stable to dry air motion (db/dz > 0 or b(H) > b(0)). Therefore this measure of buoy-
ancy relates to the stabilising effects of warming of air as it descends with constant b.
It has no dependence on the moisture in the system, and therefore it does not capture
any changes in instability associated with variations in moist convective conditions. In
the conditionally unstable system, instabilities are instead driven by the buoyancy of
saturated air parcels rising above their LFC. We present two different scalings for [B]
(and [L]) which are more appropriate for (moist) conditionally unstable atmospheres.
2.5.1.
Bretherton Non-Dimensionalisation
Bretherton (1988) introduced a moist Rayleigh number that captures some effects of
conditional instability. Though his model differs from the Rainy-B´enard model (see
Bretherton (1987) for further details), the moist Rayleigh number can be simply cal-
culated for our system. Bretherton (1988) defined the moist Rayleigh number as,
Ram = N2
m = H4(Γ −N2
d)
π4ν2
Where N2
d = (bE(H) −bE(0))/H is the Brunt-Vaisala frequency of the environment,
and Γ ≈(bp(H) −bp(0))/H is “the buoyancy generation per unit rise due to latent
heating” in “the (saturated) adiabatic ascent of a moist air parcel”. Note that the
Bretherton (1988) study uses the conditions N2
d > 0 ⇒bE(H) > bE(0) and Γ > N2
d ⇒
bp(H) > bE(H) to define a conditionally unstable atmosphere. For our model, we
9
