3
where n is the number of frequency points (usually 1 × 104)
and df is the frequency spacing (≈20 kHz) [14]. The sen-
sitivity and high dynamic range afforded by the VNA is
exemplified by the fact that we observe up to 15 pulses
before the signal gets buried in the noise. We would like to
emphasize here that the temporal pulses correspond (taken as
a weighted sum) to all the resonant modes of the cavity that
lie within the measurement frequency span, and the effective
loss from fitting the ringdown should be interpreted within
this weighted average limit, and cannot be ascribed to any
individual resonance. We extract a 1/e (power) ringdown time
of ≈280 ns which agrees well with the Lorentzian fitting
of the individual cavity resonances in the frequency domain,
giving us modal quality factors [15] in the range of ≈6000,
consistent with previous results [6].
D-tt
EM
D
T-tt
T
L
T
D
L
T
D
(a)
(b)
1d
1r
1r
tt1
tt2
tt3
tt4
2r
3r
4r
tt1
tt2
tt3
2r
3r
4r
Fig. 2.
(a) Schematic of the possible paths taken by the acoustic field
from transmit to receive ports (either through or drop). The reflection at the
waveguide taper interface, coupled with the low propagation loss leads to
interference signals in the receive port that do not correspond to ring transits.
(b) Zoomed-in time domain transmission response of the device from Fig.1(c)
for both the drop (blue) and through (red). The through port data has been
shifted by 20 dB for clarity. The successive ring transits are labelled by mr
and the triplet transits by tti, where m and i are integers. The residual EM
crosstalk is shown in black.
If we zoom-in to the time domain dataset in Fig.1(c),
replotted in Fig.2(b) for clarity, we can get further insight
into the temporal dynamics. Fig.2(b) clearly shows the residual
electromagnetic (EM) crosstalk (black) between the transmit
(L) and receive (T,D) ports arriving almost instantaneously
followed by the train of acoustic pulses. In the T port, the first
pulse (indicated 1d) corresponds to the direct transit that skips
the ring resonator whereas the subsequent pulses that couple
into and out of the ring resonator are labelled by mr, where
m is the number of ring transits a pulse undergoes before
detection. We can unambiguously identify the ring transits by
noting that the D and T ports should have pulses that differ
by ≈πR/vg as the drop pulse leaks out at the mid-way point
in the ring. The schematic in Fig.2(a) illustrates the paths and
the data in Fig.2(b) is color coded to match the paths. We
label the D port peaks also by the mr notation to show the
correspondence between the two ports and emphasize that it is
the same circulating pulse that leaked out at different instances
which leads to the difference in detection times.
We can also observe an additional set of peaks, shaded
purple and green respectively, in the T and D port time domain
response in Fig.2, labelled tti, where i is an integer. These
are analogous to triplet transits in SAW devices [8]. The paths
taken by the first triplet transits in the T and D ports are
indicated in the schematic in Fig.2. Each of these secondary
pulses that follows the cavity pulse occurs due to the reflection
of the cavity pulse at the waveguide taper interface, cf. dashed
white box in Fig.1(a). We can verify this is the case by noting
that the waveguide length is 176.6 µm and given a vg of
3534 m s−1, these tt pulses should experience an additional
delay of 100 ns and we measure a delay of ≈110 ns. In the T
port data, one can also see that the pulse shape is distorted (cf.
m ≥2), and one can clearly see a second pulse arriving within
the same time window. This is due to multi-path interference
effects which we will discuss in detail in Section IV below.
III. SEEING THE DEVICE IN ACTION: BUILDING UP THE
RESONANCE
As noted in the introduction, the combination of bandwidth,
frequency resolution and dynamic range afforded by modern
VNAs with the low loss, long interaction lengths and slow
speed of sound in PnICs makes it possible to directly visualize
the device operation. We again use the microring resonator
to illustrate this idea because the device operation is well
understood analytically [16], but this methodology can be ex-
tended to more complicated instances with multiple interacting
components (and delayed feedback loops), wherein analytical
solutions might not be tractable.
Fig.3(a) shows a micrograph of a pulley-coupled microring
resonator. The pulley-coupled design increases the effective
waveguide resonator coupling length and pushes the device
operation closer to the critical coupling regime wherein the
cavity decay rate is exactly matched by the waveguide res-
onator coupling rate and the device transmission is exactly
zero at resonance. The point coupled ring in Fig.1(a) instead
operates in an undercoupled regime wherein the cavity decay
rate exceeds the waveguide coupling rate. The larger extinc-
tion depth in transmission makes device visualization easier,
although the principle of operation of the two devices are
(nearly) identical.
Fig.3(b) shows the temporal transmission response of the
device with the peaks labelled according to the notation in
Fig.2: mr successive ring transits, tti associated triplet transit
