(PID), larger simulated samples and, most importantly, additional trigger selections that
increase the signal efficiency by an order of magnitude, in addition to yield enhancements
that naturally accompany increases in cross-section and luminosity. In order to avoid
experimenter’s bias, the dimuon invariant-mass distribution was not examined and a
random factor was kept in the branching fraction normalisation until the full analysis was
finalised.
The LHCb detector is a single-arm forward spectrometer covering the pseudora-
pidity range 2 < η < 5, described in detail in Refs. [36, 37]. Due to its lifetime of
(8.018 ± 0.026) × 10−11 s [38], the Σ+ baryon can decay both inside the vertex detector,
such that all decay products are reconstructed using the full tracking system (long tracks),
or downstream of the vertex detector (downstream tracks). In this analysis, only long
tracks are used. The short lifetime estimated for the X0 particle would result in prompt
signal production, hence, no attempt is made to distinguish the dimuon origin vertex from
the decay vertex of the Σ+ baryon in this search.
The online event selection is performed by a trigger consisting of a hardware stage,
using information from the calorimeter and muon systems, followed by two software stages,
where a full event reconstruction is performed. Since 2016, two inclusive dimuon trigger
selections have been added at the two software trigger stages, specifically designed to
retain low transverse-momentum, pT, track combinations whilst remaining within the
strict processing time constraints imposed for the software trigger. In these selections,
muon tracks are required to be inconsistent with originating from any primary vertex (PV)
and to have PID information consistent with their mass hypothesis. More details can be
found in Refs. [39,40]. In addition, an exclusive trigger selection has been introduced for
the Σ+ →pµ+µ−decay channel. Candidate Σ+ baryons are formed from combinations
of a pair of oppositely charged muons and one proton candidate that are inconsistent
with originating from any PV, with a good track-fit quality, and which form a good-
quality vertex. The Σ+ candidate is required to have pT > 500 MeV/c, be consistent with
originating from a PV and to have a significant flight distance. The Σ+ →pπ0 decay,
used as normalisation channel, is selected from a well-identified proton track and a π0
candidate reconstructed in the two-photon final state from two clusters in the calorimeter.
For events with multiple candidates, all are accepted.
Given the large production rate of Σ+ baryons in pp collisions, the present search is
conducted also including data selected at one or more trigger stages by other particles in the
event. In the offline processing phase, trigger decisions are associated with reconstructed
candidates. A trigger decision can thus be ascribed to the reconstructed candidate, the
rest of the event or a combination of both. In the Triggered On Signal (TOS) sample
the signal decay products are required to pass the muon or the hadron triggers, and the
proton from Σ+ →pπ0 decays is required to pass the hadron trigger. In the Triggered
Independently of Signal (TIS) sample, both channels are selected in events where their
decay products are not necessary for the trigger decision. Candidates from the two samples
are selected together, but the measurement of the signal branching fraction is performed
separately for the TIS and TOS samples. At the software trigger level, the signal selection
already described is maintained for both samples. The normalisation channel is selected
at the first software level by requiring a high pT hadron, while a minimum-bias selection,
with a fixed scale factor of 10−4 to limit its rate, is applied at the second software level.
Simulated samples are used to optimise the selection criteria, parametrise invariant-
mass distributions, and characterise the detector resolution and efficiencies. These samples
2
