7
Fig. 6.
Drop port time domain transmission (blue), and predictive model
fit (red, cf. AppendixA) for a four port ring resonator device, as shown in
Fig.1(a). The drop port data is cleaner and fits better than the through port
(cf. Fig.5(b) due to the spectral and modal filtering induced by the ring and
the avoidance of the background straight through path (1d in Fig.2(b),3(b))
can scale to O(10) components in the near-term.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we have shown that the temporal dynamics
of propagating GHz acoustic fields in µm-scale waveguide
geometries in PnIC platforms can be accurately visualized
and modelled using the time domain transform of the spectral
data from a vector network analyzer. The combination of low
propagation loss, long interaction lengths, slow speed of sound
and multiple interfaces with the high dynamic range and sensi-
tivity that the VNA data provides enables us to directly see the
device in action. We use an acoustic microring resonator ge-
ometry, excited by an on-chip waveguide, as a model platform
and demonstrate resonant pulse circulation and ringdown and
the quantification of multipath interference effects that occur
due to reflection at component interfaces. As PnIC platforms
scale in complexity, such temporal field mapping techniques
become increasingly critical as both visualization aids and
metrology tools for measuring and improving performance.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Martin Cryan, John Haine, Mar-
tin Kuball, Bruce Drinkwater, Jacob Brown, Yingqiang He,
Robert Thomas, Chaowang Liu, Hugues Marchand, and Yutian
Zhang for valuable suggestions and feedback.
APPENDIX A
MODELLING MULTIPATH INTERFERENCE EFFECTS
In order to capture the temporal propagation and interfer-
ence effects observed in a ring resonator, we employ a multi-
path interference model. In addition to the principal paths from
the launch port to the drop/through port with or without ring
traversals, we also consider additional subsidiary paths that
arise when reflections from waveguide taper junctions are non-
negligible. Thus, the signal from the transmit (launch) port can
traverse a range of possible routes, encompassing direct paths,
ring transits, and multiple triplet transits, some of which are
outlined in Fig.5(a), before emerging at the output port. Each
of these routes contributes a distinct amplitude and phase to
the total through/drop-signal as a function of time. Interference
effects can be observed when the arrival time of two distinct
paths lie within the temporal pulse width.
Fig. 7.
Directed graph representation of a 2-port ring resonator used to
model valid signal paths. Each edge is annotated with a 2×1 array indicating
the physical propagation length and corresponding power transmission. The
graph captures all possible routes the signal can take from the launch (L) port
to the through (T) port, including multiple ring transits and various triplet
transits due to reflection at the waveguide taper interface. Both clockwise
(CW) and counterclockwise (CCW) roundtrips (cf. Fig.8) within the ring are
represented using four nodes each to fully capture the propagation behaviour.
This allows modelling of cumulative coupling loss, with each successive
roundtrip incurring an additional loss corresponding to k2. Additional node
losses at the ports due to reflection (R) are omitted from the graph for clarity.
This graph forms the basis for modelling multipath interference effects in the
time-domain response.
To enumerate all such paths, we represent the ring resonator
as a directed graph as in Fig.7, whose nodes correspond
to physical locations or geometrical features. Directed edges
connecting these nodes have weights corresponding to the
propagation distance (lprop), and associated loss due to prop-
agation and coupling. Nodes corresponding to ports are also
assigned weights corresponding to the (lumped) loss due to
reflection at waveguide taper interface and IDTs. A path is
then defined as a sequence of connected edges leading from
the input node to the output node. A recursive pathfinding
algorithm is employed to find valid paths that the signal can
take in the directed graph. The algorithm is tweaked to allow
for revisiting nodes after reaching the output node to account
for reflections from the waveguide taper interface. Since
this directed graph represents an Infinite Impulse Response
(IIR) system, the number of valid paths grows exponentially
with time. Therefore, we impose a maximum time/distance
constraint based on the length of the time data.
