Early Warning Signs for SPDEs with Red Noise
log10(κ)
Variance along e(−0.5)
i
on a log10 scale
(a) False EWS on (4.1) for p = 0.5 in the limit κ →0+.
log10(κ)
Variance along e(−0.5)
1,k
∗on a log10 scale
(b) False EWS on (4.2) for p = 0.5 in the limit κ →0+.
log10(κ)
Variance along g on a log10 scale
(c) False EWS on (4.3) for p = 0.5 in the limit κ →0+.
log10(κ)
Variance along 1Si on a log10 scale
(d) False EWS on (4.4) for p = 0.5 in the limit κ →0+.
Fig. 2 Log-log plots of the variance in time obtained when projecting the SPDE solution along different modes. The limit κ →0−is shown from right
to left. The subfigures (a) −(d) correspond to the same systems as in Figure 1 and their values refer to the average of 10 run samples. In contrast
to the limit p →0−, the variance exhibits hyperbolic divergence across all modes due to the noise structure. This is indicated by the alignment of
all lines to the dashed black lines, which serve as a reference slope. The grey-shaded regions depict numerical uncertainties. The observed increase in
variance, which depends on the increase in the noise correlation time 1/κ, represents a false EWS in the context of CSD.
This implies the statement of Corollary 3.6, which is corroborated by the findings in the figures. In fact, for each i ∈{1, 2, 3} we
consider h(p)
1
= h(p)
2
= 1Si for any p < 0. Then, the time-asymptotic variance along such families of functions displays hyperbolic
divergence in the limit p →0−, as shown in Figure 1d, and in the limit κ →0+, as displayed in Figure 2d.
5
Discussion and Conclusion
We have derived expressions for system variance in linear SPDEs under the influence of red noise. The dependence of variance
on a critical eigenvalue suggests that in such systems, variance diverges when linear stability is lost (Theorems 3.1, 3.3, and 3.5).
This is the case for generic probing functions in the solution space (Corollaries 3.2, 3.4, and 3.6). In this sense, it is reasonable to
expect the occurrence of CSD in bifurcating SPDEs with red noise. However, we have also found that a similar divergence takes
place when the correlation time of the noise increases. This is problematic, as there is no way to tell the genuine source of an
increase in variance in an application setting. The possibility of non-stationary noise characteristics would need to be carefully
considered before applying CSD for the detection of approaching bifurcations. We have also discussed a second common EWS
for bifurcations, an exponential increase in the autocorrelation. We have shown that such an effect indeed occurs with respect
to some specific probing functions. However, also for this EWS, we emphasize the potential for false indications resulting from
18
