Has ACT measured radiative corrections to the tree-level Higgs-like inflation?
Ioannis D. Gialamas ,∗Alexandros Karam ,† Antonio Racioppi ,‡ and Martti Raidal
§
National Institute of Chemical Physics and Biophysics,
R¨avala 10, 10143 Tallinn, Estonia
Starobinsky inflation and non-minimally coupled Higgs inflation have been among the most fa-
vored models of the early universe, as their predictions for the scalar spectral index ns and tensor-
to-scalar ratio r fall comfortably within the constraints set by Planck and BICEP/Keck. However,
new results from the Atacama Cosmology Telescope (ACT) suggest a preference for higher values of
ns, introducing tension with the simplest realizations of these models. In this work, being agnostic
about the nature of the inflaton, we show that incorporating one-loop corrections to a Higgs-like
inflationary scenario leads to a shift in the predicted value of ns, which brings Higgs-like inflation
into better agreement with ACT observations. Remarkably, we find that this can be achieved with
non-minimal couplings ξ < 1, in contrast to the large values typically required in conventional
Higgs inflation, thereby pushing any unitarity-violation scale above the Planck scale. The effect is
even more significant when the model is formulated in the Palatini approach, where the modified
field-space structure naturally enhances deviations from the metric case. These findings highlight
the importance of quantum corrections and gravitational degrees of freedom in refining inflationary
predictions in light of new data.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Standard non-minimal tree-level Higgs inflation [1]
and Starobinsky inflation [2] have long been consid-
ered among the most successful models of cosmic infla-
tion [3–6]. Their predictions for the spectral index, ns,
and the tensor-to-scalar ratio, r, have consistently fallen
well within the observationally allowed regions.
How-
ever, the latest data release from the Atacama Cosmol-
ogy Telescope (ACT) [7, 8], when combined with cos-
mic microwave background (CMB) measurements from
BICEP/Keck (BK) [9] and Planck [10], along with the
first-year DESI measurements of baryon acoustic oscil-
lations (BAO) [11], introduces significant shifts in these
constraints.
In particular, the combination of Planck,
ACT, and DESI (P-ACT-LB) leaves r largely unchanged
but notably revises the predicted value of the spectral
index to ns = 0.9743 ± 0.0034. This updated value chal-
lenges the viability of Higgs and Starobinsky inflation, as
only a small fraction of the standard 50-60 e-folds period
remains within the 2σ allowed region. In this regard, the
latest observations have led to a reassessment of several
inflationary models to ensure compatibility with the new
data [12–16].
In this letter, without assuming a specific underly-
ing particle content, we incorporate the radiative correc-
tions (e.g., [17–19] and references therein) that inevitably
arise in the standard tree-level Higgs-like inflation sce-
nario. We show that these corrections lead to inflation-
ary predictions that remain well within current obser-
∗ioannis.gialamas@kbfi.ee
† alexandros.karam@kbfi.ee
‡ antonio.racioppi@kbfi.ee
§ martti.raidal@cern.ch
vational bounds. Moreover, we find that smaller values
of the non-minimal coupling, ξ, can still be viable. Fi-
nally, we explore alternative formulations of gravity and
demonstrate that the Palatini formulation (e.g., [20–22]
and references therein) offers improved agreement with
the latest observational data compared to the metric for-
mulation.
As a result, we suggest that the ACT may
have detected signatures of radiative corrections to the
inflationary potential – a possibility that warrants further
investigation and must be tested by future experiments.
II.
THE MODEL
We consider a theory involving a non-minimally cou-
pled scalar field, ϕ, specified by the action
S =
Z
d4x√−g
M 2
P + ξϕ2
2
R(g, Γ) + (∂µϕ)2
2
−Veff(ϕ)

,
(1)
where MP ≃2.4×1018 GeV is the reduced Planck mass,
Veff(ϕ) is the 1-loop corrected scalar potential and ξ its
non-minimal coupling to gravity which we assume to be
constant. The Ricci scalar R is constructed from a con-
nection Γ, which, in our analysis, can either be the Levi-
Civita connection (in metric gravity) or an independent
connection (in Palatini gravity) (e.g., [20–22] and refer-
ences therein).
We focus on a 1-loop effective scalar potential,
Veff(ϕ) = λ(ϕ)
4
ϕ4 ,
(2)
where λ(ϕ) is the scale-dependent coupling, written as
λ(ϕ) = λtree + λ1−loop(ϕ) + · · · .
The loop corrections
to λ originate from the full particle spectrum of a UV-
complete theory. However, we remain agnostic about the
arXiv:2504.06002v1  [astro-ph.CO]  8 Apr 2025
