1.2
Separation lemma
We derive a separation lemma for CLE loops. Roughly speaking, it states that two crossing loops in
a given annulus have a uniformly positive chance to get well-separated, e.g. near the outer boundary
of the annulus. More specifically, consider CLE in D. On the event E2(ε, r), there are two loops
γ1 and γ2 that cross the annulus Aε,r, and we can further define f
E2(ε, r) to be the subevent that
E2(ε, r) occurs with the additional requirement that γj ⊂(Br ∪Br/10(rei(j−1)π)) \ Br/10(reijπ) for
both j = 1, 2 (see Figure 1.2 for an illustration of that event). We prove the following.
Theorem 1.2. For κ ∈(8/3, 4], 0 < 2ε < r < 1/2, we have
P(E2(ε, r)) ≲P(f
E2(ε, r)),
where the symbol ≲involves an implicit constant which only depends on κ, r.
Our proof relies on the correspondence [36] between CLEκ and the outer boundaries of the
outermost loop clusters in the Brownian loop soup (BLS) with intensity α, where α is related
to κ by (1.1). As we will see in the proof, separation lemmas of this type turn out to be more
complicated than the ones established in [12, 13] for loop soups. In latter cases, one usually starts
with some Brownian motions or random walks, which can be used to keep track of the configuration.
For example, in Lemma 4.4, we consider two Brownian motions crossing an annulus inside an
independent BLS, and we study the non-intersection event associated with the Brownian motions
together with the loop-soup clusters that they hook. Then, there is a natural way to describe how
close they are, and how likely it is that they can be “nicely” extended to the next scale without
intersecting, through some geometric quantity (see (4.5)), which is commonly called quality. Then,
the separation lemma reduces to analyzing the quality across scales, which is now a streamlined
method. In order to use a similar method to prove Theorem 1.2, the first task is to find a suitable
notion of quality associated with loop-soup clusters. However, in that case, it seems difficult to
express the quality in some purely geometric way, as in (4.5). We found a well-suited definition of
quality, see (4.3) below, which combines geometric and probabilistic information simultaneously (in
terms of extension probabilities through “good” pairs of Brownian loops). By analyzing carefully
this object (in combination with an additional stability result on arm events, Lemma 4.8), we can
then adapt the standard framework to establish separation, and thus show Theorem 1.2.
ε
r
r
10
r
10
γ1
γ2
Figure 1.2: The well-separated arm event f
E2(ε, r).
5
