13 
 
vacuum mode with a pressure of 5 Pa. In-situ SEM imaging was conducted under different 
accelerated voltages including 10 kV, 12kV, and 15 kV, and different beam densities by tuning the 
magnifications. The accelerated voltage for EDS analysis was 15 kV. In-situ GI-XRD was 
performed in the VESPERS (Very Sensitive Elemental and Structural Probe Employing Radiation 
from a Synchrotron) beamline at the Canadian Light Source (CLS), and XRD patterns were 
analyzed based on ALBULA and XMAS software [35,45]. The e-beam and X-ray beam radiation 
energies and beam densities are summarized in Table 2. The detailed calculation methods for beam 
density are discussed in Supplementary material. Nanoindentation tests were performed in the 
KLA iMicro Nanoindentation system equipped with a Berkovich diamond indenter tip (Synton-
MDP) at room temperature. The tip shape function was calibrated by testing the fused silica 
standard. The drift rates were controlled below 0.1 nm/s, and the sampling frequency was 100 Hz. 
Young’s modulus and hardness were measured by the Oliver and Pharr method in the continuous 
stiffness measurement (CSM) mode with an indentation depth of 1000 nm [46,47]. 
 
Table 2. Radiation conditions on FAPbBr3 and MAPbBr3 single crystals 
Beam type 
Beam energy 
Beam density a) 
e-beam 
10 keV 
1E9 e/µm3; 3E9 e/µm3; 8E9 e/µm3 
12 keV 
8E9 e/µm3 
15 keV 
8E9 e/µm3 
X-ray beam 
11 keV 
5E9 ph/µm3 
14 keV 
5E9 ph/µm3 
17 keV 
5E9 ph/µm3 
a) e: Elementary electric charge; ph: Photon number. 
 
Acknowledgements 
R.C. and Y.Z. acknowledge the financial support from the Discovery Grants Program of the 
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) RGPIN-2018-05731, the 
Ontario Early Researcher Award, and the Canada Foundation for Innovation (CFI) - Evans Leaders 
Fund (JELF) Number 38044. Part of the research described in this paper was performed at the 
Canadian Light Source (CLS), a national research facility of the University of Saskatchewan, and 
R.C. acknowledges the receipt of support from the CLSI Student Travel Support Program. The 
authors thank Dr. Kai Huang and Mingqiang Li at the University of Toronto for constructive 
discussions. 
 
Authorship contributions 
Ruitian Chen: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Data curation, Writing – original 
draft, Writing – review & editing. Mingyu Xie: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, 
Writing – review & editing. Tianyi Lyu: Methodology, Investigation, Writing – review & editing. 
