Figure 9. The results of fitting Tr (F13F13) to the analytical expression (4.9) for three configurations
(one in each row), obtained by minimizing the lattice action on a lattice of size (32, 8, 8, 8), correspond-
ing to tuned T4 with ∆(2, 1, 2) = 0. The fits produce a mean squared deviation of ∼10−6, showing
excellent agreement with the analytical expression.
Left column: the values of Tr (F13F13) obtained from lattice configurations, summed over the 2nd and
4th directions, as a function of x1 and x3.
Right column: the analytical expression (4.9), for values of the four moduli ¯x1, ¯x3, η, θ fitted to the
lattice data using the least-square method.
dictions and observed data across all points in the x1-x3 plane. Additionally, the improved
action described in (C.8) of Appendix C is employed to eliminate next-to-leading-order correc-
tions. Figure 9 illustrates these results for three distinct lattice configurations, each selected
to ensure nearly uniform integrated action densities across all four directions (similar to the
configurations with almost uniform integrated action densities shown in Figure 6). The small
errors (mean squared deviation ≪1) indicate a remarkable agreement between numerical
simulations and analytical predictions.
To precisely define uniformity, we quantify it as the difference between the global maxi-
mum and minimum values of the action density within a given lattice configuration. A smaller
difference indicates a more uniform configuration, and thus, closer to the constant-F solution.
Our fits of all the 233 configurations for r = 2, k = 1 (lattice of size 32, 8, 8, 8) gives η < 0.4
with mean squared deviation < 10−3. We find that the more uniform the configuration, the
smaller the value of η, and the smaller the value of the mean squared deviation; see Figure
10. Our findings are consistent with two main points in our analytical treatment. First, in
the analytical treatment, we carry out the analysis to the leading order in λ, i.e., to O(λ0),
meaning that we ignore the contribution of the non-linear terms in the λ-expanded pertur-
bations about the constant-F solution. Second, the leading-order λ-expansion gives rise to
– 28 –
