Basic distillation with realistic noise
Vikesh Siddhu,1 Erick Winston,1 David C. McKay,1, ∗and Ali Javadi-Abhari1, †
1IBM Quantum, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
Entanglement distillation is a key component of modular quantum computing and long-range
quantum communications. However, this powerful tool to reduce noise in entangled states is difficult
to realize in practice for two main reasons. First, operations used to carry out distillation inject
noise they seek to remove. Second, the extent to which distillation can work under realistic device
noise is less well-studied. In this work, we both simulate distillation using a variety of device noise
models and perform distillation experiments on fixed-frequency IBM devices. We find reasonable
agreement between experimental data and simulation done using Pauli and non-Pauli noise models.
In our data we find broad improvement when the metric of success for distillation is to improve
average Bell fidelity under effective global depolarizing noise, or remove coherent errors, or improve
the Bell fidelity of mildly degraded Bell pairs. We pave the way to obtain broad improvement from
distillation under a stricter, but practically relevant, metric: distill non-local Bell pairs with higher
fidelity than possible to obtain with other available methods.
Our results also help understand
metrics and requirements for quantum devices to use entanglement distillation as a primitive for
modular computing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Entanglement is an important non-classical resource
used in quantum computation and communication. How-
ever, this resource depletes due to noise that inevitably
affects physical systems. This noise may be removed us-
ing entanglement distillation (also called purification) [1,
2]. At a high level, entanglement distillation entangles
many copies of lower fidelity Bell states such that we can
post-select on a subspace to obtain higher fidelity Bell
pairs. Therefore, this basic technique generally requires
a high throughput of Bell pairs and its simplest variants
are non-deterministic.
However, via enough rounds of
distillation and consumption of Bell pairs, one can hope
to achieve high fidelities [3] (see also recent work [4]). In
the context of quantum error correction (QEC) [5, 6] and
quantum compilation [7], high fidelity Bell pairs can en-
able measurement and (gate) teleportation. When pass-
ing states through certain channels, distillation can even
outperform QEC for communication [2].
There is a vast body of work dedicated to entangle-
ment distillation [8–23]. From a theoretical perspective,
understanding the best rates for distilling entanglement
and methods for achieving these rates in practice is an
important area of study. In practice, entanglement distil-
lation plays a central role in both long-distance quantum
communication [3, 24, 25] and scaling quantum compu-
tation, for instance using modular architectures [26, 27].
A variety of studies aim at optimizing protocols in these
settings [28–31].
Due to its importance, a variety of prior experiments
on various physical platforms including optical [32–39],
trapped ion [40], solid state [41] , and superconducting
[42] qubits have reported entanglement distillation. Such
∗dcmckay@us.ibm.com
† ali.javadi@ibm.com
proof-of-concept studies have opened the way for using
entanglement distillation not only in quantum networks
but also modular architectures for quantum computing.
However, a variety of challenges exist in understanding
the role distillation can play in practice, both in-terms of
finding appropriate distillation protocols that can be im-
plemented, and the efficacy of using distillation protocols
over other strategies for distributing Bell pairs given the
noise in the hardware components implementing these
protocols.
Carrying out distillation on devices can be non-trivial
and analyzing it requires care for noise sources different
from those considered in a large part of entanglement
distillation literature. For instance, a number of theoret-
ical studies assume that the entangled states experience
independent identically distributed (iid) noise (typically
Pauli noise). Furthermore, many assume noiseless gates,
measurements, and ancilla. In practice, entangled states
experience non-iid noise. For instance, the natural way
to create two non-local Bell pairs may add noise differ-
ently to each pair [43].
This noise need not be Pauli
noise [44], for instance most qubits have a non-negligible
T1 time, which is a non-Pauli error. The gates used to
carry out entanglement distillation also add noise. Mea-
surements done during or after distillation are also noisy
and, typically, of long duration. These measurement er-
rors not only affect the distillation protocol, but also the
protocols used to certify how well distillation works. Fi-
nally, error-free ancillas, used in certain nested schemes
for distillation, need not be available either.
In this work, we numerically and experimentally ex-
plore entanglement distillation on IBM’s superconduct-
ing qubits. In our numerical exploration we include noise
on both the Bell pairs being distilled and the compo-
nents (two-qubit gates and measurements) carrying out
this distillation. For local Pauli noise we report gate and
measurement noise parameters for three different distil-
lation protocols to improve the Bell fidelity of noisy Bell
pairs (with possibly unequal initial Bell fidelity).
For
arXiv:2504.06175v1  [quant-ph]  8 Apr 2025
