SVTest: general purpose software for testing weakly random sources with exemplary
application to seismic data analysis enabling quantum amplification.
Maciej Stankiewicz
,1 Roberto Salazar
,2, 3 Miko laj Czechlewski
,4 Alejandra Mu˜noz Jensen
,5
Catalina Morales-Y´a˜nez
,6, 7 Omer Sakarya
,4 Julio Viveros Carrasco,6 and Karol Horodecki
4, ∗
1Institute of Informatics, Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics,
University of Gda´nsk, Wita Stwosza 57, 80-308 Gda´nsk, Poland
2Department of Communications & Computer Engineering,
Faculty of Information & communication technology (ICT), University of Malta, Msida, MSD 2080, Malta
3Faculty of Physics, Astronomy and Applied Computer Science, Jagiellonian University, 30-348 Krak´ow, Poland
4Institute of Informatics, National Quantum Information Centre,
Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics,
University of Gda´nsk, Wita Stwosza 57, 80-308 Gda´nsk, Poland
5EMGG TerraData Limitada, Concepci´on, Chile
6Department of Geophysics, Universidad de Concepci´on, Concepci´on, Chile
7Department of Civil Engineering, Universidad Cat´olica de la Sant´ısima Concepci´on, Concepci´on, Chile
(Dated: April 9, 2025)
Generating private randomness is essential for numerous applications ranging from security proofs
to online banking. Consequently, the capacity of quantum devices to amplify the privacy of a weak
source of randomness, in cases unattainable by classical methods, constitutes a practical advantage.
One of the theoretical models of such weak sources are the so-called Santha-Vazirani (SV) sources;
however, finding natural sources satisfying the SV model is a paramount challenge. In this article, we
take three significant steps on the way to simplify this hard task. We begin with an in-depth analysis
of the mathematical background for estimating the quality of a weak randomness source by providing
a set of axioms that systematize the possible approaches to such estimation.
We then develop
software (SVTest) to estimate the parameter characterizing the source’s randomness. The software
is general-purpose, i.e., it can test the randomness of any target sequence of bits. Later, we apply
the software to test seismic events (earthquakes and local noise) as potential sources of randomness.
Our results demonstrate that seismic phenomena are possible sources of randomness, depending
on the choice of discretization. Therefore, our work provides strong evidence of the potential of
geophysical phenomena as a source of cryptographic resources, building an unprecedented bridge
between both fields.
Keywords: randomness, amplification, earthquake, quantum
I.
INTRODUCTION
The creation of random bits is ubiquitous across In-
ternet applications and extends its importance to realms
such as online banking, where confidentiality against po-
tential adversaries becomes paramount [1].
However,
achieving privacy in these bits poses an elusive chal-
lenge. Proving the privacy of a sequence against adver-
saries without additional assumptions about the source
generating the sequence remains an insurmountable task.
An area of considerable interest lies within the domain
of pseudorandom deterministically generated sequences,
extensively investigated in [2] and references therein. De-
spite their popularity, these sequences reveal vulnera-
bility upon partial disclosure of their initial conditions,
resulting in predictability and compromising their secu-
rity. This susceptibility to attacks challenges their seam-
less integration, underscoring the intricate equilibrium
required between security and operational efficiency to
pursue robust random bit generation. One approach to
address this challenge involves leveraging physical phe-
∗Correspondence: karol.horodecki@ug.edu.pl
nomena as foundational sources, harnessing properties of
these natural processes to generate a stream of inherently
weakly random bits. However, this raw randomness re-
quires further refinement through post-processing tech-
niques aimed at distilling private, secure randomness—
a process thoroughly examined in [1, 3] and references
therein. Some of the above physically certified random-
nesses include radioactive decay, specific astronomical
data selections, or even fluctuations captured by the cam-
era on a mobile device [4]. Nevertheless, for this method-
ology to prove effective, it necessitates at least two statis-
tically independent sources against classical adversaries
with access to specific knowledge about the source. In-
deed, M. Santha and U. Vazirani proved a no-go state-
ment for classical post-processing methods [5].
They
considered a family of sources—now called the Santha-
Vazirani source—parameterized by ϵ > 0, expressing its
divergence from the ideal source of uniform bits. They
showed that extracting a more random sequence—that
is, decreasing the value of ϵ—is unattainable by classical
methods. Here, the following condition constrains n bits
of the SV source:
1
2 −ϵ ≤P(si|si−1, . . . , s0, e) ≤1
2 + ϵ
(1)
arXiv:2504.06899v1  [quant-ph]  9 Apr 2025
