ing singularities in the Borel plane, namely, the ultraviolet (UV) renormalons, disappear. Third,
also the UV Landau pole disappears so that any QFT model embedded in multifractal spacetime
becomes asymptotically safe. We trace these improvements back to the Poincar´e non-invariance
of the vacuum, enabling robust S-matrix construction by circumventing limitations imposed by
the Haag theorem [17]. The resulting theory agrees with the standard quantum field theory at
low energies, while all the changes and improvements would appear at some high energy scale
we denote M.
In Sec. 2, we provide a self-contained analysis of how multifractality may be connected to
dimensional reduction, consistent with the quantum gravity approaches mentioned above. We
address canonical quantization in Sec. 3, then we discuss the consistency in Sec. 4, and the
implications in Sec. 5. We give our outlook in Sec. 6. Additional technical details are reported
in the appendix A.
2
Fractality, smoothing and dimensional reduction
This preliminary section aims to connect the concepts of multifractal space and varying effective
dimensions.
To start with, consider first a 1D space where the tangent is not defined at any point, namely,
is not smooth, and consider a non-differentiable function f(x) : M →R on this 1D manifold
M. It is possible to build from f a new function F : M →R, differentiable, via convolution
with an auxiliary smoothing function h(x) that can be chosen Gaussian [18],
h(x) =
2
√
4πl2e−x2
4l2 .
(1)
The convolution product f ∗h gives
F(x, l) =
Z ∞
0
f(y) h(x −y) dy ,
(2)
now being F smoothed, differentiable, and dependent on an intrinsic scale l, implying resolution
dependence. By construction, when l →0, the function F coincides with the original non-
differentiable function f(x).
For instance, think of the above function f(x) as the distance between a horizontal line
and a point in the 1D non-differentiable line given by the points belonging to the Koch curve.
The function f is continuous everywhere in x but non-differentiable anywhere in x [19]. Now
assume that one is interested in finding the distance between any two points in the Koch curve.
For zero resolution, such distance is not well-defined (infinite) when l →0, but it does exist for
a finite, nonzero resolution l. After applying (2), the distance between two points in the Koch
3
