Accepted Version 
Accetped date: 7 April 2025 
5 
This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-4.0 license 
 
FTIR spectra were recorded on a Thermo Fisher Scientific Nicolet Magna 6700 FTIR 
spectrometer. Micro-FTIR spectra of 2-AmpHSO4 polymorphs were recorded using the ATR 
technique on a Thermo Fisher Scientific Nicolet iN10 FTIR microscope. FT Raman spectra of 
the powdered samples were recorded on a Thermo Fisher Scientific Nicolet 6700 FTIR 
spectrometer equipped with the Nicolet Nexus FT Raman module. Raman spectra of 
microcrystalline samples and aqueous 2-Amp and 2-Amp(1+) solutions were collected on a 
Thermo Scientific DXR Raman Microscope interfaced to an Olympus microscope. Raman 
spectra of microcrystalline samples were also collected on a dispersive confocal Raman 
microscope MonoVista CRS+ (Spectroscopy & Imaging GmbH, Germany) interfaced to an 
Olympus microscope. For the experimental details of all vibrational spectroscopic 
measurements, see the Supplementary material. 
The UV-Vis-NIR absorption spectrum of a polished thin single crystal plate (0.7 mm 
thickness, no defined crystallographic orientation) of 2-AmpH2PO3 was recorded using non-
polarized light with a UNICAM UV-300 spectrometer in the 190-1100 nm region with 1 nm 
spectral resolution. 
 
The phase purity of prepared polycrystalline products was controlled by the powder X-ray 
diffraction using a Philips X’pert PRO MPD diffractometer (Bragg-Brentano geometry, 
ultrafast X’Celerator detector and Cu K radiation,  = 1.5418 Å). The data were analysed 
using the FullProf software [29], and the results are presented in Tables S2-S5, Supplementary 
material. The theoretical diffraction patterns used to confirm the sample composition were 
calculated from the single-crystal data using the PLATON software [30]. 
 
Melting points of the polycrystalline samples (with the exception of 2-AmpHSO4 (II) phase) 
were determined using a melting-point apparatus Büchi B-540 (visual detection, heating rate 5 
°C/min). 
 
The DSC measurements (with the exception of 2-AmpHSO4 (II) phase) were performed on 
a Perkin Elmer DSC 8500 instrument with a Perkin Elmer CLN2 liquid nitrogen cooler. The 
measurement cycles (heating rate 10 °C/min, helium atmosphere, finely ground samples in 
sealed aluminium pans) were carried out in temperature regions ranging from -160°C to 
temperatures slightly below the melting points of studied salts.  
 
2.2. Crystal structure determination 
The collection of low-temperature X-ray diffraction data for 2-AmpH2PO3, 2-AmpHSO4 
(I) and (2-Amp)2SO4H2O single crystals was performed on a Nonius Kappa CCD 
