2 
 
emerge in Landau levels. Here we report transport studies of the first moiré Chern band 
of 3.83° twisted bilayer MoTe2 (tMoTe2), with significantly improved device quality 
compared to previous studies [3,4], enabling the observation of intriguing new quantum 
states. Specifically, we observe integer quantum anomalous Hall (IQAH) effect at 
moiré hole filling factor of νh = 1, FQAH effects at νh = 2/3, 3/5, 4/7, 5/9, and eight 
topologically trivial correlated insulators. In between of νh = 2/3 and 3/5 FQAH states, 
a reentrant integer quantum anomalous Hall (RIQAH) state – the zero magnetic field 
analogue of reentrant quantum Hall states [19-24] – emerges at temperature below 300 
mK. Remarkably, signatures of unconventional superconductivity have been observed, 
neighboring with the FQAH and RIQAH states. The maximum onset superconducting 
transition temperature is approximately 1.2 K, with the zero-resistance state achieved 
around 300 mK, and a perpendicular critical magnetic field as high as approximately 
0.6 T. Notably, the normal state of the observed superconductivity exhibits anomalous 
Hall effect and magnetic hysteresis. Our results demonstrate the first example of 
superconductivity emerging within a flat Chern band that simultaneously hosts FQAH 
effects, a phenomenon never observed in any other systems. Our work expands the 
understanding of emergent quantum phenomena in moiré Chern bands, and offers a 
nearly ideal platform for engineering Majorana and parafermion zero modes in gate-
controlled hybrid devices that integrate superconductivity and chiral edge states at zero 
magnetic field. 
 
Main: 
The quantum geometry of electron wavefunctions, encompassing Berry curvature and 
quantum metric, profoundly influences the emergence and properties of various 
quantum states. For example, the recently observed FQAH effect (i.e. fractional Chern 
insulators [25-30] at zero magnetic field) occurs when the flat Chern band is close to 
the ideal condition for quantum geometry. Although FQAH effects have been 
experimentally realized in twisted bilayer MoTe2 (tMoTe2) [1-7], the competition 
between FQAH effects and other interaction-driven quantum states within the moiré 
Chern band, is still largely unexplored. On the other hand, the quantum metric is 
believed to play an important role in facilitating superconductivity in a topological flat 
band [12-18]. Two-dimensional (2D) flat band superconductors have attracted great 
attentions since the discovery of superconductivity in twisted bilayer graphene [31-34]. 
Since then, superconductivities have been observed in twisted multilayer graphene [35-
38], rhombohedral graphene moiré systems [11,39], moiré-less crystalline graphene 
[40-46], and most recently, in twisted bilayer WSe2 (tWSe2) [47,48]. However, the 
coexistence of FQAH effects and superconductivity within a single topological flat 
band remains elusive in experiments. 
 
