Mesons, baryons and the confinement/deconfinement transition
V. Tomas Mari Surkau and Urko Reinosa
Centre de Physique Th´eorique, CNRS, Ecole polytechnique, IP Paris, F-91128 Palaiseau, France.
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
We relate the Polyakov and anti-Polyakov loops, which determine how energetically costly it
is to bring an external static quark or antiquark probe into a bath of quarks and gluons, to the
ability of that same medium to provide the conditions for the formation of meson-like or baryon-like
configurations that would screen the probes.
Since the advent of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD)
as the theory for the strong interactions, one mystery
prevails: how do its elementary degrees of freedom, the
quarks and the gluons, turn into the actual mesons and
baryons observed in experiments? One way to attack the
problem is to consider QCD as a thermodynamical sys-
tem and to study its properties as functions of external
parameters such as temperature and/or density. In this
context, lattice simulations have clearly established that
the low- and high-temperature regimes of QCD are con-
trolled by distinct active degrees of freedom, hadrons on
the one side, and quarks and gluons on the other side [1].
These two regimes are not separated by a sharp transi-
tion, but, rather, a crossover [2].
However, in the formal limit where all quarks are con-
sidered infinitely heavy, this crossover turns into an ac-
tual phase transition, associated with the breaking of a
symmetry, known as the center symmetry [3], and probed
by an order parameter, the Polyakov loop ℓ[4].
The
latter gives access to the energy ∆F ≡−T ln ℓthat it
would cost to bring a static quark probe into a thermal
bath of gluons. A vanishing Polyakov loop, associated
with an explicitly realized center symmetry, corresponds
to the confined phase of the system, where the addition
of an isolated quark is forbidden.
For finite but large
quark masses, the thermal bath contains both quarks and
gluons, but the Polyakov loop keeps its interpretation
and remains a good probe of the distinct phases, as it is
still small in the low temperature phase, indicating that
adding a quark, though not forbidden anymore, remains
energetically very costly.
Still, a natural question arises:
How can adding a
quark into the low-temperature bath be compatible with
the change in the relevant degrees of freedom mentioned
above?
In this Letter, we argue that the possibility
of adding an external static quark probe to the low-
temperature bath is deeply connected to the tendency
of that same medium to form mesons or baryons. To this
purpose, we determine the net quark number gained by
the system in the presence of a quark or antiquark probe
compared to that of the system in the absence of the
probe. We have to distinguish between quark and anti-
quark probes since we allow for a finite quark chemical
potential.
We argue that, in the high-temperature, deconfined
phase, the net quark number gained by the system is
equal to that of the color probe, in line with the fact
that the relevant degrees of freedom are quarks in the
high-temperature phase and, thus, that the color probe
can be added without significantly affecting the bath.
In contrast, in the low-temperature, confined phase, we
find that, depending on the value of the chemical poten-
tial and/or on the considered color probe, the net quark
number gained by the system takes the integer values 0
or 3 compatible with the picture that the medium re-
arranges itself to incorporate the color charge within ac-
ceptable, meson-like or baryon-like configurations, in line
with the fact that the relevant degrees of freedom are not
quarks anymore and that external color probes should be
screened into hadrons.
We
work
in
the
heavy-quark
regime
where
the
Polyakov and anti-Polyakov loops are the most relevant
since they allow for a sharper distinction between the
confined and deconfined phases.
Our argumentation
is largely model independent as it relies only on the
one-loop expression for the matter contribution to the
Polyakov loop potential, a good approximation in the
heavy-quark regime, and on the well-established fact
that the purely gluonic contribution is confining [5–8].
We also argue that some of our findings should hold in
the full QCD case, beyond the heavy-quark regime.
Let us then consider a bath of quarks and gluons at
non-zero temperature T and quark chemical potential µ,
and study the net quark number gained by the system
upon bringing a static quark or antiquark probe, defined
as the quark number of the probe plus the net quark num-
ber response of the bath in the presence of the probe.
The latter can be related to the Polyakov loops as fol-
lows. We know that the increase ∆Fq (resp. ∆F¯q) in the
free-energy of the bath upon bringing the quark (resp.
antiquark) probe is related to the Polyakov loop ℓ(resp.
the anti-Polyakov loop ¯ℓ) as
∆Fq = −T ln ℓ,
resp.
∆F¯q = −T ln ¯ℓ,
(1)
where our choice of units is such that the Boltzmann
constant equals 1.
From this, we deduce that the net
quark number response ∆Qq (resp. ∆Q¯q) of the bath is
∆Qq = T
ℓ
∂ℓ
∂µ ,
resp.
∆Q¯q = T
¯ℓ
∂¯ℓ
∂µ ,
(2)
arXiv:2504.06459v1  [hep-ph]  8 Apr 2025
