To further evaluate the amount of binding thiol onto the surface, the resulting suspension was 
transferred to a 50 ml centrifuge tube and centrifuged at 8,000 rpm for 15 min to drive the 
nanoparticles to sediment. The supernatant solution was withdrawn using a transfer pipette, 
enough ethanol was added to bring the total volume of the suspension back to 50 ml, and the 
mixture was vigorously shaken and centrifuged again. This process was repeated so that three 
centrifuge steps were performed. The washed nanoparticles (thiol-ZnO) were then dried at vacuum 
oven under 60 °C overnight. Finally, the dried particles were weighed and dissolved using 
trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and ¹H-NMR analyzed the resulting solution to determine the amount 
of EDT with a calibration curve to ensure accurate quantification.  
 
Preparation of programmable multiple-modulus gel   
Samples for the experiment were prepared by adding 2100 mg of ZnO to 15 mL DMF by 
ultrasound for 20 seconds and allowed to rest for 30 mins. Then, TTT (20 mmol, 4990 mg, 5.74 
mL), EDT (30 mmol, 5460 mg, 4.89 mL) and Et4NBF4 (1.5 mmol, 325 mg) were added to the 
reaction mixture in a U shape PTFE tunnel sealed with two slides at ends. In this case, multiple 
electric fields were achieved by fixing the position of parallel electrodes separately while 
delivering AC voltage in different configuration across the sample. Three pairs of electrodes with 
configured voltages (4, 12, and 8 Vrms from left to right at 500 Hz) at different positions. 
 
 
Preparation of Electro-adhesive  
In a typical experiment, 210 mg of ZnO was dispersed in 0.5 mL DMF by ultrasound for 20 
seconds and allowed to rest for 30 mins. Two thiol-ene monomers, TTT (2 mmol, 499 mg, 0.574 
mL) and EDT (3 mmol, 546 mg, 0.489 mL) and Et4NBF4 (0.05 mmol, 10.8 mg) were added to the 
reaction mixture in a polypropylene vial.  Finally, 30 uL of mixture was directly employed to ITO 
coated glass which wired with the power sources (AC power supply). A series of 2 AA batteries 
(3 V) were used to supply as DC power source. 
 
Electric field simulation with Python 
The electric field within the thiol-ene solution is numerically simulated using python, based on 
Jacobi relaxation. With the electric potential of the electrodes and far fields fixed, the potential 
field is iteratively updated based on the surrounding fields from the last iteration. The solution to 
the electrostatic potential Laplace’s equation is achieved after thousands of iterations. The thiol-
ene solution was simulated as two-dimensional because it is homogeneous along the vertical axis. 
In the simulation, six electrodes are placed on the long edges of the solution, with fixed voltages 
which are the maximum voltage from the applied AC power. Relaxation time of the electric field 
is at the scale of nano-seconds, which is much faster than the period of the AC power (0.5 ms), so 
that a simulation with fixed voltage represents a moment of the AC circuit and all the other 
moments are only different by the amplitude. The simulated solution follows the shape and size of 
the experimental settings strictly. A grid of 0.1mm is set to achieve high resolution. First the 
electric potential for each grid point is simulated with Jacobi relaxation, and then the electric field 
is calculated based on the potential difference of the neighboring positions. The code of this 
simulation can be found at https://github.com/imechaozhang/Thiol-ene-electric-field-simulaiton. 
Only the magnitude of electric fields is shown in Fig. 4c because the direction of the electric field 
does not make a difference for the nanoparticles in the solution. In the logarithm plot in Fig. 4c, 
the electric field is incremented by 1 V/m in order to take the logarithm values.  
 
