3
T 0
T = 0.5T c
0
T = 1.1T c
0
-1
0
1
2
3
ΔQq+1
ΔQq_-1
0
M/3
2M/3
M
4M/3
μ
FIG. 1. The net quark number gained by the system in the
presence of a quark (solid lines) or an antiquark (dashed lines)
probe, as a function of µ for temperatures below and above the
confinement-deconfinement transition temperature at µ = 0,
T 0
c , for a medium with Nf = 3 degenerate quark flavors of
mass M.
Recall that the above formulas are qualitative esti-
mates which become exact in the T →0 limit. In this
limit, using Eq. (7), we see that ∆Q¯q −1 becomes a
step function equal to −3 for µ < −M/3 and equal to
0 for µ > −M/3, while ∆Qq + 1 becomes a step func-
tion, equal to 0 for µ < M/3 and equal to 3 for µ > M/3,
see the blue curves in Fig. 1 for an illustration in the
range µ ≥0. We stress that this asymptotic T →0 re-
sult should hold as long as the glue potential obeys the
few basic properties listed above. It is tempting to inter-
pret this universal feature as follows.
At low (zero) temperature, adding a static color charge
in the system is only possible at a huge energy cost—as
measured by the smallness of the corresponding Polyakov
loop—which causes a significant rearrangement of the
medium, screening the unwanted isolated color charge
through either a meson-like or a baryon-like configura-
tion, depending on which of these is energetically fa-
vored. At low temperatures, the relevant configurations
are those that minimize the combination H −µQ. For
instance, in the case of a quark probe, a single antiquark
state of the medium yields H −µQ ∼M + µ while a
two-quark state yields H −µQ ∼2M −2µ, where we
have approximated the energy of any heavy quark of the
medium by its rest energy M.
Then, the single anti-
quark state (which produces a meson-like configuration
for the complete system) is favored against the two-quark
state (which produces a baryon-like configuration) for
µ ≲M/3, including µ < 0, and vice-versa for µ ≳M/3.
These results seem quite intuitive.
Indeed, for µ < 0,
there is always an excess of antiquarks in the medium,
so it is simpler for the quark probe to form a meson-
like configuration with the particles of the bath than a
baryon-like configuration. As µ becomes positive, there
is now an excess of quarks, but if µ is not too large,
it is still simpler for the quark probe to form a meson-
like configuration with the particles of the bath.
It is
only above µ = M/3 that the excess of quarks is such
that, out of number, it becomes more favorable for the
quark probe to form a baryon-like configuration with the
particles of the bath. The same conclusions hold for an
antiquark probe upon changing µ →−µ. In particular,
for µ ≥0, the meson-like configuration is always favored
in this case, see the Fig. 1.
The previous analysis can be extended to the SU(N)
case. We get
∆Qq + 1 ≃
N
1 + e−NβµfβM/f(N−1)βM
,
(14)
∆Q¯q −1 ≃
−(N −1)
1 + eNβµfβM/f(N−1)βM
.
(15)
Details will be given elsewhere, together with an exten-
sion of the discussion to color probes in other represen-
tations. Here, we would like to stress that, for µ ≥0,
bringing an antiquark into the bath always leads the lat-
ter to provide a quark, ∆Q¯q −1 = 0, which we inter-
pret as the system forming a meson-like configuration to
screen the color probe. In contrast, bringing a quark into
the bath leads the latter either to provide an antiquark
∆Qq + 1 = 0, which we interpret as the system forming
a meson-like configuration, or to provide N −1 quarks,
∆Qq + 1 = N, which we interpret as the system form-
ing a baryon-like configuration. From Eq. (14), the value
of µ above which it becomes more favorable to form a
baryon-like configuration is found to be
µ =

1 −2
N

M ,
(16)
which corresponds to M/3 in the SU(3) case; see Fig. 1,
and which is easily understood from similar energetic
considerations as above, recalling that a baryon is made
of N quarks in that case. Note that, for N = 2, one finds
µ = 0.
This is expected because the representations 2
and ¯2 are equivalent. Thus, from the color point of view,
forming a meson-like configuration is then equally prob-
able as forming a baryon-like configuration.
Let us now consider what happens when |µ| > M.
The approximation (6) is not valid in this case, but
we can directly consider the equations that determine
ℓand ¯ℓ, with integrals involving either X ≡e−β(εq−µ) or
Y ≡e−β(εq+µ). Then, for µ ≥M, for instance, while the
integrals involving Y are still exponentially suppressed
as T →0, we find numerically that those involving X are
power-law suppressed and dominate over the power-law
suppression of Vglue. In this case, the low-temperature
limit is dominated by the quark contribution, which has
a saddle point at (ℓ, ¯ℓ) = (1, 1).
The same occurs for
µ ≤−M by changing the role of X and Y . It follows
