3
combined with other segments of the weakly secure ran-
dom sequence, contribute to forming the final bit-string,
which approaches a state of near-perfect security and ran-
domness.
The above idea is due to the seminal result of R. Ren-
ner and R. Colbeck. They proposed the notion of pri-
vate randomness amplification, showcasing the potential
to achieve nearly ideal private randomness by ideally vi-
olating the chained Bell inequality [38] using device in-
puts from the ϵ-SV source, assuming ϵ < 0.058. In [6],
this range expanded to ϵ ≈0.0961. Furthermore, [8] il-
lustrated a protocol utilizing a distinct Bell inequality to
amplify randomness for any ϵ ∈(0, 1
2). However, this ap-
proach necessitates numerous non-signaling devices and
lacks noise tolerance. Remarkably, [9] introduced a noise-
tolerant protocol achieving similar results but with a fi-
nite device count.
The protocol given in [39] achieved further private ran-
domness amplification under minimal assumptions based
on two non-signaling components of a device, such that
only specific inputs generate outcomes partially uncor-
related from the non-signaling adversary.
The results
of [9, 39] rely on the premise that the adversary lacked
knowledge of the weakly private source; they could only
know a parameter of the source (i.e., “e” in Eq. (1), not
specific values of the sequence. The previous unrealistic
assumption was later replaced in [12] by the idea of the
”privatization” of a source of weakly private randomness.
Specifically, the source generates its bits individually and
makes them publicly available to both the honest parties
and the adversary. However, before their disclosure, all
parties, including the adversary, were only aware of the
parameter ϵ.
A more realistic but hard-to-work-with model of a
source of weak randomness is the min-entropy source.
It is described by a single condition—a lower bound on
the maximal probability. A k-min-entropy source satis-
fies log2 maxi pi ≥k where the maximum is taken over
all events that realize the source. A practical random-
ness amplification using only one two-component device
and a min-entropy source with two blocks having each
enough min-entropy has been given recently in [40].
In contrast, the SV-source model transfers the com-
plexity of the tests to the conditions imposed on the clas-
sical source of weak randomness. Such requirements urge
researchers to delve into new phenomena wherein the
physical context ensures them. Our work exploits novel
physical phenomenologies along this line of research, mo-
tivating further advancements in randomness amplifica-
tion protocols.
II.
MOTIVATION AND MAIN RESULTS
Since neither uniformity nor privacy of a given source
of randomness can be proven, it always has to be assumed
that a given source of randomness is weakly secure. How-
ever, further, one needs to attribute some parameter—a
real number, which gives us an estimate of to what ex-
tent a given source is random. As it was stated in [13]:
“Whether a string is random or not is ultimately not a
property of the string itself, but on how it is generated”.
For this reason, the way to attribute the physical param-
eter that reports the quality of the randomness, should
be the same for all bit-strings of the same length, under
the assumption that it is generated by some SV source.
The first attempt to attribute the quality parameter to
the supposed-to-be SV source was done in [11], however,
in a heuristic manner and modeling a post-processed hu-
man’s heartbeat.
In what follows, we provide natural axioms that such
attributed ϵ should satisfy, providing several other def-
initions of ϵ that satisfy the axioms.
We also provide
software, that computes their value. Using this software,
we further compute the value of ϵ modeling the Earth
vibration (local and global separately) as the ϵ-Santha
Vazirani source. The results are promising since there
exist quantum-proof extractors that could further am-
plify the privacy of this particular source of randomness.
Our choice of weakly random bits has an important
feature: it is practically impossible for a manufacturer
to correlate an amplifying device with the values of the
bits to profound seismic events. This fact is essential, as
otherwise attacks on devices are known, and there does
not exist a complete countermeasure against such attacks
[41].
It is worth emphasizing that in addition to theoretical
and numerical results, we have delivered an open source
software for estimating the privacy of a weakly random
source modeled as the Santha-Vazirani source. Its de-
scription is in the latter part of the paper (see Section
V).
It is important to relate our test to existing tests avail-
able online.
There are two similar, however, different
approaches, which are worth mentioning here. The first
is the so-called serial test from the seminal NIST test
suite [42]. The serial test is focused on checking the fre-
quency of all overlapping bit sequences of length h. The
three main differences in comparison to our tests are the
following:
• we calculate conditional values instead of frequen-
cies,
• we use the maximal absolute deviation instead of
average square deviation, and
• we do not use the cyclic approach at the end of the
sequence.
Also, the NIST test suite was developed to check pseudo-
random sequences to use them directly in classical al-
gorithms. That approach demands the sequence to be
almost perfectly random. On the other hand, since we
apply the quantum randomness amplification method, it
is enough that the sequence is partially random, assum-
ing that we know the threshold ϵ.
