Generic deformation channels for critical Fermi surfaces including the impact of collisions
Kazi Ranjibul Islam∗
School of Physics and Astronomy and William I. Fine Theoretical Physics Institute,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
Ipsita Mandal†
Department of Physics, Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence (SNIoE),
Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh 201314, India
This paper constitutes a sequel to our theoretical efforts to determine the nature of the generic
low-energy deformations of the Fermi surface of a quantum-critical metal, which arises at the stable
non-Fermi liquid (NFL) fixed point of a quantum phase transition. The emergent critical Fermi
surface, arising right at the Ising-nematic quantum critical point (QCP), is a paradigmatic example
where an NFL behaviour is induced by the strong interactions of the fermionic degrees of freedom
with those of the bosonic order parameter. It is an artifact of the bosonic modes becoming massless
at the QCP, thus undergoing Landau damping at the level of one-loop self-energy. We resort to the
well-tested formalism of the quantum Boltzmann equations (QBEs) for identifying the excitations.
While in our earlier works, we have focussed on the collisionless regime by neglecting the collision
integral and assuming the bosons to be in equilibrium, here we embark on a full analysis.
In
particular, we take into account the bosonic part of the QBEs. The final results show that that the
emergent modes are long-lived and robust against the damping effects brought about the collision
integral(s), exhibiting the same qualitative features as obtained from the no-collision approximations.
CONTENTS
I. Introduction
1
II. Model
2
A. Keldysh formalism
4
B. Equilibrium properties and generalized distribution functions
4
III. Solutions to the quantum Boltzmann equations
5
A. Fermionic QBE when the critical Bosons are at equilibrium
6
B. Bosons away from the equilibrium
8
IV. Discussions, summary, and future outlook
10
A. Assorted Green’s functions in the Keldysh formalism
10
B. Equilibrium Green’s functions and spectral properties
11
C. Fermionic part of the QBEs
12
D. Fermionic part of the QBEs with the bosons assumed to be in equilibrium
13
References
13
I.
INTRODUCTION
Non-Fermi liquid (NFL) metals are one of the most prominent representatives of the consequences of strong correlations
in condensed matter systems [1–11], defying analytical investigations using conventional theories. In particular, Landau’s
Fermi liquid theory, which explains normal metals extremely well, break down for the case of NFLs, caused by the
destruction of the Landau quasiparticles. Consequently, they possess strange thermodynamical and transport properties
[12–17], being starkly distinct from those of the normal metals.
One such characteristic involves the resistivity not
having a quadratic-in-T dependence, which is a hallmark property of Fermi liquids (describing normal metals). Other
∗islam074@umn.edu
† ipsita.mandal@snu.edu.in
arXiv:2504.06945v1  [cond-mat.str-el]  9 Apr 2025
