Different number of degrees of freedom. If the EFT cutoff is given by the Planck mass
(or slightly lower due to coupling with matter), then the EFT of GR does not predict extra
degrees of freedom in addition to the massless spin-two graviton at energy scales E ≪Mp. In
contrast, quadratic gravity predicts the existence of new degrees of freedom that can be active
already at energy scales of the order of their masses, i.e. m0 = Mp/√c0 and m2 = Mp/√c2, whose
values are sub-Planckian since the coefficients c0 and c2 are required to be large in order to have
a well-behaved perturbative expansion in quadratic gravity. The presence of additional massive
degrees of freedom is one reason why quadratic gravity represents a perturbative QFT-based
completion of GR.
From this comparison between the EFT of GR and quadratic gravity, it should now be clear
that the latter can describe new physics in the sub-Planckian regime, e.g. in the early universe, as
we will explain in Sec. 3. Furthermore, the above discussion is also useful to contrast the old view
of strict renormalizability as a selection principle with the modern view that all QFTs, including
the strictly renormalizable ones, are just EFTs [73–75,34]; see also the end of Sec. 5.
2.3
Uniqueness
The criterion of strict renormalizability avoids the proliferation of higher-order operators in the
bare Lagrangian. Having a finite number of parameters makes the theory much more predictive
and falsifiable. It is important to emphasize again that in four spacetime dimensions quadratic
gravity is a unique strictly renormalizable gravitational QFT [39,5], which is expected to recover
GR in the low-energy regime (i.e. for energies lower than m0 and m2), is metric compatible, has
zero torsion and respects the symmetries of GR. This means that if future experiments or obser-
vations falsify quadratic gravity, we will then be forced to modify some of the starting principles.
It is worth mentioning that if we remove the Einstein-Hilbert term from (7), we are left with a
purely quadratic Lagrangian that is still strictly renormalizable. However, in this case GR cannot
be recovered at low energies, unless the Einstein-Hilbert term is induced via a matter coupling [76].
If we remove the R2 term as well, we are left with the Lagrangian of conformal gravity (in
four dimensions) [77], which is non-renormalizable from two loops [78, 79]. Furthermore, if we
introduce non-metricity and a non-zero torsion we might still achieve strict renormalizability [80,
81]. Similarly, if we break local Lorentz invariance we might still hope to find renormalizable
Lagrangians [82]. However, as soon as we depart from the geometric and symmetry properties
of GR, we open up a wider class of possibilities and lose uniqueness. From this point of view,
quadratic gravity is the most conservative quantum theory of gravity we can conceive.
This uniqueness property excludes also super-renormalizable and/or non-local QFTs of grav-
ity [83]. In fact, if we admit the presence of derivatives of order higher than four or of non-
polynomial differential operators, there exists an infinite number of gravitational bare Lagrangians
that are either local and super-renormalizable [84, 58] or non-local and renormalizable [85, 86].
10
