12
where
φ0 =τω + (1 −τ),
(B2)
φ =τω + (1 −τ)(V + 1),
(B3)
ψ =
p
τ(ω2 −1),
(B4)
where ω is Eve’s noise variance, V is the Gaussian clas-
sical modulation, τ is the transmissivity of the channel.
For the case of direct reconciliation and heterodyne de-
tection, the associated conditional CM is given by
VE|x =
 
φ0I ψZ
ψZ ωI
!
.
(B5)
Appendix C: Other results
We now investigate the behaviour of the protocols, in
terms of the secret key rate against losses, assuming ei-
ther a diﬀerent successful EC probability, block size, or
digitization parameter. For example, we see that chang-
ing the pec from 0.9 to 0.4 aﬀects the performance of
both reconciliation directions: in Figs. 5 and 6, we see a
considerable drop in terms of the rate but a minimal im-
provement in loss tolerance compared to Figs.
1 and 2,
respectively.
In Figs. 7 and 8, we doubled the block size to 4 × 105
compared to Figs.
1 and 2,respectively. Here we see an
improvement in the performance and loss tolerance: we
obtain rates almost in the 3/2 amount or more of loss
in both cases compared to Figs.
1 and 2, respectively.
However, the amount of M ∗
sparse required is almost dou-
bled as expected by the linear dependence of M ∗
sparse on
block size.
When one increases the digitization parameter (here
from d = 4 to 6), the performance also increases along
with the loss tolerance. We show this tendency in Figs. 9
and 10 for both protocols, respectively. In particular, the
tolerable loss is larger than the double in Figs. 1 and 2.
In addition, the leakage and M ∗
sparse increase slightly.
This means that by increasing the digitization param-
eter, we can obtain similar performance as by increasing
the block size avoiding large storage requirements.
Increasing the digitization means that ζdigit approaches
1.
In other words, the parties can exploit almost the
whole amount of the CV mutual information available
to them.
This is why CV are advantageous especially
for small loss. However, the terms ∆ǫs
aep and ∆ǫec
leak (also
expressed through ζleak) increase with larger digitization
parameters. This will lead to a saturation point for the
secret key rate performance and loss tolerance.
Finally, in Fig. 11, we plot the secret key rate for the
RR protocol against the block size for dB = 2. We ob-
serve that the RR protocol can tolerate higher losses.
