Ship-track studies are usually based on snapshot observations by polar orbiting
satellites that usually pass over clouds at fixed time of the day. Such observations
are thought to be unable to capture temporal evolution of CF and L adjustments to
aerosols , especially due to diel changes in solar heating[5]. Strong diel changes of cloud
adjustments would imply observational constraints based on ship-tracks sampled by
snapthots may be biased. For example, since L adjustment under nocturnal conditions
in a model strongly decreases with time due to enhanced entrainment, Glassmeier
et al. [18] suggest day-time ship-tracks studies may underestimate the negative L
adjustment. Other modeling studies also show that both L and CF adjustments change
with time, but their temporal evolutions are non-monotonic for the full diel cycle [19–
21]. Observational studies of temporal evolutions of cloud adjustments in opportunistic
experiments are still relatively rare. A case study shows L adjustment becomes less
negative in the afternoon compared to morning [22], which is supported by analysis
of large ship-tracks and virtual ship-tracks [8, 16, 23]. Evidence of the strong decrease
of L with time is not found in long-lasting pollution tracks [24].
Strong temporal evolutions of cloud adjustments to aerosols have important
implications for aerosol-cloud interaction studies and how to improve observational
constraints from opportunistic experiments. In this study, we show substantial diel
changes in CF and L adjustments and assess their impact on estimated aerosol effec-
tive radiative forcing. We develop novel methods to determine the ages of ship-track
segments and analyze cloud adjustments as a function of time since ship-emitted
aerosols are first introduced into ship-track segments. Analysis of age-tagged ship-
track segments reveal strong CF adjustment diel changes while temporal evolutions
of L adjustment is non-monotonic and their impact on forcing more muted.
2 Determining the age of a ship-track segment
Our study region is the Northeast Pacific (25o −60oN, 110o −165oW) within 250
miles of the coast between 2009 and 2021. We develop algorithms to automatically
determine the age of each qualified ship-track segment [23]. First, we produce virtual
ship-tracks by advecting ship-emissions for every large ship in the area that sailed
within 24 hours before the Aqua Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer
(MODIS) overpass time [7, 8, 16]. The ship emission time and location are based on
high-resolution Automatic Identification System (AIS) data. We drive the HYSPLIT
model with reanalysis meteorology fields to produce virtual ship-tracks. Virtual ship-
tracks are then matched with detected ship-tracks observed by Aqua MODIS [17].
Each matched ship-track is divided into 30-km long segments [25], whose age is the
time difference between its emission time and MODIS overpass time. At the time
of MODIS overpass, we can thus differentiate ship-track segments that are formed
during the nighttime from those only experience daytime conditions. For each segment,
our algorithm automatically obtains L, Nd, CF and other variables for both the
background and polluted clouds to derive cloud adjustments [7] (Figure 1). We refer
to the Method section for more details.
3
