libraries to higher-order calculations offers a convenient method to distribute precision pre-
dictions. To this end, the ploughshare project2 provides a central location to distribute such
grids. Although the number of publicly available grids is still limited, steady progress is being
made with interfaces to various parton-level Monte Carlo tools being implemented to make the
production of such grids accessible to the general public.
Below, we discuss some aspects of higher-order computations.
2.1
Parton distribution functions
One of the key elements in improving the accuracy of theoretical predictions at the LHC lies
in the determination of parton distribution functions (PDFs). PDFs are most commonly deter-
mined by global fits to experimental data, taking into account the experimental errors in the
data. The standard now is for the PDFs to be determined at NNLO QCD, although fits at
NLO QCD and LO are still available. It is encouraged to use NLO QCD (or even NNLO QCD)
PDFs where possible, even for computation of lower perturbative accuracy. The results of the
global fits are central values for each flavor PDF, along with an estimate of the PDF uncertainty,
dominated by the input experimental errors for the data included in the fit. The formalism used
in the fit can either be Hessian [11, 12] or based on Monte Carlo replicas [13]. The number of
data points included in the global PDF fits is typically of the order of 3000–4000 from a wide
range of processes. Diagnostic tools, such as the L2 sensitivity [14], have been developed to
allow a detailed examination of how the interplay between the different data sets used in global
PDF fits determine both the PDFs and their uncertainties. Lattice gauge theory has reached a
level of precision where information from such calculations has provided useful input for PDF
determination, especially at large x [15]. This will continue to improve.
In 2021-22, a benchmarking exercise was conducted using the CT18, MSHT20, NNPDF3.1/4.0
PDFs, and a combination (PDF4LHC21 [16]) was formed, using Monte Carlo replicas generated
from each of the three PDF sets. As the benchmarking exercise continued over the transition
from NNPDF3.1 to NNPDF4.0, an updated version of 3.1 was used which utilized some of the
key new data sets added to 4.0 (and already present in CT18 and MSHT20). PDF4LHC21
PDF sets are available either in a 40 member Hessian format, or a 100 member Monte Carlo
replica format. The PDF4LHC21 PDFs show a reduction in uncertainty from the combined
PDFs determined in 2015, but perhaps not to the extent that may have been expected through
the introduction of a variety of new LHC data. This is partially due to the central values of the
three input PDFs not coinciding exactly, and partially because the tensions between the data
sets that limit the resultant possible uncertainty.3 The PDF4LHC21 PDF sets are appropriate
for use in general predictions for state-of-the-art calculations, and indeed the prior PDF4LHC15
PDFs have been used in just that way.
More recently, the ABMP PDFs were updated, with a emphasis on the impact of LHC
top quark data [19].
Many differential cross section measurements from the LHC have been included in the PDF
determination. This was made possible by the NNLOQCD calculations of the relevant 2 →2
matrix elements that have been discussed in past iterations of the wishlist. For use in calculations
at N3LO, several of which are discussed here, nominally N3LO PDFs would be needed.
As
they are not yet available, NNLO PDFs are used in their stead with an unknown uncertainty
introduced into the predictions as a result. This has a non-negligible impact on the Higgs cross
section at N3LO through gluon–gluon fusion, for example. Indeed, this mis-match in order leads
2https://ploughshare.web.cern.ch
3Ref. [17] points out one problem that PDF fits may face is the bias that results from improper sampling in
very large data spaces. The bias can not only result in an underestimate of the true uncertainty, but also an
incorrect central PDF. An alternative perspective is provided by Ref. [18]
4
