PAGIONO
An ionospheric activity index
Dr.Paul.Kinsler@physics.org
timescale. Currently the processing encompasses the GPS,
GALILEO, BEIDOU, and GLONASS constellations. In our
analysis that follows, the calculation of dTEC, and its tem-
poral or spatial variation, is key to revealing GNSS-relevant
ionospheric disturbances.
IV.
DATA HANDLING
The accumulated dTEC data, or specific subsets (“slices”)
thereof were then used to create frequency histograms of
signed dTEC values. As indicated in the Motivation, although
it might seem more straightforward to simply calculate mo-
ments of these data samples, in some cases we cannot be sure
in advance whether such moments will adequately represent
the underlying physics, due to the possible presence of power-
law tails with low-value exponents. Instead, we just fit each
data slice to a simple empirical model. This model was cho-
sen after experimentation with different and variously compli-
cated fitting functions.
A.
Data subsets and slices
For the statistical analysis, the available dTEC data is di-
vided 1 into slices along any combination of four separate
axes:
Hours: each hour extends from 0 minutes 0 seconds through
to 59 minutes 59.˙9 seconds,
Degrees longitudes: we use 30 degree divisions (“dode-
cants”, or twelfths of the globe), and the associated di-
vision extends to 15 degrees west of the central value,
and up to but not including 15 degrees east of the central
value,
Magnetic latitudes: separate all latitudes into five divisions,
low, medium (north and south), high (north and south)
according to a sinusoidal fit to the magnetic latitude
(“mlz”), as depicted – and justified – on Fig. 1.
Band pair: covers all possible pair-wise combination of the
broadcast GNSS signals.
These divisions, along with their defined labels and values
are all listed on table I, which also lists some derived alternate
divisions, namely two-hour slices and local (or solar) times.
These allow a total of 24x12x5x32, i.e. over 45 thousand
(45k) potential slices.
Owing to the erratic geographic spread of ground stations,
their signals availabilty, these slices do not always contain
enough events for consistent sampling and reliable analysis.
We therefore also compute aggregate properties, i.e. based
on dividing over only three, two, or one of the data divisions.
This gives us extra slices to consider, leading to about 64k
combinations in total. Note that – as explained later – we nor-
malise against the different responses of the band pairs, and
1 Terminology: “dividing”/“division” refers to a restriction along some axis
(eg setting T05), and a slice is the result of one or several divisions (e.g.
at T05, lonc:090, mlz:1n, and lpair:*) ... We reserve “bin” for use when
referring the assignment of dTEC values into sub-intervals for histograms.
Category
Label
allowed values
UTC hours
T
T00, T01, T02, .., T23
Longitude
lonc
000, 030, 060, .., 330
Magnetic
latitude
mlz
0, 1n, 1s, 2n, 2s
Band pair
lpair
L1CL2C L1CL6C L1DL5D
L1DL7D L1IL6I L1IL7I
L1LL2L L1PL2P L1PL5P
L1WL2W L1XL2X L1XL5X
L1XL6X L1XL7X L1XL8X
L2IL6I L2IL7I L2XL5X
L2XL6X L2XL7X L5DL7D
L5IL7I L5QL7Q L5QL8Q
L5XL6X L5XL7X L5XL8X
L6IL7I L6XL7X L6XL8X
L7QL8Q L7XL8X
§ UTC 2 hours
D
D00, D01, D02, .., D11
§ Local time,
2 hours
S
S00, S01, S02, .., S11
TABLE I. Labels used to specify the data divisions. For magnetic lat-
itudes, we use “0” to indicate low latitudes, “1n” and “1s” for north-
ern and southern mid latitudes, and “2n” and “2s” for high magnetic
latitudes. Longitude slices are centred on the degree position speci-
fied, but time slices start at the hour specified. The two lines marked
§ (for 2-hour slices), are derived during postprocessing to aid analy-
sis.
so most of our analyses will put results from any band pair in
the same slice; thus the number of slices ordinarily considered
is reduced to about 2k.
There is a key tradeoff here, which we have tried to bridge
by using both fully divided data and aggregated data. Because
of the highly contingent nature of signal availability and re-
ception, and of ionospheric properties, at different times or lo-
cations, we cannot always reliably assume that a distribution is
perfectly representative, even if the slice contains a large num-
ber of dTEC samples. However, it is difficult to sample even
the relatively coarse zones adequately if we insist on the quiet
conditions needed for a “nothing happening” reference. No-
tably, we find many more recorded events in northern latitude
(sometimes even eight times more at high north compared to
high south); which is a key reason why we choose our divi-
sions to distinguish between northern and southern mid and
high magnetic latitudes. Without such a division, an apparent
“all high latitudes” result would in fact contain a significant
bias towards northern high latitudes. Likewise, aggregated
event counts in our longitude divisions vary by up to a fac-
tor of five between the highest (for lonc:000) and the lowest
(for lonc:180, 210, 330).
Notwithstanding these sampling concerns, by allowing
slices localized in both space and time, we can still track
moving disturbances, as well as follow more generic sun-
following ionospheric features; thus enabling useful predic-
tive capability.
4
