12
the Landau interaction function and the scattering vertex, a.k.a the non-analytic tempera-
ture corrections to the FLT, become discontinuities while approaching the quantum critical
manifold at T →0 [52].
To obtain the scaling exponents for the Fermi liquid we first use the Luttinger theorem
to relate the spectrum of the non-interacting fermions and the Fermi energy. As a result we
recover the critical indices ν′, z of the free-fermionic case (29). The index β = dν′ follows
directly from geometry. The compressibility (B11) of the Fermi liquid is renormalized by
interactions:
χ0 = ∂¯n
∂µ = dΩd
(2π)dm1 + F1
1 + F0
kd−2
F
,
d = 2, 3,
(34)
where F0,1 are the components of the expansion of the angular-dependent Landau inter-
action function f into the series over Legendre polynomials (d = 3) or Fourier harmonics
(d = 2), see, e.g., [49, 50]. The interactions generate additional corrections to the perfect
scaling law χ0 ∝kd−2
F
in 3d, since the dimensionless couplings F0,1 in (34) are defined via
the dimensionful Landau interaction function f multiplied by the density of states at the
Fermi level N(µ) ∝kd−2
F
. Those corrections are irrelevant near the critical point kF →0,
yielding the non-interacting index γ. With the indices ν′, z, β, γ, the rest follows from the
(hyper)scaling relations, and we end up with the result (29) for d = 2, 3.
Before we proceed, one refinement not related to the interactions per se, needs to be done.
In the standard derivations of the FLT or in the above discussions, it is assumed that we
are dealing with one fermionic band, which is partially filled with the Fermi sea. In case of
lattice fermions with several bands (like, e.g. the ladder considered in Sec. II), the Luttinger
theorem (33) needs to be stated in a more general way to account for the contribution into
the total particle number ¯N from the fully filled bands ¯ni:
¯n =
¯N
V =
X
i
¯ni +
Ωd
(2π)dkd
F , T = 0.
(35)
In case of disconnected Fermi seas, their d-volumes must be added on the r.h.s. of (35). In
general those contributions could be more complicated than the volume of d-ball explicitly
used in (35). The relevant point is that turning on interactions does not change the total
volume of the Fermi sea.
In 1d interactions destroy the Fermi liquid, but the Fermi sea survives and even preserves
its volume in the k-space. To follow up the role of interactions let us consider the antiferro-
magnetic XXZ Heisenberg chain in the transverse field within the interaction (anisotropy)
range −1 ≤∆≤0, ∆≡−Jz/J. The model is integrable, and its phase diagram is known
[53]. In the free fermionic limit ∆= 0 it is the transverse XX chain. The latter is the
limit δ = t⊥= µa = 0 of the model (2). Interactions in the range |∆| ≤1 do not change
qualitatively the phase diagram of the XXZ chain in transverse field with respect to its
free fermionic XX counterpart. It is in agreement with the plateau theorem (1). Without
modulations in the chain (P = 1) the first gapped phase (plateau at M = 0) is absent,
while the critical field hc = 1 −∆for the plateau at M = 1/2 in the polarized gapped
phase, is renormalized due to interactions. Compare to Fig. 2c. However, the fundamental
difference is that the gapless IC phase of the XXZ chain in the range 0 ≤h ≤hc is the TLL.
Magnetization near the Lifshitz critical point hc where the Fermi sea vanishes (kF →0), is
known exactly [54]:
M ≈1
2 −
√
2
π
p
hc −h ,
h →h−
c .
(36)
Up to the critical field renormalization, it is the same result as for free fermions. It yields
