9
the center engine.
That is, if the central engine im-
pulsively shines while the jet itself continues to radi-
ate through the dissipation process, then the observed
duration of radiation is attributed to jet’s own activ-
ity but not the progenitor or central engine’s activity.
Such a light curve would have an overall broad pulse
profile, with the property of “softer wider, softer later”.
In this case, we cannot determine the duration of the
central engine activity, so neither NS-NS merger nor
WD-NS merger can be ruled out.
The typical model
is the internal collision-induced magnetic reconnection
and turbulence (ICMART) model, as used to explain
GRB 230307A (Yi et al. 2023).
5.3. Extended emission
If the main emission is explained by the accretion of a
magnetar, then the extended emission can be explained
by subsequent magnetar activity.
We perform the time-resolved spectrum fitting of the
extended emission of four Type IL GRBs, using the CPL
model for GRB 211211A and the PL model for GRB
170228A, GRB 200914A and GRB 200311A due to the
low statistic, and obtain the flux light curve. Then we
perform an empirical fit to the extended emission flux
light curve with a smoothed broken power-law(SBPL)
model,
F = (F −ω
1
+ F −ω
2
)−1/ω,
(4)
where F1 = A(t/tb)α1, F2 = A(t/tb)α2. The power
law slopes before and after break time tb are α1 and α2,
respectively, and A is the normalization coefficient at tb.
ω describes the sharpness of the break at tb, and is fixed
to 10 in our fits. The fit of flux light curves is shown in
Fig. 9a. Overall, the extended emission of Type IL GRB
exhibits the power-law decay following a flat plateau.
The exception comes from GRB 170228A, which does
not show the power-law decay after the plateau, prob-
ably because the intense of the decay stage is below
the detection limit, as its flux is lower than other three
GRBs in Fig. 9a.
Except for the extended emission of GRB 230307A,
which is explained as a high-latitude effect, the ex-
tended emission of GRB 211211A was explained by the
differential-rotation-induced magnetic bubbles model
(Yang et al. 2022), which may also be suitable for the
remaining three Type IL GRBs. However, here we still
explore the possibilities for other models.
The magnetar spin-down model has been widely in-
voked to interpret extended emission, and it seems to
coherently explain the extended emission of Type IL
GRBs (Sun et al. 2025; L¨u et al. 2020). The magnetar
loses rotational energy through electromagnetic radia-
tion (magnetic dipole radiation), with the luminosity of
the extended emission showing a plateau followed by a
power-law decay characteristic with a slope of -2 (Zhang
2018; Lasky & Glampedakis 2016; L¨u et al. 2018).
L =



L0,
t ≪τc,em
L0

1 +
t
τc,em
−2
, t ≫τc,em
(5)
where L0 is the initial luminosity,
L0 = (1.0 × 1049 erg s−1)B2
p,15P −4
0,−3R6
6
(6)
τc,em is the characteristic spin-down timescales for
electromagnetic radiation,
τc,em = (2.1 × 103 s)I45B−2
p,15P 2
0,−3R−6
6
(7)
The model describes the data very well, with the only
potential problem being that the break time is some-
what small, resulting a small τc,em, which requires the
magnetar to have either a smaller period or a stronger
magnetic field. However, the energy range of the flux in
our calculation might be too high, and the break time
would be delayed if it were in the Swift/XRT energy
range, resulting in the parameter falling within a rea-
sonable space.
In addition to the magnetic dipole radiation, an-
other model invokes the relativistic stellar wind, which
extracts rotational energy from the original magnetar
(Metzger et al. 2008). But this kind of model exhibits
extended emission of hump-shaped, which is not consis-
tent with power-law decay behavior.
Additionally, some models consider that the extended
emission is generated by the interaction between the
magnetosphere and the accretion disk, rather than the
radiation from the magnetar itself (Gompertz et al.
2014; Gibson et al. 2017). Their central engine invokes
a magnetar surrounded by a fallback accretion disk, ei-
ther formed from the merger of two compact objects or
from a WD’s accretion-induced collapse. During the ex-
tended emission phase, material is accelerated to super-
Keplarian velocities and ejected from the system by the
rapidly rotating and very strong magnetic field in a pro-
cess known as magnetic propellering. The total lumi-
nosity consists of contributions from both propeller lu-
minosity and magnetic dipole radiation luminosity. The
disk is formed by the fallback accretion. During the co-
alescence process, some material is expelled due to tidal
disruption and then re-falls for accretion assuming the
accretion disk appears at t = 0 s, which means that
accretion starts immediately and is at its peak inten-
sity. In reality, material is still in the fallback period
initially, thus, accretion is initially much gentler; how-
ever, as the accretion increases, the intensity also grows.
