3
FIG. 1: (a) Spatial distribution proﬁle of electron density at
Reticle Mini-Environment (RME) [21, 23] when EUV power is
ON for < 100 ns within a single EUV pulse of 20 µs duration.
The yellow dash arrow indicates the EUV-beam path.
(b)
The afterglow phase at the end of 20 µs EUV pulse when
EUV power is OFF. (c) Two distinct types of particle charging
mechanisms which depend on particle location within RME
and EUV pulse timing (see text) (d) The charge variation
with time (/pulse) for 100 nm particle is shown at the location
inside and outside EUV beam.
result of such conversion, the steepest increase of popula-
tion of positively charged particles is observed (∼0.9%).
Phase - 1 is the shortest period which is followed by phase
- 2 which exists between 100 ns and 4µs. At the begin-
ning of phase - 2 (< 100ns), the population of neutral
particles decays at very slow rate (compared to phase -
1) whereas that of negatively charged particles sharply
FIG. 2: Typical population characteristics of charged (pos-
tive: red and negative: blue) and neutral (white) particles
are shown in the two regimes mentioned in Figure 1a (EUV
power ON) and Figure 1b (at the end of 20 µs EUV pulse
when EUV power is OFF) for diﬀerent particle sizes: 100 nm
(a-b), 1 µm (c-d) and 10 µm (e-f).
increases and return back to its initial value at the be-
ginning of pulse. In this time period the population of
positively charged particles almost remains same. After
this initial time scale within phase - 2, the population
of positively charged particles decreases steadily due to
fast charge reduction and they immigrate to the popu-
lation of neutral partices. But outside the EUV beam
path, the population of negatively charged particles in-
creases shaprly at the expense of neutral particles popula-
tion. At the end of phase-2, the population of nagatively
charged particle reaches maximum and that of neutral
particles reaches minimum. After completion of phase -
2, the phase - 3 period triggers which is the longest pe-
riod and lies between 4µs and 20µs. In this phase almost
all the positively charged particles lose their charge and
dynamic immigration happens from population of posi-
tively charged particles towards neutral particles. This
is evident from the population plots of neutral and posi-
tively charged particles. On the other hand, in this phase
the population of negatively charged particles almost re-
mains in saturation for ∼6 µs and then slowly starts to
decline due to conversion from negative to neutral parti-
cles as observed in Figure 3. During such fast transient
