Regarding the actual establishment of metropolitan communication networks based on the security
of the MDI-QKD protocol, many advances have already been made, including the construction of a
star-type quantum network in a metropolitan area of 200-square-km, which in addition to providing a
high transmission bit rate, also proven to be safe against detection attacks [423]. MDI-QKD has been
implemented in quantum channels that coexist in the same fiber with classical data channels [424, 425].
5.4. Detector-device-independent quantum key distribution
As discussed in the previous section, implementing the MDI-QKD protocol requires the interference
of photons from two separate lasers, making its implementation more challenging than conventional QKD
schemes. Another issue lies in the finite-key analysis, which demands a relatively large post-processing
data block to achieve optimal performance.
To address these challenges, an alternative approach called detector-device-independent QKD (DDI-
QKD) has been proposed [426–428]. While DDI-QKD shares a similar conceptual framework with MDI-
QKD, it differs in its use of a ‘black box’ model.
In this method, Alice and Bob ensure that their
measurement systems do not leak any unwanted information to external sources. This is accomplished,
in principle, by replacing the measurement apparatus in Bob’s laboratory with a device built by them
but not necessarily characterized. Additionally, DDI-QKD replaces the two-photon Bell state measure-
ment (BSM) with a 2-qubit single-photon BSM, eliminating the need for two-photon interference from
independent light sources.
An example of such a protocol works as follows: Alice encodes BB84 polarization states in single
photons, which she sends to Bob. Bob encodes his information into the spatial degree of freedom of
the incoming photons (two modes). This is achieved using a 50:50 beam splitter along with a phase
modulator that applies a random phase to each incoming signal. Bob then performs a BSM on the two
qubits (polarization, spatial modes) to project each input photon into a Bell state. The remaining steps
of the protocol are identical to MDI-QKD.
Despite the anticipated strong performance and partial security proofs, Sajeed et al. [429] demon-
strated that the security of DDI-QKD cannot rely on the same principles as MDI-QKD. They demon-
strated two key security vulnerabilities. First, DDI-QKD’s security is not based on postselected entan-
glement, and a blinding attack renders its security. Second, Sajeed et al. [429] revealed that DDI-QKD
is vulnerable to detector side-channel attacks, as well as other side-channel attacks that exploit imperfec-
tions in Bob’s receiver. The source of these vulnerabilities seems to stem from Bob’s preparation process,
which, unlike MDI-QKD, can be influenced by Eve through the signals she sends to Bob.
5.5. One-sided device-independent quantum key distribution
5.5.1. Standard 1SDI-QKD
Another approach to relaxing technical requirements of DI-QKD systems is to consider an asymmetric
scenario, known as one-sided DI-QKD (1SDI-QKD), in which one party trusts their device and the other
does not. Note that this situation might describe QKD between a user who is technologically sophisticated
enough characterize and trust their equipment (such as a bank or government agency), with a client with
untrusted devices.
The protocol first introduced by Branciard et al. [95] is as follows: Alice and Bob each receive part
of an entangled photon pair. Alice has two binary measurement settings A1 and A2. Since she does
not trust her measurement apparatus, it is treated as as a block box with a single bit input to choose
between settings. On the other side, Bob has two fully trustful projective measurements B1 and B2 in
some qubit subspaces. Alice and Bob might not always detect their photons due to channel losses or
inefficient detectors. Alice and Bob will to try to extract a secret key from the outcomes of A1 and B1
and can estimate the information of a possible Adversary (Eve) using the results of A2 and B2. Since
Bob fully trusts his measurement device, he can safely discard the events where he does not detect a
photon, since Eve cannot gain any information from these. Alice, on the other hand, cannot, and must
include no-click events in her analysis. For the security proof and key rate in this protocol, let us denote
by Ai = (Aps
i , Adis
i ) and Bi = (Bps
i , Bdis
i ) the strings of classical bits of Alice and Bob get from the
recording of their measurements results. Here Aps
i
and Bps
i
applied for actual detection (ps for post
selection) and Adis
i
and Bdis
i
are for no detection and they will be discarded for the key extraction. Then
from n-bit strings of Aps
1 and Bps
1 on which Eve can have some information, Alice and Bob can extract
a secret key of length l [430] where
l ≈Hϵ
min(B1|E) −nh(Qps
1 ),
(172)
67
