102
The Path to aN3LO Parton Distributions
to construct the approximate anomalous dimension matrix and the uncertainty on it, in the
way discussed in Section 4.1.2 below. In the non-singlet sector instead, we take nH = 0,
i.e. we take a unique answer as our approximation, and we neglect the uncertainty on it,
for reasons to be discussed in greater detail at the end of Section 4.1.3.
4.1.2. The approximate anomalous dimension matrix and its uncertainty
The procedure described in Section 4.1.1 provides us with an ensemble of eNij different ap-
proximations to the N3LO anomalous dimension, denoted γ(3), (k)
ij
(N), k = 1, . . . eNij. Our best
estimate for the approximate anomalous dimension is then their average
γ(3)
ij (N) =
1
eNij
e
Nij
X
k=1
γ(3), (k)
ij
(N).
(4.5)
We include the uncertainty on the approximation, and the ensuing uncertainty on N3LO theory
predictions, using the general formalism for the treatment of theory uncertainties developed in
Refs. [152, 151]. Namely, we consider the uncertainty on each anomalous dimension matrix
element due to its incomplete knowledge as a source of uncertainty on theoretical predictions,
uncorrelated from other sources of uncertainty, and neglecting possible correlations between
our incomplete knowledge of each individual matrix element γ(3)
ij . This uncertainty on the
incomplete higher (N3LO) order terms (incomplete higher order uncertainty, or IHOU) is then
treated in the same way as the uncertainty due to missing higher order terms (missing higher
order uncertainty, or MHOU).
We construct the shift of theory prediction for the m-th data point due to replacing the central
anomalous dimension matrix element γ(3)
ij (N), Eq. (4.5), with each of the instances γ(3), (k)
ij
(N),
viewed as an independent nuisance parameter:
∆m(ij, k) = Tm(ij, k) −¯Tm,
(4.6)
where ¯Tm is the prediction for the m-th datapoint obtained using the best estimate Eq. (4.5) for
the full anomalous dimension matrix, while Tm(ij, k) is the prediction obtained when the ij
matrix element of our best estimate is replaced with the k-th instance γ(3), (k)
ij
(N).
We then construct the covariance matrix over theory predictions for individual datapoints due
to the IHOU on the ij N3LO matrix element as the covariance of the shifts ∆m(ij, k) over all
eNij instances:
cov(ij)
mn =
1
eNij −1
e
Nij
X
k=1
∆m(ij, k)∆n(ij, k).
(4.7)
We recall that we do not associate an IHOU to the non-singlet anomalous dimensions, and
we assume conservatively that there is no correlation between the different singlet anomalous
