 
Figure 5. Bring humans to decide the trade-offs on the Pareto front | MOBO of tapping mode 
on water droplet sample on mica substrate. Here the drive amplitude, setpoint amplitude, and I 
Gain are chosen to be the controlling parameters. There are 20 initial random seeding points and 
50 explorative active learning steps in this experiment, and the acquisition function of qNEHI is 
used. A Tap300Al-G is used to optimize scan at 1 Hz in a 5 𝜇m area. a-b, the resulting a height 
and b phase maps taken with the optimal parameters given by the MOBO process. c, after 20 
seeding plus 50 explorative steps, different weights (0.1 to 2.0 with 0.1 increment) are multiplied 
to the reward of phase before retraining the MOBO GP models. The new optimal controlling 
parameter of drive amplitude, setpoint, and I gain are given by the qNEHI acquisition function at 
each added weight. Here the updated optimal solutions are plotted in the drive amplitude vs. 
setpoint space, showing how the optimal solution evolves with different emphasis on the phase 
reward. d, a similar plot for added weight for the reward of trace. After the extra weights are added, 
topography maps with new optimal controlling parameters are taken: e-i, the trace and retrace scan 
lines of height and phase taken along the red dashed lines in a and b with optimal controlling 
parameters predicted by e default weights on all the rewards, f weight of 0.5 for the reward of 
phase, g weight of 1.5 for the reward of phase, h weight of 0.5 for the reward of trace, and i weight 
of 1.5 for the trace. MOBO offers a way to optimize controlling parameters with control on how 
much each reward will be improved quantitatively. Detailed controlling parameters used in this 
figure are summarized in Table S1. 
 
 
VII. 
Conclusion 
We demonstrate that Multi-Objective Bayesian Optimization effectively balances multiple 
uncertain rewards, enabling FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reproducible) access 
to high-quality and reproducible experimental results. Beyond optimizing system performance, 
