8 
 
(negative maximum of the same closed gating loop) are shown. At Vg = 0 V (Fig. 2a), 
the SNOM can distinguish Bernal (ABAB), rhombohedral (ABCA) and polar stackings 
(ABCB*) in the same way that has been demonstrated in Fig. 1. These stacking orders 
are denoted by symbols in different colors in Fig. 2b where the two polar stackings 
marked by upward and downward triangles become clearly distinguishable when gated. 
Our Raman data shown in Fig. S4 support the stacking assignment of ABAB, ABCA 
and ABCB-type stackings as marked in Fig. 2b.  
 We focus on the polar stacking region at the middle of each SNOM image 
(marked by I, II, III in Fig. 2c and triangles in Fig. 2b) because it shows the most 
noticeable change when gated. As Vg is increased from 0 V to 20 V (from Fig. 2a to Fig. 
2b), a DW across the whole region becomes clearly visible, dividing the original region 
with nearly identical optical contrast into two parts, region I and region II shown in Fig. 
2c (corresponding areas in Fig. 2b marked by downward and upward triangles), with 
slightly different optical contrast. This DW becomes more apparent with increasing Vg 
to 40 V (Fig. 2c), where the DW separating region I and region II is indicated by the 
black arrow. The enhanced DW response is presumably due to the more pronounced 
plasmon reflection at the DW between regions I and II at an increased doping level, 
which has been well established in bilayer graphene [54, 55]. We can clearly observe 
from Figs. 2c (Vg = 40 V) and 2d (Vg = 60 V) that as the gate voltage is increased further 
and further from Vg = 20 V, the near-field response of region II becomes progressively 
darker in comparison to that of region I. The near-field response almost reverts to its 
initial state (Fig. 2a) when Vg passes through 0 V again from the positive maximum, 
making regions I and II barely distinguishable (Fig. 2e). This also implies that device 1 
at Vg = 0 V is close to its charge neutrality point. When Vg is gradually changed from 
Vg = 0 V (Fig. 2e) to more negative values (Figs. 2f to 2h), the near-field response of 
region I becomes progressively darker in comparison to region II. It shows an exactly 
opposite trend as seen from Figs. 2a to 2d with positive Vg. Complete dataset for gate-
dependent SNOM images is shown in Fig. S5 that includes Figs. 2a-2h. Consistent 
behaviors with Figs. 2a to 2h (first cycle scan) are observed in a consecutive gate-
dependent SNOM scan (second cycle scan), but extending to a larger range of Vg, from 
-60 V to 80 V (SNOM images shown in Fig. S6). 
To quantify the gate-dependent near-field behavior observed in regions I and II, 
we extract the optical contrast between the regions I and II, which is defined 
