stimulated emission will never occur, and n will remain constant while λ stays at zero. Secondly,
at next-to-leading order in the Markov approximation, a higher-order correction in xpl/xβ appears
as a time-ordered modification to Eq. (3.42). The correction to Eq. (4.2) at this order corresponds
to the Γχχh term discussed in the introduction, with an overall minus factor. This contribution
generally leads to absorption, which persists even in mixed states. However, since xpl/xβ is typically
very small, this effect remains negligible in most cases.
5
FLRW Background
In the flat background, a higher thermal bath temperature or a longer graviton wavelength en-
hances stimulated graviton emission. Such behavior is analogous to stimulated emission in quan-
tum electrodynamics (QED). In QED, the population of excited atomic electrons also decreases
more significantly for lower atomic energy levels. Thus, α has a cutoff, and the softest photon is
constrained by the minimum energy gap in the atomic state that stimulates emission.
However, in the present case, k and β remain unconstrained.
In the previous section, we
found that the temperature or wavelength must be sufficiently small to neglect the backreaction
on spacetime dynamics. At this stage, an FLRW background is essential for discussing significant
stimulated emission. As α increases, the backreaction of the thermal bath on spacetime dynamics
becomes inevitable. While such a situation is already interesting as a thought experiment, it is
also of practical importance for gravitons predicted by inflation, as the scale-invariant spectrum is
generated at the onset of the radiation-dominated universe.
In a general FLRW background, the quantities β, τ, and k are comoving. If the thermal bath
of χ drives the background evolution, the energy density of χ is given by
ρχ =
π2
30(aβ)4 .
(5.1)
During radiation domination, the physical Hubble parameter H and the scale factor a satisfy the
relation aH = τ −1. Substituting this into the Friedmann equation
3M 2
plH2 = ρχ ,
(5.2)
we obtain the simple expression for the coefficient
α ≡
2
5x2 ,
(5.3)
where x = kτ. The Heisenberg equations are then given by
n′ = 2ξ
x + 2ϵη
5x2 ,
(5.4)
ξ′ = 2η + 2
x

n + 1
2

−2ϵη
5x2 ,
(5.5)
η′ = −2ξ + 2ϵ
5x2

ξ + n + 1
2

.
(5.6)
where we have introduced an order-counting parameter ϵ, which denotes the strength of the interac-
tions. With ϵ = 1, stimulated emission dominates over the the Hubble friction term on superhorizon
scales (x ≪1). This behavior has been reported in perturbative analyses based on in-in formalism
[22], where it results in secular, scale-invariant growth in the graviton power spectrum. This secular
growth behavior has also been confirmed by recent work [28]. The breakdown of perturbative anal-
ysis was suggested on superhorizon scales. Here, the Heisenberg equations incorporate nonlinear
– 13 –
