swapped over the ensuing sums we can iterate the process because the Euler integrand consists of the same
elements as the original summand, so rational functions to some power and Γ functions [5]. The number of
integrations depends on the sequence of the counters being summed over: with a bit of luck many of the steps
yield low-dimensional integrals or even geometric sums. The final multiple Euler integrals can at times directly
be evaluated in terms of multiple polylogarithms.
It is possible to incorporate polygamma functions into the formalism — by way of example Γ[z] ψ[z] =
∂α|α = 0 Γ[z + α] — and leaving that differentiation to the very end assuming that it commute over both,
summations and integrations. Similarly, higher poles in the Mellin-Barnes representation may be dealt with
introducing further parameters. The re-summation into Euler integrals is apparently not hindered by such
regulator parameters as we call them in the main text, although their presence may significantly increase the
number of integrations.
In general, expanding the Euler integrands in these parameters and integrating afterwards is not a well-
defined procedure, as our two examples show. Therefore one is faced with the problem of solving rather general
Euler integrals, see eg. (13) already for the off-shell one-loop box. To this end we employ intersection theory
for hypergeometric functions. This allows us to derive Pfaffian systems of first order differential equations on
the Euler integrals. The latter are apparently always of canonical form [18] implying that one can solve them
in terms of iterated integrals.
From a two-parameter MB representation of the one-loop box [9] we found a two-parameter Euler rep-
resentation. We studied the latter by bivariate intersection theory [8]. For the double box we were able to
construct a two-parameter MB representation (50) as well, based on the Cheng-Wu trick [19] and heavy use of
the barnesRoutines.m package [20] to integrate out superfluous MB parameters by Barnes’ lemmata. Several
four-fold parametric derivatives of sums over residues now need to be determined. We first took these sums as
they arise from picking residues and translated them into four-fold Euler integrals. Following the algorithm of
[8] the associated four-layer intersection theory problem can indeed be solved and integrated, and we confirm
the known answer for the double box [9]. On the one hand this is quite spectacular to see, on the other the
computational effort is considerable. The most complicated step is the inversion of the matrix of level four
intersection numbers, a dense 9 × 9 matrix containing five regulator parameters.
Yet, we are not really interested in the full, undifferentiated sum of residues including the regulators, but
rather in specific Taylor components. It is possible to shift the two parameters affecting the denominator Γ
functions in (52), (57) without changing the Taylor components in question. This yields a bivariate intersection
theory problem with one regulators less which can be solved effortlessly yielding the same result. In this exam-
ple — just as intended in [8] — intersection theory very efficiently replaces the IBP technique in decomposing
integrals in terms of a basis of masters, and the ensuing construction of Pfaffian differential equations.
Prospectively, many steps of these computations can be automated, e.g.
the construction of series of
residues for multi-dimensional MB representations, cf. [21], and selecting the best suited of the associated
Euler integrals. This paper thus possibly hints at a new approach to the evaluation of Feynman graphs. A
pivotal input is a fairly low-dimensional MB representation, which is, of course, hard to obtain.
A problem more inherent to intersection theory is the construction of bases. For n-parameter Euler integrals
the basic idea is to choose monomials 1/(p1...pn) involving any n rational factors present in the Euler integrand.
The monomials can have more a less constituents if some of their factors involve several integration variables;
we may also add simple numerators in that case. As yet there is no definite prescription. Nevertheless, with
a little hindsight one quickly finds a basis so that
• only the lowest layers of the Taylor expansion around any pole are solicited,
• the connections beyond the first level do not contain higher poles,
• a rescaling of the masters by denominators depending on the kinematic invariants/outer variables makes
the intersection numbers constant, i.e. their core part only depends on the regulator parameters. As
a test, their determinants should cleanly fall apart into factors involving outer variables and others
consisting of regulators.
Rescaling all regulator parameters by a common scale ϵ (which plays the rˆole of a dimensional regulator) a
good choice of basis implies that the equations will be canonical wrt. ϵ and can be solved in terms of iterated
integrals3. In our two examples Goncharov polylogarithms [11, 12] are sufficient. The result is a Laurent series
in terms of the regulators. Picking the desired components we match the expressions in [9, 10].
3In preliminary studies we have occasionally seen weight drop on some masters, which is related to off-diagonal elements at ϵ0
in the Pfaffian matrices.
14
