April 10, 2025
0:43
WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE
arxMs
2
V. M. Mostepanenko
λ0 by about a factor of ﬁfty.5
As to the long-range regime, where the interaction potential behaves as 1/z4, it
is applicable at separations satisfying the conditions2–4
λ0 ≪z ≪λT ,
(3)
where λT ≡ℏc/(kBT ) is the thermal wavelength, kB is the Boltzmann constant,
and T is the temperature.
There are also important restrictions imposed on the analytic expressions for the
frequency-dependent dielectric permittivities of plate materials used for calculation
of the Casimir-Polder interaction. Thus, the physically meaningful permittivities
must satisfy the Kramers-Kronig relations and possess the positive imaginary parts.
If the latter requirement is not satisﬁed, this results in violation of the second law
of thermodynamics.6
Below we show that in some recent literature the application regions of the
Lifshitz formula for the Casimir-Polder interaction are replaced with the other ones
in an unjustiﬁed manner, and the proposed analytic expressions for the dielectric
permittivity claiming an excellent accuracy in fact possess the negative imaginary
parts over the wide regions of frequency and temperature.
2. Application Regions of the Short- and Long-Range Potentials of
the Casimir-Polder Interaction in the Lifshitz Theory
In place of the application conditions (1) and (2) of the short-range potential es-
tablished by the founders of the Lifshitz theory, a few papers use the alternative
conditions
a0 ≪z ≪a0
α ,
(4)
where a0 = ℏ/(mecα) = 0.53 ˚A is the Bohr radius and α is the ﬁne structure
constant.7–9
The conditions (4), however, are formulated in terms of only the atomic pa-
rameters and disregard the material properties of a plate. For instance, the lattice
constant of Si is l = 5.45 ˚A. Thus, according to papers,7–9 the short-range regime
of the Lifshitz formula is already applicable at the atom-plate separation z = l
because it is by the order of magnitude larger than the Bohr radius a0. At so short
separation, however, the Si plate cannot be considered as a continuous medium de-
scribed by the dielectric permittivity. Thus, in Refs. 7–9 the application region of
the Lifshitz theory is incorrectly extended to too short separations.
As to the upper bound of the short-range regime, for Si the characteristic ab-
sorption wavelength λ0 is equal to a few hundreds of nanometers. From (2) we see
that the short-range regime is applicable up to 6–9 nm, but, according to (4), it is
applicable only at much shorter separations7–9 z ≪a0/α = 7.26 nm. This means
that the upper bound of the short-range regime is underestimated, as compared to
that established by the founders of the Lifshitz theory.
