10
subspace for the atom Hamiltonian to reproduce the spectroscopic results accurately. However, this large subspace
was too big to compute the dipolar interaction time dynamics due to the computational complexity.
To reduce the Hamiltonian to a smaller and more tractable subspace (99P3/2, 98D5/2), we truncated the eigenstates
U full in the original subspace, resulting in the matrix U. Because this new matrix is no longer orthonormal, we
decomposed our truncated unitary with an SVD decomposition U = MΣV and imposed singular values of unity to
arrive at an orthonormalized basis set U ′ = MV . Under this approach, the atomic state that resonantly interacts
with the molecule maintains its overlap with the original eigenstates after orthonormalization. The truncated atomic
Hamiltonian in the uncoupled basis can be calculated using the orthonormalized wavefunctions with,
Hatom = U ′Hfull
atom(U ′)†,
(7)
where Hfull
atom is the diagonal matrix with energies associated with relevant eigenstates before truncation. This approach
allowed us to capture the exact eigen-energies and the approximate eigenstate decompositions.
Collective Interactions
We perform Monte Carlo simulations by sampling particle positions based on measured spatial dimensions and
densities of the atomic and molecular clouds. The distribution of the distances between a random Rb atom and its
nearest and next-nearest molecular neighbors are presented in Fig. 8. A finite probability of having multiple KRb
molecules inside the Rydberg atom wavefunction motivated the use of a collective model where one Rydberg atom
interacts with several of KRb molecules. Because a collective model exhibits exponential scaling of the Hilbert space
dimension with increasing molecule number, we restrict our calculations to the single-excitation subspace as further
expanded upon in Fig. 9.
0
1
2
3
4
Distance from Rydberg atom core ( m)
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
Probability of finding
a KRb molecule
nearest neighbor
next nearest neighbor
Rydberg atom radius
0
1
2
3
4
-4
-2
0
2
4
Wavefunction
amplitude ( m-3/2)
FIG. 8. Wavefunction of the 98D5/2 Rydberg electron and the averaged distance distribution of the nearest and the next nearest
KRb molecules from a Rydberg atom. We determined the Rydberg atom radius to be 1 µm (dashed line) as the wavefunction
falls off dramatically beyond it. This corresponds to a characteristic KRb density of 1 × 1012/cm3. There is a 39% probability
of finding a single KRb molecule within the Rydberg orbit and a 14% probability of finding two.
This approach ensures a linear scaling of the Hilbert space dimension, making the computations tractable. We can
now define H0 (Eq. 5) within this relevant subspace {|R⟩|0, 0, 0...0⟩, |r⟩|1m
j ⟩}, where |1m
j ⟩= |0, 0, ..., 1m, ..0⟩denotes
the excitation of the j-th molecule to one of the three m = (1, 0, −1) molecular projection modes of |N = 1, MN = m⟩.
This approximation is valid due to the conservation of energy, given that the interaction strength is sufficiently weaker
than the energy of dipolar quanta (2.227 GHz). In addition, we also simplified our treatment of the Rydberg atom
as a two-level system by focusing solely on the coupling between the highest energy 98D5/2 state (|R⟩) and the
highest energy 99P3/2 state (|r⟩). Interactions between other state pairs are at least 20 MHz detuned and, thus, are
significantly suppressed, ensuring the closure of the chosen subspace and the validity of the approximation.
