20
FIG. 12. (a) Field-dependent mode spectrum of a Kagome artificial spin ice obtained by VNA-FMR. The signal strength of mode C resonances
for H ≤−300 Oe (blue columns) and mode D resonances (red columns) is extracted from the spectra within the region highlighted by the
box in right panel (a). Adapted from Ref. [25]. (b) Representative ferromagnetic resonance absorption curves of different artificial spin ice
and anti-spin ice systems at saturation. Adapted from Ref. [4]. (c) Avoided crossing and mode-hybridization between reversed and unreversed
bars in the ground state and in the monopole oriented state (characterized by four magnetic charges at each vertex) in a high-density square
ASI. Adapted from Ref. [71]. (d) Angular dependence of the switching fields in a bicomponent square ASI made of two different metallic
ferromagnets. The red color represents nanomagnets made of Ni81Fe19, and while blue represents nanomagnets made of Co90Fe10. Adapted
from Ref. [115].
the resistance with the microwave current I(t)10. This tech-
nique was successfully used to study the effects of collective
magnetization reversals on the high frequency dynamics in
connected ASI210. Similarly, it was shown that microwave-
driven dynamics in a connected ASI system can be detected by
means of spin pumping and inverse spin Hall effect, enabling
a simple investigation scheme of dynamics in ASI211. Fur-
thermore, this work suggests that integrating connected ASI
as processing and transport devices in conventional electron-
ics is feasible.
3.
Photoemission electron microscopy with x-ray magnetic
circular dichroism
In contrast to BLS and microwave-based techniques, pho-
toemission electron microscopy with x-ray magnetic circular
dichroism (PEEM-XMCD) provides a method to study the dy-
namics of ASI in real space. In this full-field imaging tech-
nique, the sample is illuminated with x-rays, and the photo-
emitted electrons are collected and focused using a series
of electrostatic and/or magnetic lenses212,213. This is shown
schematically in Fig. 13. Typical PEEM setups can achieve a
spatial resolution around tens of nanometers, which is suitable
to study ASI.
For probing magnetism in 3d transition metals like iron,
manganese, and nickel (elements commonly used in ASI ma-
terials), the x-ray energy is tuned to the L edge, which corre-
sponds to the electronic transition where an electron is excited
from the 2p orbital to the 3d orbital. Images are measured for
incident x-rays with both right-circular (RC) and left-circular
(LC) polarization, and the difference or asymmetry between
these images gives the XMCD contrast. In PEEM-XMCD,
the dichroic contrast IXMCD depends on the sample magneti-
zation direction M and the photon spin direction σ as follows:
