3
the pulse duration essentially becomes determined by the
collimator focal length alone.
To accommodate the existing MEMs scanner footprint,
the new reflective-optics design uses a Thorlabs MPD189-
P01, 203.2 mm focal length off-axis parabolic mirror
(OAP) as the primary focusing optic. A Thorlabs RC08
reflective collimator of focal length fc = 33 mm and max-
imum numerical aperture NA of 0.15 is used to focus the
fiber output onto the OAP. The overall design yields a
beam magnification factor M of:
M = dout
din
= f0
fc
= 203.2
33
≈6.2.
As configured, the new focusing unit provides a maxi-
mum collimated beam size of 11 mm for input fibers 0.15
NA or larger, which is approximately twice the diameter
(dr = 4.6 mm) of our MEMS mirror (MirrocleTM model
A8L2.2). As a result, the maximum lever arm for the
new scanner design was set to approximately one-half
the focal length of the OAP focuser.
Using equation B5 in appendix B, we show that the
effective beam spot size deff at the output port of the
scanner is expected to scale as:
deff ≈6.2
q
d2
f + (1.22λ/(2NA))2.
(1)
Thus, a multi-mode input fiber of diameter df = 10 µm
and NA ∼0.1 should produce a divergence-limited spot
diameter deff ≈62 µm. If one includes diffraction ef-
fects, the expected spot size increases to:
d′
eff ≈62µm
p
1 + (0.61λ · 106)2
(2)
This result satisfies our initial goal of adopting the path
length geometry of our existing system to achieve 100 µm
or smaller spot diameters in the optical regime at the
location of the exit port. In comparison, the refractive
system of Ref [14] achieved a spot size 170 µm, so we
expect this new system to improve on that by a factor of
just under 3.
A second goal was to provide a scan range dscan
> 20 mm.
As shown in Equation B9 of Appendix B,
the new collimation setup gives:
dscan ≲49 mm

dr
4.6 mm
 
θ
θmax

,
(3)
where θ is the beam deflection angle off the MEMS mirror
(θmax ≈±5o) and dr is the MEMS mirror diameter (here,
dr=4.6 mm).
Both the scan range and spot size scale with the mag-
nification factor, for fixed fiber and MEMS mirror spec-
ifications. The chosen mirror offers an excellent combi-
nation of size and range of deflection angle that, when
coupled with the breadboard-based design of the scan-
ner unit, yields small spot sizes for relatively large (and
adjustable) scan ranges. Details about the trade-offs be-
tween scan angle and spot size are described in more
detail in Appendix B.
B.
Output Fiber Plate
In contrast to Ref [14], the characterization data re-
ported in this paper were obtained without a cryogenic
detector payload, to best evaluate the MEMS scanner
system alone. We considered a number of measurement
approaches for the characterization work, including, e.g.,
sweeping the beam across a pinhole much smaller than
the beam diameter, etc. However, such approaches would
require additional optics and add complexity and align-
ment uncertainty during cryogenic cycling. In the end,
we simply covered the output port with a precision plate
that placed a 105 µm multi-mode fiber at the nominal
center position of the scan field (see Figure 1). The di-
ameter of the output fiber was selected to be as small
as possible, while exceeding the expected cryogenic spot
size of 60 µm.
In our model, the output beam shape is treated as a
convolution of the beam and output fiber profiles. As-
suming a roughly Gaussian beam profile, the effective
spot size of the focused beam at the scanner output plate
should be:
deff,meas =
q
d′2
eff + d2
fiber
(4)
≈122µm
p
1 + (0.31λ · 106)2
(5)
which is roughly 130 µm for a wavelength of λ = 625 nm.
This value for the spot size is roughly double what we
measure with a detector when looking at output light
intensity vs. spot position, and would imply ∼twice the
relevant sweep length value for pulsed beam calculations,
as discussed in Section IV.
III.
BEAM SIZE MEASUREMENTS
We conducted both warm (300 K) and cold (∼10 mK)
measurements of the beam spot size to validate the design
expectations summarized above.
By design, the scan-
ner performance is relatively insensitive to thermal con-
traction effects, so we were able to perform most of the
system characterization and optimization experiments at
room temperature, rather than having to cool the unit
after each small refinement was made to the design. Be-
low, we document two types of room temperature beam
size tests, where the scanner was either: (i) mounted on
an optical bench, and the beam size measured using a
CCD detector, or (ii) mounted in −situ in the (warm)
cryostat and the beam size measured using an avalanche
photodiode detector (APD). Unless otherwise noted, all
bench-top tests were performed using the same models
of input and output fibers as those used for the in −situ
tests.
