5
15 min per section) as manual methods, its true value
lies in automating the tuning process.
Unlike manual
methods requiring constant parameter adjustments, our
method automates beam delivery with minimal super-
vision, streamlining operations without sacrificing beam
quality. As we expand the present method to other beam-
lines, it could significantly reduce tuning and setup time,
allowing researchers to focus more on their scientific in-
vestigations.
In conclusion, we have developed and tested an AI-
assisted method for transporting radioactive ion beams
at the CARIBU facility. The present methodology can be
readily expanded to other beamline sections within the
CARIBU facility. Moreover, our method can be adopted
by both present and upcoming radioactive ion beam fa-
cilities.
We remark that Bayesian Optimization not only en-
hances operational efficiency at a radioactive beam fa-
cilities but also holds promise for other complex sys-
tems. An upgraded version of our approach is planned for
the Multi-Reflection Time-of-Flight (MR-TOF) device at
CARIBU [31]. The MR-TOF device is a state-of-the-art
mass spectrometer that exploits multiple reflections be-
tween electrostatic mirrors to extend the flight path of
ions. This enables high-precision measurements of nu-
clear masses and efficient separation of isotopes during
beam delivery operations.
Beyond its success at specific facilities, BO’s trans-
formative impact lies in its ability to reduce setup time
and optimize beam tuning processes across varying lev-
els of expertise.
This efficiency allows scientists to fo-
cus on their core activities—experiments, data analy-
sis, and discovery—rather than technical adjustments.
Other prominent laboratories, such as the Advanced Pho-
ton Source (APS), can leverage this technique to auto-
mate the tuning of ultra-bright, high-energy x-ray beams.
Furthermore, BO’s capabilities extend to domains fac-
ing similar high-dimensional tuning challenges, such as
robotics, materials science, and hyperparameter tuning
in machine learning models.
This advancement marks
a significant step towards autonomous scientific discov-
ery, enhancing workflow and empowering researchers to
concentrate on addressing complex scientific questions.
The authors wish to thank the ATLAS Controls Group
for AWACS network access and CARIBU operators for
facilitating live testing. This work was supported by the
Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Nuclear
Physics, under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357, and
DE-FOA-0002875 funds. This research used resources of
ANL’s ATLAS facility, which is a DOE Office of Science
User Facility.
[1] T. Kubo, M. Ishihara, N. Inabe, H. Kumagai, I. Tani-
hata, K. Yoshida, T. Nakamura, H. Okuno, S. Shimoura,
and K. Asahi, The riken radioactive beam facility, Nu-
clear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Sec-
tion B: Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms 70,
309 (1992).
[2] M. Lieuvin, P. Bertrand, D. Bibet, B. Bru, F. Chautard,
M. Duval, C. Ricaud, and F. Varenne, Commissioning of
spiral, the ganil radioactive beam facility, AIP Confer-
ence Proceedings 600, 59 (2001).
[3] G. Savard, S. Baker, C. Davids, A. F. Levand, E. F.
Moore, R. C. Pardo, R. Vondrasek, B. J. Zabransky,
and G. Zinkann, Radioactive beams from gas catchers:
The CARIBU facility, Nuclear Instruments and Methods
in Physics Research Section B: Beam Interactions with
Materials and Atoms Proceedings of the XVth Interna-
tional Conference on Electromagnetic Isotope Separators
and Techniques Related to their Applications, 266, 4086
(2008).
[4] N. Angert and B. Franzke, The GSI heavy ion facility, in
Challenges and Goals for Accelerators in the XXI Cen-
tury (WORLD SCIENTIFIC, 2012) pp. 279–306.
[5] I. Moore, T. Eronen, D. Gorelov, J. Hakala, A. Joki-
nen, A. Kankainen, V. Kolhinen, J. Koponen, H. Pent-
til¨a, I. Pohjalainen, M. Reponen, J. Rissanen, A. Saasta-
moinen, S. Rinta-Antila, V. Sonnenschein, and J. ¨Ayst¨o,
Towards commissioning the new IGISOL-4 facility, Nu-
clear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Sec-
tion B: Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms
317, 208 (2013), xVIth International Conference on Elec-
troMagnetic Isotope Separators and Techniques Related
to their Applications, December 2–7, 2012 at Matsue,
Japan.
[6] I. Wiedenhoever, L. T. Baby, D. Santiago-Gonzalez,
A. Rojas, J. C. Blackmon, G. V. Rogachev, J. Belarge,
E. Koshchiy, A. N. Kuchera, L. E. Linhardt, J. Lail, K. T.
Macon, M. Matos, and B. C. Rasco, Studies of exotic nu-
clei at the resolut facility of florida state university, in
Fission and Properties of Neutron-Rich Nuclei (World
Scientific, 2013) pp. 144–151.
[7] C. Wrede, The Facility for Rare Isotope Beams, EPJ Web
of Conferences 93, 07001 (2015), publisher: EDP Sci-
ences.
[8] F. Becchetti and J. Kolata, Recent results from the
twinsol low-energy rib facility, Nuclear Instruments and
Methods in Physics Research Section B: Beam Inter-
actions with Materials and Atoms 376, 397 (2016),
proceedings of the XVIIth International Conference on
Electromagnetic Isotope Separators and Related Topics
(EMIS2015), Grand Rapids, MI, U.S.A., 11-15 May 2015.
[9] M. A. Fraser, Y. Kadi, A. P. Bernardes, Y. Blumen-
feld, E. Bravin, S. Calatroni, R. Catherall, B. God-
dard, D. Parchet, E. Siesling, W. V. Delsolaro, G. Van-
doni, D. Voulot, and L. R. Williams, Status of the
HIE-ISOLDE project at CERN (2017), arXiv:1707.05129
[physics].
[10] Y. Ye, X. Yang, H. Sakurai, and B. Hu, Physics of exotic
nuclei, Nature Reviews Physics 7, 21 (2025), publisher:
Nature Publishing Group.
[11] A. Edelen, C. Mayes, D. Bowring, D. Ratner, A. Adel-
mann, R. Ischebeck, J. Snuverink, I. Agapov, R. Kam-
