the sum of two copies of the parent theory partition function.5
Now we turn to the case where the Z2 symmetry being extended is anomalous.
Here the expectation from the group-like case (particularly from the example of
section 6.2.2) is that we should make a diﬀerent choice of algebra for the symme-
try boundary, and in so doing introduce additional phases into the partial trace
decompositions. Indeed, consulting [10, Table III] suggests that if we want the
eﬀective symmetry to be an anomalous Z2 we should take 1 ⊕eGB ⊕eRB ⊕eRG
as our physical boundary. Doing so, we ﬁnd that any of the three gaugings of
Rep(D4) should produce a theory with two ground states.
With such a setup, the TDLs for the trivially-acting Z2 × Z2 on the sym-
metry boundary are now given by {1,eGB,eRB,eRG} rather than the previous
{1,eRG,eR,eG}.
This is perhaps clearer when the anyons are labeled in terms
of D4 conjugacy classes and irreps of their centralizers. With the irreps of D4 still
denoted {1,a,b,c,m}, let the order four generator of D4 be y and the order two
generator be x. Recall that the conjugacy class [y2] has centralizer all of D4 and
the [x] and [xy] conjugacy classes have Z2 × Z2 centralizers, the Z2 × Z2 irreps for
which we label by pluses and minuses. The anyons we have been working with can
then be labeled
1 ⇔(1,1),
eRG ⇔(1,a),
eR ⇔(1,b)
eG ⇔(1,c),
eGB ⇔([y2],b),
eRB ⇔([y2],c),
mB ⇔(1,m),
mG ⇔([x],+,−),
mR ⇔([xy],+,−).
For an example of how this aﬀects the operators appearing in partial traces,
see Figure 7. Figure 7a depicts TDLs which exist in the absolute 2d Rep(D4)-
symmetric theory with a trivially-acting Z2 × Z2 subsymmetry, obtained by col-
lapsing the physical and symmetry boundaries onto one another. The lines labeled
by a and c are part of this Z2×Z2, and its triviality means that they admit a topo-
logical junction, the operator for which we label σb. In the following two ﬁgures
we imagine the same diagram in which the TDLs are anyons living on the sym-
metry boundary of a SymTFT. In Figure 7b we assume that the eﬀective Z2 is
non-anomalous, which means that we can take the Z2 × Z2 symmetry to be given
by the anyons {(1,1),(1,a),(1,b),(1,c)}.6 In this case, the operator σb connects
up to a (1,b) line in the bulk. In Figure 7c we instead assume that the eﬀective
Z2 symmetry carries an anomaly, which means that the Z2 × Z2 symmetry must
5For the latter two cases, the diﬀerent symmetry boundary algebra will incur additional phases
due to braiding, of the type to be discussed below.
6There are multiple choices here for how we could realize the Z2 × Z2 symmetry in terms
of anyons, quantiﬁed by the nine gSPT phases with reduced topological order Z2 appearing
in [10, Table III]. We do not bother examining all of these since the main point is to contrast
them with the igSPT phase, which is unique.
40
