2.4.2. Locality and Measurement-dependence Loophole
Definition 6 (space-like separation). For two events in Alice and Bob’s lab respectively with coordinates
(tA, xA) and (tB, xB) in Minkowski spacetime are causally space-like separated iff the invariant spacetime
interval ∆s2 = c2(tA −tB)2 −|xA −xB|2 < 0, or equivalently Eq. (6) holds, which implies that the spatial
distance between the events is greater than the distance light could travel in the time interval separating
them.
Because no causal influence (which is limited by the speed of light) can bridge a space-like interval,
there is no possible way for one event to affect the other.
Fig.2a shows two black boxes A and B
representing the Alice and Bob’s laboratories causally space-like separated in causal cones to prevent any
influence the other detector’s measurement from the other lab.
Definition 7 (Locality loophole). The locality loophole is open if Eq. (6) is not certified.
To close the locality loophole the Bell experiment must be realized such that the entire measurement
process, consisting of the random choice of basis, the adjusting the analyzer, and the detection of the
particle satisfied the space-like separation condition [172]. Locality loophole was certified in the late
“90s using (i) entangled photons from SPDC sources, (ii) increasing the space-like separation between
the analyzers to tens of km [173, 174], (iii) employing fast, unpredictable and random switching of
measurement settings to further eliminate the possibility of communication between the detectors (iv)
using fast electronics and quantum random number generators (QRNG) to choose the settings of the
analyzers [170].
The first Bell test to close both the detection and locality loopholes was reported in 2015 [74]. It
used electron spins that were entangled using an event-ready protocol [164–166]. The experiment demon-
strated the first statistically significant BI violation without relying on additional assumptions such as
fair sampling.
Definition 8 (Measurement-dependence loophole). The measurement-dependence loophole, also known
as the freedom-of-choice or the free-will loophole, questions whether the choices of measurement settings
could be influenced by hidden variables, i.e. PX = PX|Λ?, PY = PY |Λ?
This arises from the observation that the local and realistic causal structure in Fig (5a) implicitly assumes
PX = PX|Λ and PY = PY |Λ that there is no common cause between the local settings X and Y and
the source Λ. A small amount of correlation is required to produce a false BI violation, therefore, a Bell
test must use QRNGs to randomly determine the measurement settings in real-time, ensuring that no
prior knowledge could influence the results, hence closing the measurement dependence loophole [175].
In 2017, a groundbreaking experiment, known as the “Cosmic Bell Test” the light from distant stars was
used to choose measurement settings, arguing that the light had traveled for hundreds of years and thus
could not be influenced by hidden variables [176].
Other loopholes. Coincidence-Time Loophole – Coincidence windows can create spurious correlations if
the time window for considering detection events as part of the same pair is too wide. Then, nanosecond-
level timing precision are used for tight synchronization and narrow coincidence time windows [177].
Future quantum networks employing repeater stations and tight coincidence timing windows will further
ensure the proper pairing of entangled photons [178].
Memory Loophole – The memory loophole arises if detectors have some form of memory from previous
trials, which could influence future results. Experiments must randomized trials and reset the system
after each trial to avoid memory effects [171] (see Sec.3.11).
Finally, Superdeterminism is a theoretical loophole that challenges the assumption of free will in
choosing measurement settings [179]. Although superdeterminism is not directly testable in the traditional
sense, the scientific consensus generally assumes that randomness and independence in quantum processes
are valid (a review of this philosophical loophole is in [180]).
2.4.3. Experimental Breakthroughs
The timeline in Fig.3 refers to the first definitive closure of the detection and locality loopholes, si-
multaneously referred to as “loophole-free” Bell tests. The first experiment used entangled electrons
and photons in NV centers over a distance of 1.3 kilometers [74]. All photonic experiments were also
reported: Ref. [168] used high-efficiency photon detectors and random measurement settings, and simi-
larly, the experiment in Ref. [169] used highly efficient detectors and a large spatial separation between
detectors. Compared to previous Bell tests using entangled photons, the critical component here was
16
