FIG. 4. The figure depicts the deviation of mitigated energy expectation value for the BH molecule from the
ideal value in two different training scenarios. The purple plot represents the deviation of mitigated energy
when ideal expectation values are used as targets in training data and the green plot represents the deviation
of mitigated energy when sequential error mitigated expectation values are used as the targets for the training
set Mitigated results on (left) fake-Melbourne machine and (right) fake-Guadalupe machine.
Algorithm
Time Complexity
GCN forward pass
O(ln2k + l|E|k)
GCN backward pass
O(ln2k + l|E|k)
Regressor forward pass
O(lrnkr)
Regressor backward pass
O(lrnkr)
TABLE I. Time and space complexity analysis of for-
ward and backward pass.
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS:
To demonstrate the working of the GNM (shown in
Fig. 2), we test it on two different molecules and two dif-
ferent devices with diverse noise profiles. Since the model
is not based on the variational principle, the estimated
expectation value can go below the ideal value. With the
advent of modern gate error suppression techniques, such
as dynamic decoupling and gate twirling, fluctuations in
measurement can be greatly suppressed. In a simulation
protocol, this can be approximated by using a fixed seed
value to represent an averaged sampling statistics which
we have chosen to use throughout this work. In this ar-
chitecture, we train an ML model with circuits composed
of single and double excitations to predict noiseless ex-
pectation values using noisy ones. The GNM model is
developed using PyTorch38 and PyTorch Geometric. For
GNN, we use Graph Convolution Networks. The details
of graph encoding and feature construction are found in
the Methodology section.
In the training data, labels
are generated sequentially using the reference error mit-
igation strategy which uses VQE as a subroutine and is
implemented using Qiskit- Nature39. The one- and two-
body integrals are imported from PySCF40. The second-
quantized fermionic operators are transformed into qubit
operators by using Jordan-Wigner encoding41. All the
noise models used are derived from fake IBM Quantum
hardware. We mainly use noise models imported from
fake backends of two quantum devices: ibmq Melbourne
and ibmq Guadalupe having 14 and 16 qubits respec-
tively.
The model is trained separately for each bond
length using the Adam optimizer with 100 epochs. Due
to a limited number of data in the training set, batch size
is taken as 1.
To illustrate the functionality of the GNM, our initial
testing focuses on the H4 molecule where we symmetri-
cally stretch all the H −H bonds. In STO-3G basis H4
has 4 electrons in 8 spin-orbitals. From the findings de-
picted in Fig. 3, it becomes evident that the optimized
energy difference for full circuit between the noisy and
corresponding noiseless scenarios ranges from approxi-
mately 1 Eh to 0.32 Eh on the ibmq-Melbourne machine
and from 0.48 Eh to 0.3 Eh on the ibmq-Guadalupe ma-
chine. However, when considering the mitigated energy
compared to the noiseless energy, the difference is con-
fined within 12 mEh on the ibmq-Melbourne machine
7
