11
sity. Additionally, the intermediate density range sup-
porting a continuous transition (see IV C 1) shifts to lower
n. Finite-T phase diagrams for pancake geometries and
tilted dipoles remain to be explored.
V.
ELEMENTARY EXCITATIONS OF THE
QUANTUM-STABILIZED STATES
The unique properties of the quantum-stabilized states
manifest in their dispersion relation and elementary ex-
citation spectrum.
This applies to both single-droplet
states and supersolids, though with markedly different
features.
Analogously to the case of uniform states
discussed in III B, the excitation features of quantum-
stabilized states relate to a momentum-dependent inter-
action potential, ˜Vint(k), that stems from the competi-
tion of the long-range anisotropic DDI with the state
geometry. This competition is renewed compared to uni-
form states due to the novel morphologies adopted by
quantum-stabilized states, see IV.
The dispersion relation (5) does not directly apply to
quantum-stabilized states because of their non-uniform
character. Instead, their dispersion and the underlying
elementary excitations can be derived within Bogoliubov
theory introduced in III B 2 c for fully trapped systems.
This approach consists in linearizing the time-dependent
GPE (3) around the ground-state wavefunction ψ, while
applying perturbations to ψ, called quasiparticles. This
applies to quantum-stabilized states provided that the
GPE is extended by the quantum-fluctuation term dis-
cussed in III C and possibly by the thermal-fluctuation
term discussed in IV E. Hereafter, we review the exci-
tation features of single-droplet states and supersolids
based on the Bogoliubov approach.
A.
Excitation Spectrum of Droplets
As reviewed in IV A, single-droplet states form in
regimes where phonon modes soften and drive the MF
instability. This occurs in geometries where the dipoles
are oriented along a weakly confined or unconfined direc-
tion. The resulting droplet states, stabilized beyond the
MF instability, are finite, localized, and highly stretched
in the dipole direction, denoted z. Droplets appear both
in trapped and fully unconfined settings.
Droplets of
large enough N reach the incompressible regime.
Due to their finite character, droplets exhibit a dis-
crete excitation spectrum, with mode spacing dictated
by the droplets’ sizes. In fully unconfined settings, mode
energies are limited by the droplet’s chemical potential,
thereby setting a limit to the number of modes, which
increases with N. The low-energy excitation spectrum is
dominated by excitations along z, as this is the droplet’s
largest dimension [76, 77]. This corresponds to the ex-
citation configuration modeled by Eq. (5) in III B 2 a for
the uniform state.
Due to the droplet’s non-uniform character, momen-
tum is not a good quantum number, and the dispersion
relation (5) does not directly apply. However, the lowest
excitation branch of sufficiently large droplets proves to
connect with (5) through a mode-momentum assignment
and the inclusion of a term accounting for the LHY sta-
bilization, see Fig. 4 (I.a) [76]. The former is achieved by
considering the first spatial cancellation of the quasipar-
ticle amplitudes, see Fig. 4 (I.b). The latter is done by
adding 3
5γQFn1/2 [see Eq. (7)] to Vint(k) in (5) [76, 79].
This correction is also relevant for uniform superfluids
near the phonon instability, resulting in a lowering of the
instability threshold ac.
The droplet state formed at as < ac exhibits a higher
density than the superfluid state, and a transverse size
governed by its self-bound nature rather than the trap-
ping potential. The density increase, combined with the
added LHY term in (5), and the transverse rearrange-
ment lead to a hardening of the lowest-energy modes,
thus preventing instability. In trapped systems, the ex-
citation gap remains finite and continuous as as varies,
indicating a smooth crossover from uniform superfluid to
droplet [76, 77]. In fully untrapped systems, the lowest
droplet mode goes soft at the transition towards a uni-
form state [76].
For droplets in the incompressible regime, the disper-
sion relation does not exhibit a linear phononic behav-
ior. However, unlike non-interacting BECs where a sim-
ilar deviation arises from dominant kinetic effects, the
droplet nonlinear dispersion stems from interaction ef-
fects, namely the k-dependence of Vint [76], see Fig. 4
(I.a).
The modes of incompressible droplets also have
distinct features: they show minimal bulk density fluctu-
ations and dominant surface ones, the lowest excitation
being of quadrupolar character [76, 77], see Fig. 4 (I.c).
B.
Excitation Spectrum of Supersolids
For roton-driven MF instability, quantum-stabilized
density-modulated ground states can form. Their disper-
sion relation intimately relates to and reflects the crystal
structure. For states with periodic density modulation,
such as those formed in partly infinite geometries (see
IV C), the Bogoliubov quasiparticle amplitudes are well
described by Bloch wavefunctions. These are character-
ized by a quasimomentum q defined on the first Brillouin
zone q ∈] −π/L, π/L] with L the supersolid periodicity
and a branch index ν [93, 95, 108, 115–117].
Supersolids are density-modulated states that also
manifest global superfluidity. A distinctive feature of the
supersolid excitation spectrum is that it features mul-
tiple gapless excitation branches at q →0. According
to the Nambu-Goldstone theorem, the number of gap-
less branches reflects the number of spontaneously bro-
ken continuous symmetries [118]. For supersolids with a
crystal of dimension D, there are D+1 gapless branches,
corresponding to D broken translation symmetries and 1
