11 
 
 
Figure 4. OHUE change between the 2000 period and 1988 period. The top row shows the OHUE change 
from multi-model mean from HIST, GHG, AER, and NAT, respectively. The bottom row shows the results 
from IAP, Ishii datasets, and as well as the excess OHUE based on GF.  
 
The historical results can be decomposed into contributions from GHG, AER, and NAT forcing 
(Figure 4). In both GHG and AER, OHUE weakens (i.e., moves closer to zero) from the 1988 
period to the 2000 period, as shown in Figures 2a and 2b. The positive response in AER is more 
pronounced in the tropical latitudes, which could be linked to the geographic distribution of 
anthropogenic aerosol forcing. Although natural external forcing is often overlooked in long-term 
climate change due to its smaller magnitude relative to GHG and AER forcings, its effect on 
regional OHUE change is comparable to that of the other two forcings (Figure 4d). The zonal 
pattern indicates that the NAT-forced change is mainly affected by the ocean heat uptake in both 
mid-latitudes, which resembles the GHG-induced pattern (Figure 4b). In addition, the positive 
change in NAT is primarily due to the ocean temperature decrease during the Pinatubo eruption 
period (gray curve in Figure 4d).  
The OHUE change maps from the IAP and Ishii datasets reveal a strong positive change in the 
western Pacific and Indian Ocean, along with a negative change in the eastern Pacific—features 
not present in the ensemble mean of the models (Figure S4 in Supporting Information). This 
discrepancy between observations and models suggests that internal climate variability in the 
observations could play a key role in driving these differences. To validate this hypothesis, we 
examine the results from individual members of the CESM2LE model as an example, which 
combines the forced response with a random-phase background noise (Figure S5 in Supporting 
Information). Some realizations match the observed pattern, and some also exhibit a similar pattern 
but with the opposite sign of change. It is worth noting that internal variability is larger than the 
forced responses (Figure S6 in Supporting Information), particularly in certain models (ACCESS-
