Figure 1: Thin section preparation process
To address this challenge, we propose an optimization approach that employs cross-correlation analysis with 3D
rotations to locate the best-matched interface between thin-section and micro-CT images. This approach aims to
(i) reduce manual alignment efforts, (ii) explore the advantages of paired multimodal images in improving digital
rock-based computed effective properties.
To demonstrate the versatility of the proposed method, we apply it to both synthetic 3D porous media, serving as
controlled testbeds for validation, and Berea sandstone samples. These applications highlight the method’s effectiveness
across a range of 3D porous structures. Furthermore, with the two registered images of Berea sandstone, we analyze
differences in pore characteristics and upscaling properties by comparing images from the same location in two
different modalities. Our results indicate that precise registration can help correct image-based simulated properties,
improving the accuracy of image-based rock property estimates. Additionally, this study provides a foundation for
future data-driven super-resolution techniques that rely on spatially consistent multimodal imaging.
2
Method
We developed a systematic approach to register a 2D thin section within a 3D image. Figure 2 shows the overall
procedure of the image registration, which consists of four steps: (1) performing a linear transformation of the 3D CT
scan, (2) extracting a 2D image from the rotated 3D volume, (3) applying template matching to evaluate the similarity
between the extracted image and the thin section image, and (4) repeating (1)–(3) to find the optimal registration via an
optimization algorithm, specifically the differential evolution (DE) algorithm used in this study.
Before performing this workflow, a preprocessing step may be necessary depending on the dataset. In general, when two
images differ in their feature spaces, filters can be applied to make the features more coherent, and the pixel size can be
matched by rescaling [Brown, 1992, Zitova and Flusser, 2003]. In this section, we assume that the two images have the
same resolution and feature space to explain the general procedure of our registration workflow, as preprocessing steps
may vary depending on the dataset. In the section 3.2, we will further discuss the preprocessing steps required for Berea
sandstone digital images. Here, we present the general procedure for registering any 2D image to a 3D CT volume.
3
