Elimination of spurious oscillations on photoemission spectra
19
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
electron energy (a.u.)
10
-7
10
-5
10
-3
10
-1
dP/dE (a.u.)
Stationary BSB
SPM: Ψ
(-) BSB
SPM: Ψ
(-) Jellium
0
0.1
10
-7
10
-4
Figure 11. Photoelectron spectrum perpendicular to the surface Al(111) within
the BSB model: Φ = 0.156 a.u., EF = 0.414 a.u., and a = 311 a.u. subject to
the same laser pulse of Fig. 9. Projection onto stationary states with deﬁnite
parity in brown line (highly oscillating) and onto outgoing scattering waves Ψ(−).
We compare the results with the projection onto scattering waves of the spectrum
corresponding to the jellium model. The inset shows that the Ramsauer-Townsend
resonances present in the jellium model almost vanish in the BSB model.
5. Conclusions
We have introduced the scattering projection method (SPM) to retrieve the energy
spectrum in one-dimensional photoionization problems.
SPM is based on solving
the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation, and projected the ﬁnal time-evolved
wavefunction onto scattering waves that have appropriate incoming or outgoing
boundary conditions. This approach was developed to eliminate spurious oscillations
that often appear in the ionization spectrum when using a numerical basis generated
on a ﬁnite grid.
We compared our method to another commonly used technique
for reducing spurious oscillations, the well-known window-operator method (WOM),
and demonstrated several advantages of SPM. On one hand, SPM more eﬀectively
smooths high-frequency oscillations compared to WOM. Additionally, SPM enables
the computation of directional emission, allowing for the investigation of emission
asymmetry. We have also studied this asymmetry using directional half-cycle pulses.
In practical applications, such as the electron emission from metal surfaces
excited by the grazing incidence of ultrashort laser pulses, previous calculations faced
signiﬁcant challenges from numerous spurious oscillations.
Our new results show
that SPM can resolve certain physical features in the spectra from metal surfaces
while disregarding spurious oscillations. Overall, SPM produces smoother ionization
spectra more eﬃciently than WOM, and, importantly, it does not remove other types
of physical oscillations that mainly arise from genuine quantum interference eﬀects.
