2.3
Search for Light Dark Matter with the neutrino detector
The lack of detection of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles (WIMPs), which were viable dark matter
candidates in the mass range m ≫1 GeV, has led to increased interest in models of light dark matter
(LDM). Such particles could interact via new mediators, such as dark photons, axion-like particles,
fundamental scalars, etc. Depending on the interaction type, there are various signatures with LDM that
can be probed at SHiP: decays, scatterings of electrons or nucleons, as well as the combination of the
latter, such as “double-bang” events [13]. We report here the case of LDM scattering off electrons, which
may be searched for using the SHiP’s neutrino detector.
The final state is characterised by just a single recoil electron. The background source consists
of neutrino interactions with an electron in the final state and one or more unidentified particles. The
background suppression relies on a high-precision tracking performance to identify any other charged
particle produced at the vertex, as well as photons produced by π0 decays. Background from deep
inelastic scattering, the leading process in the 10 – 100 GeV energy range is negligible thanks to the
spatial resolution of the high-precision vertex detector. The residual background mainly consists of
neutrino elastic scattering. For a detector mass of about 3 tonnes and 6 × 1020 protons on target, after
topological and kinematical cuts are applied, SHiP has sensitivity to direct detection down to the expected
relic density of dark matter in the mass range from 10 MeV/c2 up to ∼2mπ in the most commonly used
dark photon-LDM benchmark model [21].
3
Beamline and target facility
At the SPS, the optimal experimental conditions for BDF/SHiP are obtained using a proton beam energy
of 400 GeV combined with short, one-second slow-extracted spills to exploit fast-pulsed cycles to deliver
a high yield of protons on target (PoT). While the SPS has routinely delivered a total of > 5×1019 protons
per year in the past, the experimental programmes that have been running since 2013 have only been
exploiting approximately 1 −1.5 × 1019 protons per year. CERN currently has no experimental facility
that is compatible with the maximum available beam power of the SPS. The ongoing consolidation
of the North Area and upgrades of the CERN injector complex has motivated a comprehensive
upgrade of the existing ECN3 experimental facility to a state-of-the-art high-intensity experimental
facility, capable of fully exploiting the capacity of the SPS in parallel to the operation of the HL-
LHC and CERN’s other fixed target programmes. The upgrade of the facility and the construction of
BDF is carried out under the auspices of the HI-ECN3 project at CERN.
Several detailed investigations of the proton sharing to the different facilities across the CERN
accelerator complex have been carried out [6, 8, 9]. With an average of 200 days of operation per year
and an average of 5000 spills per day, the studies confirm the possibility of delivering 106 spills of
4 × 1013 protons in order to annually deliver a total of 4 × 1019 PoT per year to BDF/SHiP. The working
point of 4 × 1019 PoT per year for BDF/SHiP ensures 1.25 × 1019 protons to the North Area whilst
operating the other SPS beam facilities, and 0.85 × 1019 protons in case a month is dedicated to ions. It
has been verified that there is no technical limitation in the accelerator complex, or in the facility design,
to continue operation at 4 × 1019 PoT per year for 15 years, guaranteeing 6 × 1020 PoT for BDF/SHiP.
The ECN3 experimental hall is located together with the TCC8 target area at the end of the 750 m
long transfer tunnel downstream of TCC2, which is the target area servicing the other North Area ex-
perimental halls EHN1 and EHN2 located on the surface. Both ECN3 and TCC8 are located entirely
below the natural ground level with a 8 m thick additional layer of earth added on top. No additional
beam line is needed to locate BDF in ECN3. The proton beam will be transported from the SPS to ECN3
via the existing primary transfer lines (TT20 and P42). The proton spills for BDF/SHiP will be taken
through the beam splitter system and past the primary production targets in TCC2 on dedicated cycles
without splitting in order to maintain a high transmission efficiency and reduce beam loss to a minimum
for the high intensity beam. The current T4 target system for the H6 and H8 beamlines in EHN1 will be
6
