– SUSY: depending on the super-symmetry breaking scale, super-partners like neutralinos may have
mass in the GeV/c2 range.
The observation of a GeV/c2-mass FIP may also shed light on the existence of new physics at
much higher scales. For instance, ALPs couple to the SM via non-renormalizable operators, with the
dimensional coupling closely related to the scale of the ultraviolet completion of the model. Detecting
ALPs and extracting the value of the coupling would allow identifying the scale, similar to how meson
factories constrain new physics scales by the non-observation of modifications to rare meson decays.
To achieve the highest sensitivity to new physics, SHiP implements a multilayered background
suppression and control strategy, combining optimized shielding, high-granularity background tagger
systems, precise timing and tracking information, and particle identification. One of the primary sources
of background originates from neutrino-induced interactions, where high-energy neutrinos produced in
the proton-beam interactions may generate secondary particles that mimic FIP decays. Another sig-
nificant background source is the high flux of muons generated in the beam dump. They are capable
of producing background through deep-inelastic interactions with the material of the detector, but also
combinatorial background from random muons forming fake vertices. Cosmic-ray-induced backgrounds
are effectively mitigated by the underground location of SHiP and the surrounding background tagger
systems, making their contribution negligibly small.
The SHiP experiment uses a heavy and dense target and a hadron absorber to minimise muons
and neutrinos coming from decay in flight of pions and kaons, and a dedicated muon shield that signi-
ficantly reduces the flux of muons before they reach the fiducial volume of the detector systems. These
are complemented by high-efficiency background tagger systems, capable of rejecting interactions that
could produce background-like signals. A large helium-filled decay region further minimizes material
interactions that could contribute to secondary backgrounds in the search for decay signatures, while
precise timing and topological selection criteria provide additional discrimination power.
The SHiP experiment is uniquely positioned to explore vast regions of parameter space that remain
unconstrained. Its ability to detect long-lived particles will extend well below the coupling strengths
currently probed by accelerator-based experiments. In the benchmarks tested, SHiP’s sensitivity reaches
2-4 orders of magnitude in the coupling scale beyond current experimental bounds. For fixed couplings,
the span in mass may be over 1-2 orders of magnitude. Hence, SHiP can measure thousands of events
for couplings that are orders of magnitude below the current limits, offering not just discovery potential
but also the opportunity to characterise new physics with unprecedented precision.
Fig. 1 illustrates the projected sensitivity of SHiP for a variety of new physics models, often used
in literature as benchmarks. Given its robust experimental design and the long-term operation plan, the
limits set by SHiP will remain a reference for decades.
Beyond setting new constraints, the redundancy of SHiP’s background rejection systems and its
optimized detector layout ensure that, in the event of a discovery, the experiment will not only detect new
physics but also precisely measure the properties of any new particles. The ability to reconstruct decay
vertices, measure lifetimes, and determine coupling strengths will allow for a detailed study of any new
phenomena observed. In particular, SHiP can reconstruct the masses of FIPs and distinguish between
different theoretical models by analyzing their production and decay characteristics. For instance:
– Reconstructing various decay modes of FIPs enables determination of the FIP’s spin and the struc-
ture of the operators that couple the FIP to the SM [11].
– HNLs are capable of explaining neutrino oscillations and baryon asymmetry of the Universe. At
SHiP, these would manifest themselves via a position-dependent excess of lepton number violating
decays and particular patterns of HNL couplings to neutrinos. Observing around 1000 events with
HNLs at SHiP may be enough to answer how they are involved in the resolution of those BSM
problems [11,12]. Furthermore, in the mass range around 1 GeV/c2, SHiP may cover practically
3
