12
Here
|ψ(x, y, t′)|2
is
analogous
to
a
density
in
photons.m−2.s−1.
The conversion t′ →ζ′ defined in
Eq. 58 is then used to convert to photons.m−3 (in the
compressed frame):
|ψ(x, y, t′)|2 =
r mt
m⊥
|ψ(x, y, ζ′)|2.
(60)
We combine Eq. (59) and Eq. (60) and multiply by c to
take into account the change of variable along z and by
ℏto obtain:
iℏ∂ψ(x, y, ζ′)
∂τ
=

−ℏ2
2 ¯m∇2 −i¯γ + ¯V (r⊥, ζ′) + ¯g3D|ψ|2

ψ(x, y, ζ′),
(61)
with ¯g3D = ℏc × 2ℏω0
ε0n0c ×
r mt
m⊥
× −k0
nE
2
n0
.
(62)
This simplifies to
¯g3D = −nI
2 (ℏω0)2
r mt
m⊥
.
(63)
The interaction energy in the GPE Eint = gρ is therefore
obtain in the optics language by Eint = ℏω0 × −∆n
which is simply the energy of one photon times the
nonlinear index change.
We established a formal mapping of the dispersive
NLSE to a 3D+1 GPE. Like in the previously treated
2D+1 case, we will now preferably use the native optics
units of Eq. (49). As seen in Eq. (58), the conversion
from the temporal units (relative to t or t′ axis) to the
spatial units along ζ′ is done via a multiplication by the
mass ratio
p
mt/m⊥= 1/√−k0D0 in [m.s−1].
In optics language, the “momentum” of a perturbation
along the co-moving t′-axis is then δω = ω −ω0 as de-
fined in Eq. (50) with ω0 the central frequency of the
laser. Then, the response of the system to a perturba-
tion of momentum k = (kx, ky, δω) will be given by the
“3D” Bogoliubov dispersion relation:
ΩB(k) =
s k2
⊥
2k0
+ δω2|D0|
2
  k2
⊥
2k0
+ δω2|D0|
2
+ k0|∆n|

.
(64)
The dispersion (64) is still linear at low k, but k =
(kx, ky, δω) is now three-dimensional. An important con-
sequence of this relation is that, for δω ̸= 0, a gap opens
in the dispersion along k⊥and the linear dispersion pro-
gressively vanishes. In other words, the dispersion of a
weak excitation propagating along the x direction is mod-
ified if its frequency differs from that of the driving laser
ω0. Similarly, the temporal evolution of an excitation (in
the co-moving frame) is influenced by its momentum in
the transverse plane. In the following, we will estimate
the various orders of magnitude to understand when this
coupling starts to play a non-negligible role.
C. Discussion on the dimensionality of the system
The 3D+1 representation established here does not ac-
tually require a laser pulse to be correct; any slowly vary-
ing modulation of a continuous-wave (CW) laser is also
well described in this way. However, in almost all ex-
periments on paraxial fluids of light to date, only the
two-dimensional dynamics in the transverse plane, de-
scribed by a 2D+1 NLSE, have been explored (see Sec-
tion VII). To know whether this picture is sufficient or if
one should take into account the dynamics along the co-
moving time axis t′, let us examine the different orders of
magnitudes involved along the t′-axis. We take again the
example of a hot rubidium vapor cell, with ∆n ∼10−5,
k0 ∼8 × 106 m−1. For the length of the medium, which
typically ranges from 1 to 20 cm (see Section V), we will
take here L =10 cm.
In the 2D+1 experiments the system is only modu-
lated in the transverse plane. The detection is done by
imaging the density (and the phase) on a camera with an
exposure time texp >1 µs. This exposure time is to be
compared to the characteristic scale of superfluid dynam-
ics along the t′ axis, which is ξt =
p
−D0/2k0∆n. For
hot rubidium vapor a typical value of D0 near resonance
is D0 ∼−10−18s2m−1, which gives ξt ∼0.5 ns ≪texp.
So the typical time dynamics related to the interactions
would be integrated out by the detection methods of ex-
periments, giving access exclusively to the dynamics.
But, letting apart the detection method, is there any
dynamics taking place along the t′ axis in these experi-
ments? We can evaluate the smallest value of δω giving a
significant evolution of a weak excitation after propaga-
tion in a medium of length L: ΩB(k⊥= 0, δωmin)L ∼π.
Then, δωmin ∼2π · 400 MHz. This implies that any ex-
citation below about 400 MHz can be considered frozen
out in the dynamics of fluids of light. At such frequen-
cies, and even down to 1 MHz, modern CW lasers are
typically shot-noise limited. As a result, unless temporal
modulation or noise is deliberately added at frequencies
above δωmin, the system contains only vacuum fluctua-
tions above that frequency range.
The 2D+1 experiments do not impose any additional
time perturbations, but time-excitations are generated
from the quench of the interactions at the entrance of the
nonlinear medium, which creates a distribution of pairs of
correlated excitations of momentum (k, −k) (Larr´e and
Carusotto, 2015). The signature of these excitations in
the (x,y) plane was measured in the transverse noise spec-
trum (Steinhauer et al., 2022)), and we expect a similar
manifestation along the t′-axis. However, these fluctua-
tions average to zero, so we can neglect the effect of the
quench in the mean-field data (in the absence of stimu-
lation of the process). In the typical transverse experi-
ments, we can thus safely neglect the time dynamics.
Finally, we discuss the geometric aspect ratio in typical
experiments. In the CW laser case, the fluid’s dimensions
