Comparative Investigation of MAPbBrxI1−x and SbH4BrxI1−x Perovskites: Electronic
and Structural Properties
Veysel C¸elik1, ∗
1Department of Mathematics and Science Education, Siirt University, Siirt 56100, Turkey
(Dated: April 9, 2025)
This paper comparatively investigates the structural and electronic properties of hybrid per-
ovskites MAPbBrxI1−x and SbH4PbBrxI1−x by means of DFT-based calculations. The main aim is
to check if the increase in band gap due to substitution of I−ions with Br−ions can be overcome by
introducing the inorganic SbH+
4 cation. Since the Br−ions merely enhance structural stability of
the perovskite framework and SbH+
4 not only sustains that stability but also reduces the band gap
to nearly ideal values and thereby improves electronic performance, these are the leading candidates
among them. Of them, the reduced band gap SbH4PbI3 (∼1.37 eV) and the perfectly matched
SbH4PbBrI2 with its band gap being exactly 1.51 eV are top prospects for being stable and having
high-efficiency solar cell applications. The findings show that SbH+
4 -based perovskites have potential
for future photovoltaic devices.
PACS numbers: 68.43.Bc, 68.43.Fg
I.
INTRODUCTION
Among
photovoltaic
researches,
methylammonium
lead iodide (MAPbI3) is the most researched perovskite
compound. This compound has attracted great atten-
tion as it possesses near-ideal band gap of approximately
1.55 eV that facilitates the effective absorption of a broad
solar spectrum and enables high photocurrent genera-
tion1,2. Its desirable optoelectronic properties and crys-
tal structure have been key determinants of the tremen-
dous progress realized in the power conversion efficiencies
(PCEs) of perovskite solar cells in the past ten years3,4.
Hybrid organic–inorganic metal–halide perovskites,
and more particularly MAPbI3, have been the subject
of intense research due to their exquisite photovoltaic
characteristics. Investigation of antimony hydride–based
perovskites such as SbH4PbI3 has been relatively sparse.
Filip et al.5 systematically investigated perovskite com-
positions by replacing the A-site cations with hydride-
based ions (NH+
4 , PH+
4 , AsH+
4 , SbH+
4 ) and studied the
resulting electronic band structures using GW calcula-
tions. They discovered that SbH4PbI3 possesses a con-
venient direct band gap of approximately 1.4 eV, which
is suitable for photovoltaic applications.
Furthermore,
these materials possess small electron and hole effective
masses (less than 0.3 electron masses), indicating good
charge transport properties5,6. The electronic properties
of SbH4PbI3 are therefore highly promising.
But to look into the electronic properties of SbH4PbI3,
along with its stability it is also important. Tenuta et
al.7 performed density functional theory (DFT) calcu-
lations in order to look into the thermodynamic stabil-
ity of hybrid halide perovskites, SbH4PbI3 being one of
them.
Their overall conclusion was that the materials
have poor thermodynamic stability largely due to inher-
ent structural attributes and environmental susceptibili-
ties. In particular, they identified that chemical stability
of SbH4PbI3 is directly related to aqueous solubility of
its decomposition product, SbH4I, in a way that the ma-
terial becomes susceptible to degradation upon exposure
to humid environments. Another study, nonetheless, by
Rego et al.8 more recently showed that the incorpora-
tion of van der Waals (vdW) corrections alters drasti-
cally the stability predictions, in a way that SbH4PbI3 is
thermodynamically favored. Their work also showed that
the incorporation of non-local correlation effects via vdW
interactions helps remove the discrepancies in standard
DFT calculations and hence provides a better estimate
of SbH4PbI3 stability. These are theoretical investiga-
tions and need more experimental data to back them up.
One very certain prediction can be made, however, that
the incorporation of the PbI−
3 complex ion will lower the
overall stability.
MAPbI3 is known to have severe disadvantages that
disqualify it from being practically utilized. In particu-
lar, the material is inherently unstable in the presence of
moisture, oxygen, and heat stress, which leads to rapid
degradation of the photovoltaic performance9,10. Substi-
tution of iodide (I−) in the perovskite structure with bro-
mide (Br−) has been recognized as a probable choice to
inhibit these disadvantages. Bromide ions, being smaller
in ionic radius than iodide ions, result in the cage param-
eters decreasing and contribute to greater structural sta-
bility2,11. The enhanced thermal and moisture stability
of the resultant perovskite material with stronger Pb–Br
bonds, however, has the drawback of a broader band gap
reducing absorption of the solar spectrum. Consequently,
mixed-halide perovskites comprising both bromide and
iodide ions are of intense focus as a method of maximiz-
ing efficiency and stability12,13.
Moreover, Zheng and
Rubel14 demonstrated that the strong electron affinity
of the PbI−
3 complex ion significantly detracts from the
thermodynamic stability of perovskites. Therefore, step-
wise substitution of iodide atoms by bromide atoms in
SbH4PbI3 is suggested as a probable means of reducing
electron affinity and thus enhancing structural stability.
In the present work, a strategy consisting of controlled
arXiv:2504.05889v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  8 Apr 2025
