parallel temperature. This scattering process by whistler waves drives the system toward a
more isotropic state.
As the simulation progresses, repetitive whistler wave generation becomes evident. Figure
4(d) clearly shows that the excitation of each wave element corresponds to a rapid reduction
in the temperature anisotropy. Additionally, the increase in parallel electron temperature
leads to a downshift in wave frequency [Figure 4(c)], as well as lowering the instability thresh-
old for temperature anisotropy. These simulation results confirm that microwave heating
effectively energizes electrons and triggers whistler wave excitation in the LAPD parameter
space. Furthermore, they provide strong evidence that the experimentally observed repeti-
tive whistler wave excitation is intrinsically linked to the self-regulating nature of whistler
anisotropy instability in a driven system. Because the time scale for anisotropy relaxation
is significantly shorter than its build-up, the repetition period is primarily controlled by
the microwave heating rate, with greater heating power corresponding to a faster repetition
rate. The same relation applies to magnetospheric plasma, as the time scale for anisotropy
relaxation due to whistler wave generation is t ≃50 ω−1
ce ≃4e−3 s [42, 49], which is much
smaller than both the repetition period and the electron heating time scale.
In summary, this Letter reports whistler wave generation by electron temperature
anisotropy created in a controlled laboratory setting, closely resembling the excitation
mechanisms in near-Earth space. Experimental observations, theoretical analysis, and PIC
simulations confirm that continuous microwave heating induces electron anisotropy, leading
to whistler wave excitation through anisotropy driven instability. This driven system ex-
hibits a repetitive cycle of wave emission and electron anisotropy buildup and relaxation.
These experiments open a new avenue for investigating the detailed processes involved in
whistler wave excitation, contributing to the understanding of energetic electron dynamics
in near-Earth space.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by NASA grant NO. 80NSSC20K0917, NSF grant NO. 2108582
and DOE grant NO. DE-SC0024910.
We would like to acknowledge high-performance
computing support from Derecho (https://doi.org/10.5065/qx9a-pg09) provided by
NCAR’s Computational and Information Systems Laboratory, sponsored by the National
10
