care was taken to reduce beam damage by detuning the beam (i.e. applying a small
change in the undulator gap value to reduce peak intensity) and cooling the sample
to temperatures between 100 K and 180 K. (See the Supplementary Information for
more detail regarding the issue of beam damage.) The NIXSW data (Fig. 3) were
acquired via the accumulation of Ar 2p photoemission spectra during twelve separate
sweeps of photon energy through the Ag(111) Bragg condition. (At 180 K the bulk
lattice constant for Ag is 4.0779 ˚A, equating to a (111) plane spacing of 2.354 ˚A
and a corresponding Bragg energy of 2633.47 eV). A Jupyter Notebook version of
NIXSW/dynamical X-ray scattering code that had previously been developed by two
of the authors (DAD and T-LL) was used to fit the data and extract the coherent
position and coherent fraction parameters.
Core hole clock considerations and fitting
The determination of the delocalization/charge transfer time, τD, is dependent on
accurate knowledge of the core hole lifetime, τCH. Our choice of Ar@C60 (as opposed
to other endofullerenes) for the measurement of intracage excited state delocalization
was motivated in part by the ready availability of high precision measurements of the
Ar 2p core-hole lifetime (5.7 ± 0.1 fs[33]). Moreover, argon is a particularly attractive
target species for CHC experiments due to the easily-resolved spectator shift, i.e. the
difference in kinetic energy between the electron spectra arising from the two distinct
decay channels in Fig. 1(b). The delocalization time, τD, is calculated from the relative
integrated intensities of the spectator and “traditional” Auger-Meitner contributions
(ISpec and IAuger, respectively) to the de-excitation spectra:
τD =
 ISpec
IAuger

τCH
(1)
An additional motivation for the use of argon lies in the X-ray absorption linewidth,
and, in particular, its relationship to the resolving power of the beamline (∼10,000)
at the Ar L3 edge. As noted above, our measurements were acquired in the Auger-
Meitner resonant Raman mode, for which the X-ray photon bandwidth (∼25 meV in
this case) is significantly smaller than the natural lifetime of the core-hole. When this
is the case, the kinetic energy of the spectator peaks tracks the variation in photon
energy across the absorption edge (for the reasons discussed by Menzel[26].); in other
words the spectator peaks remain at fixed binding energy (see Fig. 2). Conversely, the
peaks arising from the “traditional” (i.e. non-Raman) Auger-Meitner process remain at
fixed kinetic energy. These, and many other, constraints were applied during the fitting
of the set of Auger-Meitner decay spectra acquired across the X-ray absorption reso-
nance. An extensive description of our fitting strategy is given in the supplementary
information.
Density functional theory (DFT) calculations.
For the results shown in Fig.3, the structure of Ar@C60 was first optimised at the
DFT/PBE/6-31++G∗∗level of theory and the orbitals involved in the Ar 2p →4s
transition were identified. The excited state was then calculated at the same level
13
