the previous region. We observe that our result is close to the 1-loop β-function shown in
dashed line since the truncated critical exponent at 1/N2 order is well approximated by
the ϵ term (compare with Eq.4) except around the poles just. This feature is similar to
the gauge-fermion example above.
Figure 10: Solutions of the SCR for the truncated critical exponent at second
order (left Y -function and right β-function). The apparent ”kicks” correspond to
the solutions getting closer to the poles and hence delimit the different intervals
over which the SCR is numerically solved. The black dashed line is the 1-loop
Y (β)-function.
Based on this result, we may speculate on the effect of 1/N2 corrections in the gauge
theory above. These corrections may similarly change the sign of the singularities in which
case the solutions of the SCR away from the poles will be close to the 1-loop beta function
as in the O(N) example while if they do not change sign the reconstructed beta function
will be multi-valued, and hence ill-defined.
4
Conclusion
We investigated the critical behavior of generic QFTs featuring a single marginal coupling
in d−ϵ dimensions to extract information about its d dimensional counterpart. To achieve
this goal we first derived and then analyzed the implications of the self-consistent relation
between the d −ϵ scaling exponent and the d dimensional beta function. The relation
allowed us show that to describe an interacting FP in the d dimensional theory at least
two critical exponents must exist as function of ϵ. These eventually collide for a given ϵ in a
non-Lipschitz way. We illustrated this feature for the Banks-Zaks infrared FP in 4d QCD.
However, for the large number of flavours limit in QCD the absence of a multivalued critical
exponent for the d−ϵ sister theory prevents from concluding on the absence of a non-trivial
UV fixed point. This result shows that the statement made in [14] is invalid. Moreover,
we demonstrated that the potential existence of poles in the critical exponents as function
of ϵ in the d −ϵ theory prohibits the reconstruction of the full RG flow, when the critical
exponent signs on both sides of the pole are opposite. In fact, if the signs agree one can
reconstruct the flow by gluing together different regions of the RG flow. Interestingly, we
observed that, at the order 1/N, the time-honored four-dimensional O(N) model features
poles with switching signs for the critical exponents of the sister theory in d−ϵ dimensions.
However, the full flow for the theory can be reconstructed when taking into account the
1/N2 corrections. We expect a similar behavior to occur also for gauge-fermion theories at
large number of flavors. It would be interesting to generalize our results to multi-coupling
theories.
