A second notable finding is that the relative humidity feedback also becomes very small; indeed,
the relative humidity changes in the interactive-SST runs (Fig. 11, panel a) are very similar to
those for the fixed-SST runs. As a consequence, the feedback becomes strongly dominated by the
Planck response. It is also very close to zero in the tropics and subtropics and has a substantial
contribution only poleward of 40◦.
d. Summary
We conclude the following about the connection between the circulation changes and the TOA
radiation changes:
• In the deep tropics, between 0◦and 15◦, the radiative changes are mainly driven by the forcing
(Fig. 10). The circulation changes (specifically the collapse of the MMC, which is not fully
compensated by eddy transport changes) result in decreased divergence of the meridional
energy transport (Fig. 6), which is balanced by increased OLR. The increased OLR, in turn, is
driven by a drying of the atmosphere (Fig. 11) which again finds its source in the circulation
changes, as they result in increased divergence of the meridional moisture transport (see
Section 6). This behavior is found in both fixed- and interactive-SST runs, although in the
latter case a portion of the additional energy convergence can be used to warm the surface and
the whole column, increasing its specific humidity at the same time. This feedback occurs
essentially at fixed relative humidity.
• Further from the equator, in the subtropics (between 15◦and 40◦), the circulation changes
(combination of reduced mean meridional circulation and increased eddy transport) lead to de-
creased convergence of meridional energy transport (Fig. 6), balanced by decreased OLR. The
OLR decrease results from the interplay of humidity changes and thermal structure changes
(the atmosphere is moister and slightly cooler, Figs. 8 and 9) which are well summarized by a
strong increase in relative humidity (Fig. 11).Again, this relative humidity change is consistent
with the circulation changes, and in particular the collapse of the MMC. The interactive-SST
runs are quite similar to the fixed-SST runs in that area, i.e. the feedbacks remain relatively
small, as the deficit of energy convergence can be compensated radiatively through the hu-
midity increase without affecting surface temperature. Nevertheless, this is less and less the
case as we move poleward, and there is a progressive transition to the regime described next.
23
