optimal simulation it is preferable to deviate from this ideal and focus attention solely on the reaction
mechanism/bond reconfiguration step.5 We then initialize the reactants close to the catalyst surface
with minimal velocity, giving rise to a “soft-landing” to facilitate adsorption. The preparation of in-
dependent states for each reactant and the catalyst then remains justified to the extent that it does
not significantly influence the reaction mechanism. This can be deemed acceptable based on heuristic
considerations, or alternatively the initial mutual separation between the chemical species could also
be treated as a convergence parameter subject to numerical experimentation.
2. Kinematic modeling requirements: These refer to further kinematic constraints imposed by the single
reaction-event physics we focus on. For example, to faithfully model a small time window of a single
reaction event of a larger chemical reaction, the wavepackets should not significantly delocalize before
strong interactions between all species develop, and the time for strong interactions to develop should
be smaller than the average time between reactant collisions, e.g. in the case of the gas, the mean free
time.
Rotational Motion
We may approach the rotational motion with a similar spirit. Statistical mechanics again suggests preparing
these DoF in a thermal state. A collection of atoms forming metal clusters/slabs, or most molecules for
that matter, have large equilibrium principal moments of inertia, which are inversely proportional to the
energy scale of rotations. If one associates a rotational temperature Θrot to this rotational energy scale, for
typical reaction temperatures T we have T ≫Θrot. Barring H2, with Θrot ∼10−40K, small molecules have
rotational temperatures Θrot ≲0.1 −10K (see Table 11C.1 in [68] and Table 6.1 in [69]). Hence, naively we
would have to prepare a thermal state of rotational eigenstates (e.g., eigenstates of the rigid rotor Hamiltonian
under typical approximations discussed later) to very high angular momentum for molecules. This is a non-
trivial state preparation that could be carried out by a similar procedure as that discussed for the vibrational
modes in the next section. In practice, however, such a rotational state preparation is not desirable. For
small molecules, larger angular momenta, and therefore larger angular velocities, are associated with initial
configurations that are less likely to adsorb to the catalysts. Hence, these configurations are less kinetically
relevant for simulations. For larger molecules, even though one naively expects the angular momentum to
acquire a large quantum number, the effective linear velocities of extremal atoms decreases with increasing
molecular size, and are asymptotically small compared to the contribution from the vibrational states.
Accordingly, we construct the molecular reactants in the rotational ground state.
This choice carries a
potential additional benefit.
Assume that a uniform superposition in the rotational degrees of freedom
effectively behaves as a uniform ensemble for the purposes of chemical bonding and determining the output
reaction rates. Then, initializing the molecule in the spherically symmetric rotational ground state effectively
captures uniform averaging over classical molecular orientations relative to the catalytic surface, which would
instead require several distinct classical calculations. Finally, note that substrates (slabs) are approximated
in our approach as being periodic, and hence do not have rotational modes associated with them due to
being confined in a simulation super cell. Isolated atoms also do not have rotational modes.
Vibrational Motion
The vibrational modes, extensive in the number of atoms for any molecule, cluster, or other extended phase,
typically carry the majority of the thermal energy and are mechanistically critical for bond reconfiguration.
After all, vibrationally stretching a bond is highly conducive to eventually breaking it, a precursor to forming
new bond configurations. At typical reaction temperatures, for most small and medium size molecules, only
a few excitations of vibrational modes occur, since they typically involve energies scales between 10 to
300 meV (∼80 to 2500 cm−1). Therefore, at the initial time, we prepare the vibrational modes of molecules
in a thermal state with a finite cutoff on the number of excitations per mode, i.e.
a truncated thermal
state. Similarly, we build a truncated thermal state for the vibrational modes of the catalyst, although
the cutoffs for a large cluster or extended phase are higher and therefore will consume more computational
5If we insisted in preparing reactants far enough from the surface that they are approximately non-interacting at the initial
time, we would easily find ourselves spending the majority of the overall simulation time waiting for the reactants to reach the
surface.
11
