further briefly review the calculation of the relative entanglement entropy of a massless fermionic field for disjoint intervals
in the Schwarzschild spacetime using the two-point function. This yields various interesting properties and inequalities
associated with the mutual information of the field in various states. Section 3 introduces the Unruh DeWitt detector
(UDW) formalism for fermionic fields and calculates the transition rates of the quantum probe in different vacua, as
the transition probability is a competing term in the correlation measures.
The transition probability in the usual
scenario is positively correlated with temperature; however, it can also decrease with an increase in temperature due to
the anti-Hawking effect [42]. We introduce the condition for the anti-Hawking effect and later correlate it with results
obtained from entanglement harvesting. Section 4 starts with a discussion of the entanglement measures used in the later
subsections. We investigate entanglement harvesting with two static detectors—one in close proximity to the horizon
and the other at some proper distance from it. We vary the proper distance between detectors, keeping other parameters
constant, and perform entanglement harvesting. The subsequent subsection explores the entanglement characteristics of
the vacuum relative to the distance from the horizon, with fixed detector separation and other fixed parameters. The
same analysis is also repeated for both detectors in free-fall trajectories in the following subsection. Finally, section 5
provides a comparative analysis of the near-horizon entanglement properties of the Hartle-Hawking state with those of
the Minkowski vacua in the context of a uniformly accelerated detector in flat spacetime. Conclusions are discussed in
the last section. Use is made of natural units, namely ℏ=c= kB=1, throughout the paper.
2
QFT in spherically symmetric spacetime
We begin with a concise review of quantum field theory applied to fermionic fields within the context of curved spacetime
and then present the derivation of the two-point functions in various vacuum states.
We define spacetime as a pair (M, g), where M is a connected 4-dimensional Hausdorff manifold and g is a metric
of signature +2 on M [43]. If it admits an isometric action Φ : SO(3) × M →M such that the maximal dimensions
of its orbits are two, then we call the spacetime to be spherically symmetric. Any spherically symmetric solution of the
vacuum Einstein field equation exhibits local isometry with the Schwarzschild solution [44]. In particular, a non-rotating
body undergoing gravitational collapse results in the formation of a Schwarzschild black hole. In this paper, we focus
specifically on the Schwarzschild spacetime.
2.1
The classical Schwarzschild spacetime
The Schwarzschild spacetime possesses three globally spacelike Killing vector fields, in addition to one more Killing
vector field that is timelike outside the horizon and spacelike inside the horizon. The metric in (1+3) dimensions, using
Schwarzschild coordinates, can be expressed as follows:
ds2 = −

1 −2GM
r

dt2
S +
1

1 −2GM
r
dr2 + r2(dθ2 + sin2 θdϕ2).
(1)
Here M is the ADM mass associated with the geometry, and {tS, r, θ, ϕ} represents the Schwarzschild coordinates.
Furthermore, one should also note that the above expression, denoted by Eq.(1), is a classical relation and does not say
anything about the quantum states of space-time. However, one can take various matter fields and study their quantum
theory in a classical curved spacetime.
For ease of application in later sections, let us introduce null coordinates v = tS + r∗, u = tS −r∗, with r∗=
r + Rs log |r/Rs −1| and Rs = 2GM. Essentially, the constant value of any one of these coordinates describes null
geodesics corresponding to ingoing and outgoing directions, respectively. While certain entanglement properties depend
upon the angular components, the majority of these properties remain valid when we confine our focus to radial motion
exclusively. The truncated Schwarzschild line element, in (1+1) dimensions, in the new coordinates becomes
ds2 = −Rs
r e−r/Rse(v−u)/2Rsdudv.
(2)
The above metric, represented as Eq.(2), has a coordinate singularity at Rs = 2GM. Nonetheless, it is possible to
perform an analytic continuation of this metric, making it regular at all points except for r=0. This can be achieved by
introducing new coordinates, U := ∓2Rs exp (−u/2Rs) and V := 2Rs exp (v/2Rs), which are commonly referred to as
the Kruskal coordinates. The line element corresponding to Kruskal coordinates is
ds2 = −Rs
r e−r/RsdUdV.
(3)
4
