5
FIG. 5: Transient population dynamics of (a) neutral parti-
cles (blue), (b) negatively charged particles (red) and (c) posi-
tively charged particles (black) for 100 pulses. The population
variation of positively charged particles remains constant over
time. However, the population of neutral particles decreases
steadily and that of negatively charged particle increaes. The
cross-over pulse number (nco) is visible at the intersection
point of the population curves for negatively charged parti-
cles and neutral particles. The dash line shows the large time
scale asymptotic ﬁt for the population of negatively charged
particles. The size of the particle is 500 nm.
of population dynamics for large time scale, 100 pulses
(= 2 ms) simulation has been performed as shown in
Figure 5. Although the population of positively charged
particles ﬂuctuate within single pulse, but their popula-
tion shows staeady state over multi-pulse scenario as is
also evident from 2-pulses analysis. However, it is clear
that the population of negatively charged particles in-
creases steadily over time at large time scale and that
of neutral particles decreases.
A cross-over point at a
certain pulse number can be obtained between the pop-
ulation curve of negatively charged particles and that of
neutral particles. Such cross-over point is size dependent
which implies that the growth/decay rates of such pop-
ulation curves are size dependent. The larger the size
of the particles, the smaller is the cross-over time. As
an example, the cross-over pulse number (nco) is 12 for
500 nm particle size where as it is extremely large for
smaller size particles of 10nm. To make an estimation
for the critical pulse number (ncr) required for complete
conversion of neutral particles to negatively charged par-
ticles for a ﬁxed size of particle, an analytical asymptotic
analysis is performed at the plateu regime of the popu-
lation curve for negatively charged particles. As an ex-
ample, the population dynamics curve for 500 nm size
negatively charged particles at large time scale is ﬁtted
with asymptote: Nneg = 2.22×10−5 ×np +0.7883, where
Nneg is the population of negatively charged particles and
np is the pulse number. To estimate the “critical” pulse
number ncp when the complete population conversion of
FIG. 6: The critical pulse number (ncr) is estimated for a
particular size of particles when all the neutral particles will
be converted to negatively charged particles. The variation
of such critical pulse number with particle size is shown in
this ﬁgure (red curve). The smaller the size of the particles,
the larger is the critical pulse number. The variation of cross-
over pulse number (nco) with particle size is shown by the blue
curve (also in inset). No cross-over is found for the particles
> 200 nm diameter within our simulation range of 100 pulses.
neutral particles to negatively charged particle will occur
is Nneg = 1−Npos where the maximum value of positively
charged particle population 0.01 (1%) is considered. Now
implementing these values in the above asymptotic equa-
tion, the approximate critical pulse number for a partic-
ular size of particle can be obtained. The large time scale
asymptotic expressions are diﬀerent for diﬀerent size par-
ticles. It is to be noted that uncertainty is much higher
to determine ncp for particles < 100 nm particles as the
steady growth continues for the population curve of neg-
atively charged particle within simulation time reported
in this work. The dependence of critical pulse number on
particle size is shown in Figure 6. The bigger is the par-
ticle size, less number of pulses are needed for complete
population conversion of neutral particles to negatively
charged particles. On the other hand, for smaller size
particles (< 40 nm), the critical pulse number, ncr →∞.
In conclusion, the population dynamics of the charged
particles inside and outside EUV beams have been con-
sidered for single and multi-pulse scenario for the ﬁrst
time. The populations of diﬀerent species strongly de-
pends on surrounding plasma conditions and associated
plasma-particle interactions (outside EUV beam area) or
plasma-particle-photon interactions (inside EUV path).
At the beginning of single pulse during EUV-ON (< 100
ns), the population of positively charged particles rises
sharply due to particle-photon interactions, but subse-
quently fast decay occurs due to afterglow eﬀect. How-
ever over multi-pulse scenario, the population of posi-
tively charged particles ﬂuctuate but maintains a steady
state average value. However, the population of nega-
tively charged particles increases over pulses and that
