Endoscopic fiber-coupled diamond magnetometer for cancer surgery
A. J. Newman,1, 2, ∗S. M. Graham,1, 2 C. J. Stephen,1, 2 A. M. Edmonds,3 M. L. Markham,3 and G. W. Morley1, 2, †
1Department of Physics, University of Warwick, Gibbet Hill Road, Coventry, CV4 7AL, United Kingdom
2EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Diamond Science and Technology,
University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom
3Element Six Innovation, Fermi Avenue, Harwell Oxford, Didcot OX11 0QR Oxfordshire, United Kingdom
Interoperative measurements using magnetic sensors is a valuable technique in cancer surgery for
finding magnetic tracers. Here we present a fiber-coupled nitrogen-vacancy (N-V) center magne-
tometer capable of detecting iron oxide suspension (MagTrace™from Endomagnetics Ltd.) used in
breast cancer surgeries. Detection of an iron mass as low as 0.56 mg has been demonstrated, 100
times less than that of a recommended dose at a maximum distance of 5.8 mm. Detection of an iron
concentration as low as 2.8 mg/ml has also been demonstrated, 20 times less than a recommended
dose. The maximum working distance from the sensor can be as large as 14.6 mm for higher con-
centrations. The sensor head has a maximum diameter of 10 mm which would allow it to be used
for endoscopy, laparoscopy and interoperative surgery.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Non-toxic and non-radioactive techniques for finding
metastasized breast cancer in lymph nodes are becoming
more prevalent in hospitals around the world as magnetic
based sensors have developed and are able to be used in
place of blue dyes and radioisotopes [1–6]. Radioisotopes,
detected using a gamma probe, are expensive and not avail-
able in all hospitals. Furthermore, using radioisotopes ex-
poses the medical team and the patient to radiation which
is preferably avoided. Blue dye can be injected into the pri-
mary tumor and accumulates in the sentinel lymph node
over time, highlighting its location to the surgeon through
visual inspection. Allergic reactions to blue dye have been
reported in approximately one in a hundred patients [7–11].
Blue dyes also can cause long term staining of the skin at
the injection site.
To mitigate the risks associated with these techniques,
magnetic sensors have been increasingly utilized in sentinel
lymph node biopsy (SLNB) to provide detection of non-
toxic superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPION)
[12–15] suspended in liquid which can be injected into the
patient from 20 minutes to two weeks before surgery. Mag-
netic detection can have two operating modes, one using
alternating current (AC) and a coil to generate an AC mag-
netic field [16–18] and the other using permanent magnets
[19]. AC field methods cause the target to produce an AC
magnetic field which is detected. Heating of tissue due to
the frequency and amplitude of the nearby probe through
Joule heating is also an issue. [20–22].
NV center magnetometry couples high dynamic range
[23–25] and high magnetic sensitivity [26–29] with small
sensing volumes e.g. 1 mm3 or less [23, 28, 30–33]. The
small sensor size is appropriate for SLNB applications be-
cause it reduces the volume inserted into the patient re-
ducing trauma and bruising. Furthermore for laparoscopic
surgeries, probes are limited in size by the trocar used in
these procedures, typically to 12 mm diameter, which high-
lights the need for small probes. [34]. The ability to fiber
∗Alex.Newman@warwick.ac.uk
† Gavin.Morley@warwick.ac.uk
couple the diamond also provides more maneuverability
when compared with a solid rod or rigid baton found in
other devices [20, 35]. Sensing of magnetic fields using NV
centers in diamond has previously been used to detect mag-
netic nanoparticles for sensing in biomedical tissue [35, 36].
One design had a non-mobile sensor head for imaging cells
that had been removed from the patient or animal [36].
The other had a sensor head that is 20 mm in diameter
which is too large for these surgical applications, as well as
an AC sensitivity of 57 nT/
√
Hz [35].
Here we present an endoscopic fiber-coupled diamond
magnetometer with a maximum diameter of 10 mm. This
diameter makes the probe applicable for use in endoscopic,
laparoscopic, and interoperative surgical procedures.
Its
compact design is achieved by using a small permanent
magnet, that is attached to the probe head, for both a bias
field and inducing fields in the sample. This eliminates the
need for bulky AC excitation and cancellation coils, as well
as the need for providing power to the sensor head. The
probe can detect iron oxide nanoparticles at concentrations
as low as 2.8 mg/ml at a distance of 5.8 mm, with a max-
imum detection range of 14.6 mm at the highest tested
concentration of 28 mg/ml. The system has an unshielded
sensitivity of 12.3 ± 4.1 nT/
√
Hz between 0.5 and 10 Hz.
Unlike conventional NV magnetometers that require a sta-
tionary permanent magnet bias field, our design incorpo-
rates a bias magnet attached to the probe, allowing it to
move without losing sensitivity. This feature is essential
for handheld magnetometer probes in applications such as
medical surgery.
II.
EXPERIMENTAL DETAIL AND METHOD
The optoelectronic setup is shown in Fig. 1a. A Laser
Quantum 532-nm GEM laser is used for excitation of the
NV ensemble in the diamond. A laser power of 250 mW
is used with approximately 150 mW measured at the di-
amond, after accounting for losses through the system in-
cluding the beam splitter and fiber-coupling efficiency. The
optical system is inside a rack on wheels for increased mo-
bility. The fiber used is a Thorlabs FG910UEC. The fiber
is 1.5 m long with a core diameter of 910 µm (0.22 NA)
and with a steel FCPC (ferrule-connector-physical-contac)
arXiv:2504.05884v1  [physics.med-ph]  8 Apr 2025
