 
displays an RMSEV heatmap and a separate overlaid 
magnetogram image in the left-side plots. The red cross 
on each magnetogram identifies the pixel with the 
highest RMSEV (h-RMSEV) value. The spectral profiles 
and their corresponding reconstructions for these h-
RMSEV pixels are shown in the right-side plots.  
In the heatmaps, darker areas represent lower 
reconstruction errors, while lighter areas indicate 
regions with higher RMSEV values. In all panels, the 
lighter regions in the heatmaps closely align with the 
polarity inversion lines (PIL) in the overlaid 
magnetogram. The spectral profiles of the h-RMSEV 
pixels in panels (a) to (c) exhibit unusual Stokes V 
shapes, with poor reconstructions. In contrast, panel (d) 
presents a stabilized Stokes V profile, showing 
improved reconstruction quality. 
3.3. Flare starting region 
We used image data from the Atmospheric Imaging 
Assembly [11] (AIA) 1600 Å filter and the Helioseismic 
and Magnetic Imager (HMI) on the Solar Dynamics 
Observatory (SDO) as references for the analysis. 
Bright regions on SDO/AIA 1600 images were used to 
identify potential flare-triggering sites for the X1.3 flare 
in AR 13663. Aligning these regions with SDO/HMI 
images enabled a comparison between the Hinode/SP 
and SDO/HMI magnetograms, allowing us to assess 
whether or not the locations of the detected anomalous 
Stokes V spectra correspond to the bright point locations. 
The X1.3 flare began at 05:33, peaked at 05:59, and 
ended at 07:03 on May 5, 2024 [12]. The flare-triggering 
region is visually defined and marked positionally on 
the SDO images captured around the flare onset time to 
provide a reference for images captured at earlier 
timestamps, like those of the Hinode SP maps. Figure 4 
presents two snapshots, taken just before and 
immediately after the flare onset, with red rectangles 
marking the potential flare-triggering regions on 
zoomed-in SDO/AIA 1600 images. 
To compare and align potential flare-triggering 
regions with our Hinode/SP map data, we prepared 
zoomed-in images from SDO/AIA 1600 and SDO/HMI, 
captured at timestamps closely matching those of the 
Hinode/SP maps (including three pre-flare maps and 
one during-flare map). Figure 5 displays zoomed views 
of AR 13663, showing SDO/AIA 1600 images (left 
column) and SDO/HMI magnetograms (right column). 
Figure 4. SDO/AIA 1600 images showing the onset of the 
X1.3 flare event, with red rectangles highlighting 
potential flare-triggering regions. These regions are 
marked to serve as a reference for images captured at 
earlier timestamps, corresponding to the times of the 
Hinode/SP maps. 
Figure 4. Estimated flare triggering regions on 
SDO/AIA 1600 and SDO/HMIB images (zoomed views), 
captured at timestamps closely align with those of the 
Hinode/SP maps. 
