evolution of the state vector.
(b) Macroscopic emergent phenomena: Decoherence causes the quantum state to
evolve into non-interacting branches, each corresponding to a diﬀerent measurement
outcome.
Wave function collapse emerges as an apparent phenomenon within each
branch (e.g. Joos and Zeh 1985). Each branch then continues to evolve as a separate
“world” or “universe”.
While signiﬁcant progress has been made in understanding how the Schr¨odinger equation
accounts for classical-like behavior in macroscopic systems, quantum decoherence remains
an active area of research with some foundational questions still open. But for the purpose
of our paper, we take the Many-Worlds Interpretation and the branching of the state vector
into decoherent states as given.
The idea of a continuously branching multiverse may seem unconventional. This mir-
rors historical developments like the Theory of Evolution or the Big Bang theory, which
were also counterintuitive when ﬁrst proposed. But ultimately, the elegance and simplicity
of the underlying theory tend to prevail over the seeming strangeness of the explanation.
Crucially, the Many-Worlds Interpretation helps to restore the fundamental principle of a
single, universal law of motion. Although initially met with skepticism, it has since gained
signiﬁcant traction among a large portion of the physics community, with surveys of quan-
tum physicists showing increasing acceptance of this interpretation (see e.g. Tegmark 1998;
Schlosshauer, Koﬂer and Zeilinger 2013).
Nevertheless, even within the Many-Worlds Interpretation, a signiﬁcant problem remains:
The Schr¨odinger equation alone cannot generate all quantum mechanical predictions without
incorporating the Born rule. While these postulates do not contradict each other, they violate
the principle of a single fundamental law.
Example:
Consider an experiment with n = 1000 independent binary quantum measure-
ments (such as Stern-Gerlach measurements), producing outcomes y = (y1, . . . , yn) ∈{0, 1}n.
Assume that each measurement splits the state vector as ψyi=1+ψyi=0, with ⟨ψyi=1 | ψyi=0⟩= 0
3
