shift-invariant couplings to fermions and anomalous couplings to gauge bosons, just as the
QCD axion [51].
Here, we focus on leptophilic ALPs, which are described by an effective Lagrangian
only involving charged leptons.
Up to higher-dimensional operators and restricting to
flavour-diagonal couplings, the general ALP Lagrangian reads
LD = 1
2∂µa ∂µa −1
2m2
aa2 + ∂µa
2Λ
X
ℓ=e,µ,τ
Cℓψℓγµγ5ψℓ,
(2.1)
with real couplings Cℓ. Equivalently, one can change the field basis and write this La-
grangian in terms of pseudoscalar couplings to fermions. Under the chiral ALP-dependent
rotation of the lepton fields
ψℓ→ei Cℓ
2Λ aγ5ψℓ,
ψℓ→ψℓei Cℓ
2Λ aγ5 ,
(2.2)
the derivative couplings above are cancelled when plugging the transformed fields into the
lepton kinetic terms, and the ALP appears in the lepton mass term. Since this transfor-
mation is anomalous, i.e. it does not leave the fermion path integral measure invariant, it
also gives rise to a contribution to the ALP couplings to photons, so that in the new field
basis, the ALP Lagrangian reads (see e.g. refs. [5, 34] for details)
LD = 1
2∂µa ∂µa −1
2m2
aa2 −ia
X
ℓ=e,µ,τ
mℓ
Λ Cℓψℓγ5ψℓ+ α
4π
a
ΛF µν ˜Fµν
X
ℓ=e,µ,τ
Cℓ,
(2.3)
up to higher-order terms in a/Λ, and ˜F µν = ϵµνρσFρσ/2 with ϵ0123 = 1. Note that the
truncation explicitly breaks the shift symmetry of lepton couplings, which is restored by
higher-order terms where the shift symmetry just corresponds to a re-phasing of the leptons.
It is well-known [52, 53] that all physical observables remain unchanged under non-
linear field redefinitions of the form in eq. (2.2), which is just a change of variables in the
path integral formulation of QFT. In the context of effective field theories, it has been
shown in ref. [54] that such field redefinitions are largely equivalent to using the equations
of motion for the involved fields (even when off-shell), although care has to be taken beyond
the leading order [55]. Working consistently at leading order in 1/Λ, i.e. only using vertices
involving a single ALP, the Lagrangians in eq. (2.1) and eq. (2.3) therefore make identical
predictions, even though the latter features ALP couplings to both leptons and photons.
This equivalence implies that a leptophilic Lagrangian in the pseudoscalar basis defined
by
LP = 1
2∂µa ∂µa −1
2m2
aa2 −ia
X
ℓ=e,µ,τ
mℓ
Λ Cℓψℓγ5ψℓ,
(2.4)
does not give the same results as (2.1) when the corresponding process involves effective
vertices to photons. For this reason, there are two “leptophilic” ALP models with distinct
phenomenology, which in the following we refer to as the “derivative” (eq. (2.1)) and
– 4 –
