6
wave function and Hamiltonian and EHF is the HF energy
calculated classically, we find it to be very limited at best,
due to noise. In fact, recalling that the correlation energy
that we sought to capture is 17.079 milliHa, we find that
our calculation captures 400 milliHa but on the other side
of the HF value. An earlier work that calculates ground
state energies using the UCC-VQE approach on quantum
hardware also report similar findings (large errors in corre-
lation energy itself, although the total energy error is small
due to the large HF contribution to it) for their 6- and
12-qubit computations on the Aria-I and the Forte-I quan-
tum computers respectively [43], but we find that in our
MRUCC-VQE case, the issue is more pronounced. In fact,
the clique 0 contribution to the energy is −3.545409 Ha,
whereas the HF energy is −3.570995 Ha in our case. How-
ever, in the UCC-VQE case that the authors in Ref. [43]
considered, the dominant clique subsumed the HF energy
in it, and thus measuring one clique was sufficient in their
case to obtain a total energy lower than the HF value. We
note that a larger active space choice and/or a lower degree
of approximation (for example, picking more parameters
from energy sort VQE) would have led to a larger amount
of correlation energy to capture, but would have run into
the issue of very deep circuit to evaluate in a noisy setting.
Thus, we conclude that we need better resilience to noise
on the quantum hardware front to be able to capture the
right correlation energy trend in the VQE framework.
IV.
CONCLUSION
In conclusion, we carry out a 12-qubit multireference
unitary coupled cluster VQE calculation on a trapped
ion quantum hardware to obtain the energy of the BeH2
molecule in a geometry where the role of strong correlation
effects is significant. The limitations imposed by current-
day quantum hardware demanded the use of resource re-
duction techniques to reduce the two-qubit gate count and
the number of measurements, besides necessitating the use
of error mitigation (debiasing) and post-selection (based on
particle number conservation).
By leveraging symmetry,
using energy sort VQE, and using pipeline-based quantum
circuit optimization, we reduced the two-qubit gate count
from 12515 to 20 with a loss of 0.45% in the total energy.
We used the notion of supercliques, where we partition a
Hamiltonian into sets of qubit-wise mutually commuting
terms (cliques), and then combine cliques yielding the same
energy contributions into supercliques.
Picking only the
important supercliques leads to a drastic reduction in the
number of circuits to evaluate on quantum hardware. Fur-
thermore, we use a simple isometry, which leads to an in-
put state preparation circuit with only 3 two-qubit gates.
We also note that in view of the prohibitive costs and ac-
cumulation of errors, we prepare a circuit with optimized
parameters obtained from VQE simulation and then mea-
sure the Hamiltonian on that prepared state on a quantum
computer. We find that the error in ground state energy
obtained on the Forte-I quantum computer relative to that
evaluated on a traditional computer with the same reduced
problem setting is only 2.69%. However, although employ-
ing a series of resource reduction techniques significantly
lowers the depth of the quantum circuit while not losing a
notable fraction of the energy to be captured, a combination
of the small magnitude of correlation energy in the chosen
active space and the high physical error rates in current-day
quantum computers yields an energy that is still larger than
the HF value. We expect that with further advances in the
quantum hardware front, one can carry out multireference
UCC-VQE computations with better precision.
V.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work was carried out as a part of the Meity Quantum
Applications Lab (QCAL) Cohort 2 projects. VSP acknowl-
edges support from CRG grant (CRG/2023/002558). VSP,
PC, and DS acknowledge Prof. Bhanu Pratap Das for ini-
tial discussions on multireference coupled cluster theories,
Ms. Aashna Anil Zade for fruitful discussions on various
concepts, Dr.
Cedric, Dr.
Mao, and Mr.
Jeffrey with-
out whose support in fixing a bug at the last minute would
have made quantum hardware execution a huge challenge,
Dr. Subimal Deb for deliberations on single particle basis
sets, and Mr. Sudhindu Bikash Mandal for support with
AWS Braket.
KS acknowledges support from Quantum
Leap Flagship Program (Grant No.
JPMXS0120319794)
from the MEXT, Japan, Center of Innovations for Sustain-
able Quantum AI (JPMJPF2221) from JST, Japan, and
Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research C (21K03407) and for
Transformative Research Area B (23H03819) from JSPS,
Japan.
JR acknowledges support from the Agència de
Gestió d’Ajuts Universitaris i de Recerca through the DI
grant (No. 2020-DI00063). JR and JN acknowledge sup-
port from MICIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033/ FEDER,
UE.
[1] D. S. Abrams and S. Lloyd, Physical Review Letters 79,
2586 (1997).
[2] D. S. Abrams and S. Lloyd, Physical Review Letters 83,
5162 (1999).
