3 
 
of radiations on mechanical performance is crucial, as the mechanics-coupled stability of OIHPs 
plays a vital role in their durability and commercial viability [12,30]. 
 
In our study, we perform in-situ observations of both e-beam-induced cracking in SEM and 
synchrotron X-ray beam-induced composition evolutions in two different OIHP single crystals, 
including FAPbBr3 and MAPbBr3. We reveal the overall unstable process of OIHP single crystals 
under radiations and directly detect the volatilization of organic groups experimentally. Based on 
the loss of organic components, we unveil a volume-strain-based mechanism in OIHP single 
crystals under radiations from the perspective of energy conversion. Besides, we also test the 
Young’s modulus (E) and hardness (H) on the as-growth and radiated areas of both crystals, using 
the nanoindentation method, to investigate the impact of e-beam-induced cracking on their 
mechanical stability. 
 
2. Results 
2.1.  In-situ SEM imaging and EDS analysis 
Figures 1a and 1b show the crack initiation and propagation on the surface of FAPbBr3 and 
MAPbBr3 single crystals under e-beam radiation of 3E9 e/µm3 @ 10 keV as the increase of 
radiation time, but the crack patterns are different between these two types of single crystals 
(Videos S1 and S2 in Supplementary material for SEM imaging under different e-beam energies 
and densities). Analogous to mud desiccation crack patterns, there are 3-point star-style cracks on 
the FAPbBr3 crystal surface and bricklayer-style cracks on the MAPbBr3 crystal surface [31,32]. 
For FAPbBr3, the longer the radiation exposure, the more cracks form, but their lengths are almost 
unchanged over time. In contrast, in MAPbBr3, cracks grow longer quickly, but the number of 
cracks is fewer than those in FAPbBr3. These phenomena indicate that e-beam-induced cracking 
occurs on the surface of OIHP single crystals without grain boundaries, and the crack patterns are 
distinct in OIHPs with different organic cations. 
 
Figures 1c and 1d show the quantitative crack density (i.e., the percentage of the scanned area 
occupied by cracks) changes which represent the degree of crack occupation over radiation time 
under various circumstances. Crack initiation and propagation under the e-beam radiation are 
categorized into three stages. In Stage I, no crack appears. Both crystals keep in this stage for tens 
of seconds only when the beam density and energy are low (1E9 e/µm3 @ 10 keV and 3E9 e/µm3 
@ 10 keV). In Stage II, the cracks initiate and propagate rapidly, and the crack densities increase 
at relatively constant rates. In Stage III, the increase of crack density obviously slows down. The 
fit slopes of crack density over radiation time for Stage II and Stage III are listed in Table S1 
(Supplementary material). We observe some common features in both crystals: For example, as 
the beam density increases, the duration of Stage I decreases. Crack growth occurs at the very 
beginning when the beam density reaches 8E9 e/µm3. Besides, the higher the beam density or 
