Therefore, an anomaly resolution in terms of quasi-Hopf algebras can be stated
more precisely as an exact sequence of quasi-Hopf algebras
D
ıÐ→C →K,
(4.23)
where
1. D is a quasi-Hopf algebra not gauge equivalent to a Hopf algebra,
2. C,K are quasi-Hopf algebras which are gauge equivalent to Hopf algebras.
We can understand the anomaly resolution as the fact that the inclusion ı(ΦD) ∈
C ⊗C ⊗C of the coassociator ΦD of D becomes trivialized (in the sense of gauge
equivalence) in C, since ΦC ∈C⊗C⊗C is gauge-equivalent to a trivial coassociator.
As mentioned previously, this extends group anomaly resolutions
K →˜G
πÐ→G,
(4.24)
where one talks about the pullback π∗α of the anomaly 3-cocycle α ∈Z3(G,U(1))
being cohomologically trivial in Z3( ˜G,U(1)). We will explicitly apply these def-
initions in the construction in Section 6.5.1, which will allow us to deduce very
general resolutions (c.f. Eq. (6.61)).
5
Relation between the SymTFT and Hopf alge-
bras
In this section we discuss the relationship between the SymTFT and the algebraic
approaches to anomaly resolution, and to noninvertible symmetries more generally.
First, let us consider the SymTFT associated to a single fusion category, be-
fore discussing anomaly resolution in this language. To begin, suppose we have a
two-dimensional theory with a global G symmetry, for G a ﬁnite group. The three-
dimensional SymTFT bulk is a gauged G theory, speciﬁcally, a three-dimensional
G Dijkgraaf-Witten theory. The ’t Hooft anomaly of the two-dimensional G sym-
metry, α ∈H3(G,U(1)), is the level of the three-dimensional Dijkgraaf-Witten
theory.
Now, suppose that instead of an ordinary ﬁnite group G we have a fusion cat-
egory C. The existence of an anomaly is reﬂected in the lack of a ﬁber functor
on C. (In particular, note that the choice of fusion category implicitly encodes
the anomaly, analogously to the diﬀerence between Vec(G) and Vec(G,α), both of
which are associated to the same ﬁnite group G, but which deﬁne diﬀerent fusion
categories.) It is believed that the three-dimensional Dijkgraaf-Witten theory for
17
