15
FIG. 9. Top: Comparison of CCD measured spot size for
the copper multi-piece focuser assembly (left) and unibody
3d printed assembly (right), showing the smaller and more
spatially resolved spot obtained with the new design. Mid-
dle: Spot size vs z position in the beam, showing substantially
reduced astigmatism and smaller spot size at the best focus,
located at 1mm positive displacement in this measurement.
Bottom: Spot image with smaller collimator, producing a
magnified spot on the CCD, as a function of wavelength. As
wavelength increases, mode volume shrinks, and we can vis-
ibly see the reduction in number of modes as the spot goes
from being dominated by a TEM20 mode at 365 nm to the
TEM00 at 970 nm. The spatial resolution at the CCD within
the spot, which is entirely limited by the diffraction-limited
performance of the focuser, is also visibly better at short wave-
lengths, as expected.
system (see Figure 2), and the resulting spot size is re-
duced from 95 to 70 µm, with a 5 µm uncertainty.
As part of this investigation, spot measurements were
carried out with a shorter focal length collimator (Thor-
labs RC04), which magnifies the fiber by an additional
factor of 2.2 for a total system magnification of 13.5. The
resulting spot image is show in Figure 2, which more
clearly shows the multi-moded nature of the light being
emitted by the fiber. While the astigmatism-corrected
spot sizes are within 20% of the divergence-limited spot
expectation, assuming an ideal flat emission profile for
the fiber with a 10 micron width, in both the original
data and the collimator with resolved astigmatism, we
find the spot size gets smaller with increasing wavelength
above roughly 700 µm.
To explore this further, we can look at the magnified
spot sizes for different wavelengths, shown at the bottom
of Figure 9. The most striking feature of these images
is that the fiber mode is visibly changing as wavelength
decreases. The number of modes in an optical fiber scales
with wavelength as:
Nmode ∼2π2a2
λ2
NA2,
(C1)
where a is the radius of the fiber core. For the wave-
lengths tested in this paper, the number of modes in the
10 µm-diameter optical fiber ranges from 150 at 365 nm
to 20 at 970, resulting in a trend towards a more Gaus-
sian profile as the fiber gets closer to behaving more like
a single-mode fiber (defined as Nmode ≲3.1). Detailed
modeling of spot size vs. wavelength would thus require
detailed mode modeling of the optical fiber, which is be-
yond the scope of this paper. We note, however, that
the spot size is thus limited by fiber performance, and
that smaller spots for a given scanning range are attain-
able by moving to single-mode fibers, at which point the
diffraction and fiber limitations will need to be modeled
in more detail.
