FJ-MM: The Friedkin-Johnsen Opinion Dynamics Model
with Memory and Higher-Order Neighbors
Roberta Raineria,b, Lorenzo Zinoa and Anton Proskurnikova ∗
April 10, 2025
Abstract
The Friedkin-Johnsen (FJ) model has been extensively explored and validated, spanning applications in
social science, systems and control, game theory, and algorithmic research.
In this paper, we introduce an
advanced generalization of the FJ model, termed FJ-MM which incorporates both memory effects and multi-
hop (higher-order neighbor) influence.
This formulation allows agents to naturally incorporate both current
and previous opinions at each iteration stage. Our numerical results demonstrate that incorporating memory
and multi-hop influence significantly reshapes the opinion landscape; for example, the final opinion profile can
exhibit reduced polarization. We analyze the stability and equilibrium properties of the FJ-MM model, showing
that these properties can be reduced to those of a comparison model–namely, the standard FJ model with a
modified influence matrix. This reduction enables us to leverage established stability results from FJ dynamics.
Additionally, we examine the convergence rate of the FJ-MM model and demonstrate that, as can be expected,
the time lags introduced by memory and higher-order neighbor influences result in slower convergence.
1
Introduction
Agent-based opinion dynamics modeling is a rapidly advancing field that attracts researchers from social sciences,
economics, physics, engineering, and beyond; see [1–5] for comprehensive reviews of its history and recent devel-
opments. The most studied models in engineering and mathematical literature rely on iterative opinion averaging
as the key driving force of opinion formation, a mechanism originating from pioneering work on social power [6]
and studies on rational consensus [7,8]. Recent experiments confirm a tendency toward opinion averaging in small
groups [9], medium-size groups [10], and large-scale online communities [11]. The central element of an averaging-
based model is a weighted digraph of social influence, which can be static or co-evolve with opinions. This digraph
depicts social ties among individuals and quantifies the weights each agent assigns to those they are connected with.
Individuals (nodes in the graph) update their opinions by taking the weighted average of the opinions of adjacent
nodes, with updates occurring simultaneously or asynchronously [3].
The Friedkin-Johnsen (FJ) model
The Friedkin-Johnsen (FJ) model [12] is a seminal and extensively studied model of opinion formation, naturally
extending the French-DeGroot iterative averaging dynamics. In addition to the weighted influence digraph, the FJ
model assigns each agent a constant innate opinion, factored into each opinion update iteration. Originally defined
as the agent’s initial opinion [12], the innate opinion can also be shaped by the agent’s prejudices or some other
sources of information, such as social media. The strength of an agent’s “anchorage” to their innate opinion is
regulated by an additional parameter, interpreted as the agent’s susceptibility to social influence [1]; some studies
interpret this constant as a measure of conformity under group pressure [13]. While remaining linear, the FJ model
can result in diverse distributions of final opinions, ranging from consensus to multimodal polarized states [1].
In recent years, the FJ model has been studied from systems and control [14–16], game-theoretic [17, 18], and
algorithmic [19–21] perspectives; a number of experiments have been conducted to validate it [9, 12, 22–24]. The
FJ model has been extended to describe dynamics of multidimensional opinions on interrelated topics [25] and the
dynamics of expressed versus private opinions [26].
∗a Department of Electronics and Telecommunications, Politecnico di Torino, Turin, Italy; b Department of Mathematical Sciences
“G.L. Lagrange”, Politecnico di Torino, Turin, Italy. Email: {roberta.raineri,lorenzo.zino}@polito.it, anton.p.1982@ieee.org.
A shortened version of this preprint will appear in the proceedings of the European Control Conference 2025.
arXiv:2504.06731v1  [eess.SY]  9 Apr 2025
