7
FIG. 5.
The logarithmic negativity EN as a function of
∆c/ωm and χ/ωm when (a) κa/ωm = 0.5, (b) κa/ωm = 0.8,
(c) κa/ωm = 1.2, and (d) κa/ωm = 1.5. Other parameters
are the same as those in Fig. 2.
Here, the variable η−is defined by
η−=
1
√
2[Σ(V) −
p
Σ(V)2 −4 det V]1/2,
(27)
where Σ(V) = det(VO) + det(VM) −2 det(C). Based
on the steady-state covariance matrix V, the logarithm
negativity can be calculated, and the dependence of the
optomechanical entanglement on the system parameters
can be analyzed in detail.
C.
Enhanced optomechanical entanglement
In this section, we study the enhanced optomechani-
cal entanglement in the linearized Kerr-cavity optome-
chanical system. Concretely, we analyze the influence of
the system parameters on the entanglement generation.
In Figs. 5(a)-5(d), we show the dependence of the log-
arithmic negativity on ∆c and χ under different cavity-
field decay rates κa.
We can see that the peak value
of the logarithm negativity is smaller for a larger de-
cay rate κa, and that the optomechanical entanglement
remains even in the sideband unresolved regime.
No-
tably, as χ increases, the large blue sideband-parameter
region also becomes suitable for preparing optomechan-
ical entanglement. Moreover, the entanglement exhibits
a similar trend as the effective coupling strength Gsd.
By comparing Fig. 3 with Fig. 5, we find that the lo-
cation in the parameter space spanned over ∆c/ωm and
χ/ωm corresponding to the peak entanglement is con-
sistent with that for the coupling strength.
In partic-
ular, in the shallow red- and blue-sideband parameter
regions, the EN first increases and then decreases with
χ for a given ∆c, indicating an enhancement of the en-
tanglement generation induced by the Kerr nonlinearity.
FIG. 6. (a) The logarithmic negativity EN as a function of
the average thermal phonon occupation ¯nth and the scaled
Kerr constant χ/ωm. (b) The logarithmic negativity EN as
a function of the driving amplitude Ωand χ/ωm. The pa-
rameters used are κa/ωm = 0.8 and ∆c/ωm = 0.3.
Other
parameters are the same as Fig. 2.
This is because the entanglement is determined by both
the effective driving detuning ∆sd and the effective cou-
pling strength Gsd. As χ increases, the rapid decline in
entanglement is mainly due to the deviation of the detun-
ing ∆sd from the near-resonant region, causing a faster
decrease in entanglement compared to the reduction in
effective coupling strength.
We also investigate the influence of both the environ-
mental thermal phonon occupation and optical driving
amplitude on the entanglement generation performance.
Figure 6(a) shows the logarithmic negativity versus the
average thermal phonon occupation ¯nth and the Kerr
constant χ. It can be seen that, as χ increases, the en-
tanglement initially increases and then decreases.
For
some values of χ, even when the average thermal phonon
occupation ¯nth reaches 3000, the steady-state optome-
chanical entanglement still remains. We point out that,
though the nth is very large, the average phonon num-
ber in the mechanical mode is small.
This is because
the working point of the system is right useful for the
sideband cooling, and hence the ground-state cooling of
the mechanical resonator can be realized. We checked
the average phonon number in the mechanical mode and
find that ⟨b†b⟩ss ≈0.5. We also find that, for a given
nth, the EN first increases and then decreases with the
increase of χ. This implies that the introduction of χ im-
proves the ability of the system to resist thermal noise.
This phenomenon can be explained based on the depen-
dence of Gsd on the Kerr constant χ. Compared to the
case of χ = 0, the coupling strength Gsd/ωm is largely
enhanced for a wide range of ∆c/ωm. In Fig. 6(b), we
show the logarithmic negativity versus the optical driv-
ing amplitude Ωand Kerr constant χ. It can be observed
that as the driving amplitude increases, the entangle-
ment first increases and then decreases, suggesting that
stronger driving does not always lead to greater entan-
glement. Similarly, the peak value of EN appears around
χ/ωm ≈2.4 × 10−5.
