Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. output
©ESO 2025
March 31, 2025
Letter to the Editor
Topological ignition of the stealth coronal mass ejections
Yu. V. Dumin ⋆
Sternberg Astronomical Institute (GAISh) of Lomonosov Moscow State University,
Universitetskii prosp. 13, 119234, Moscow, Russia
Received March 31, 2025
ABSTRACT
Context. One of hot topics in the solar physics are the so-called ‘stealth’ coronal mass ejections (CME), which are not associated with
any appreciable energy release events in the lower corona, such as the solar flares. It is sometimes assumed that these phenomena
might be produced by some specific physical mechanism, but no particular suggestions were put forward.
Aims. It is the aim of the present paper to show that a promising explanation of the stealth CMEs can be based on the so-called
‘topological’ ignition of the magnetic reconnection.
Methods. As a theoretical basis, we employ the Gorbachev–Kel’ner–Somov–Shvarts (GKSS) model of formation of the magnetic
null point, which is produced by a specific superposition of the remote sources (sunspots) rather than by the local current systems.
Results. As follows from our numerical simulations, the topological model explains very well all basic features of the stealth CMEs:
(i) the plasma eruption develops without an appreciable heat release from the spot of reconnection, i.e., without the solar flare; (ii) the
spot of reconnection (magnetic null point) can be formed far away from the location of the magnetic field sources; (iii) the trajectories
of eruption are strongly curved, which can explain observability of CMEs generated behind the solar limb.
Conclusions. Therefore, the topological ignition of magnetic reconnection should be interesting both by itself, as a novel physical
phenomenon, and as a prognostic tool for forecasting the stealth CMEs and the resulting unexpected geomagnetic storms.
Key words. Sun: coronal mass ejections (CMEs) – Sun: activity – Magnetic reconnection – Methods: analytical – Methods: numer-
ical
1. Introduction
Since the discovery of the coronal mass ejections (CME) in the
early 1970’s (e.g., review Howard 2006, and references therein),
it was known that in some cases they could be reliably associated
with other manifestations of the solar activity in the lower corona
(first of all, the solar flares); while in other cases it was impos-
sible to trace such a relationship (Chen 2011; Webb & Howard
2012; Howard & Harrison 2013; Nitta et al. 2021; Reva et al.
2024). However, the undetectable origin of the respective CMEs
was attributed for a long time just to the insufficient quality of
observations.
Meanwhile, in the course of development of the observa-
tional technique it was gradually recognized that the initiation
of some CMEs might be inherently unobservable. As a result,
the term ‘stealth CME’ emerged and became widely used in the
last decade. Unfortunately, the nature of this phenomena remains
unclear till now. One point of view is that there is a continuous
spectrum of CMEs with various expression of energy release in
the lower corona; and the stealth CMEs belong just to one of
the wings of this spectrum. Another point of view is that there
should be a special mechanism for the production of such CMEs,
but its physical principles are still unknown.
It is the aim of the present Letter to show that a promising
candidate for the above-mentioned mechanism is the so-called
‘topological’ ignition (or trigger) of the magnetic reconnection,
whose general principles were formulated quite a long time ago
by Gorbachev et al. (1988) but remained poorly exploited till
now. Here, we shall perform the detailed numerical simulations
⋆e-mail: dumin@pks.mpg.de,dumin@yahoo.com
of the respective process and show that its basic features are
in perfect agreement with the observed properties of the stealth
CMEs.
2. Theoretical model and simulations
It is commonly believed that the main source of the solar activ-
ity is the magnetic reconnection, when the magnetic field lines
break apart and then connect again in a new configuration (e.g.,
monographs Priest & Forbes 2000; Somov 2013). This process
takes place in the so-called null (or neutral) points, where all
components of the magnetic field vanish (Parnell et al. 1996;
Dumin & Somov 2016). Such a null point is usually assumed to
be formed by the local current systems; this corresponds to the
‘standard’ scenario of magnetic reconnection. On the other hand,
there is yet another option for the appearance of the null point,
which is often overlooked. This is a specific superposition of in-
fluences by the distant sources, which can result in the X-type
configuration with vanishing magnetic field in its center. The
possibility of such superposition was proved for the first time
by Gorbachev et al. (1988) by utilizing rather sophisticated the-
orems of differential geometry and algebraic topology, and the
respective effect was called the ‘topological trigger’ of magnetic
reconnection. The most important differences between the ‘stan-
dard’ and ‘topological’ scenarios are summarized in Table 1.
Our consideration will be based on the above-mentioned
Gorbachev–Kel’ner–Somov–Shvarts
(GKSS)
model,
whose
specific feature is the existence of the specific ‘topologically un-
stable’ arrangements of the magnetic-field sources (sunspots).
Their tiny variation results in the dramatic reconstruction of the
Article number, page 1 of 4
