(a) Network’s Average Opinion Dynamics
(b) Nodes’ Ultimate Opinions Distribution
Figure 5: Example 3: Comparison of the averaged opinion’s dynamics and the ultimate opinion vectors for the original FJ model (2),
the FJ-MM and the comparison FJ model.
Proof. Consider the eigenvalue-eigenvector system associated to the dynamical system in (7).
Given ρ( ¯A) the
spectral radius of ¯A, it exists v ∈Rn s.t. ¯Av = ρ( ¯A)v, with v eigenvector associated to maximum eigenvalue ρ( ¯A).
Let us now define x = [v; v]. Then, it holds:
¯Adx =

0
I
ΛW (2)
ΛW (1)

x =

v
ρ( ¯A)v

≥ρ( ¯A)x
(11)
From Corollary 3.2 in [51], it follows that ρ( ¯Ad) ≥ρ( ¯A).
The result is in line with what intuitively expected. Indeed, the memory term acts as a rumor that drives the
node opinion back to the past, influenced by opinions at previous steps. Moreover, focusing on Use Case 4, as shown
in the following Corollary, the inequality holds also compared to the original FJ.
Corollary 2. Let us assume to be under the assumptions of Use Case 4, i.e. recent memory influence. The FJ-MM
model converges slower than the original FJ model without memory, that is,
ρ( ¯Ad) ≥ρ(ΛW) .
Proof. Proposition 2, since W (1) + W (2) = W, implies that ¯A = ΛW and ρ( ¯A) = ρ(ΛW).
4.1
A Special Case: Homogeneous Susceptibility
It is interesting to explicitly compare the convergence rates of the FJ-MM model with matrices (6) and its corre-
sponding comparison FJ model. This comparison is relatively straightforward when all agents share the same level
of susceptibility to social influence, λii, and assign identical total weights, βi > 0, to past opinions:
Assumption 2. Assume that Λ = σI with σ ∈R with4 σ ∈(0, 1). Moreover, assume that all elements of the vector
β are equal βi = β0 ∈(0, 1) for every i ∈V.
The spectral radius of the comparison FJ model with such a susceptibility matrix is straightworward to find.
Lemma 2. If Λ = σI, then for every stochastic matrix ˆW one has ρ(Λ ˆW) = σ, in particular, ρ( ¯A) = σ. Hence,
the convergence rate of the FJ-MM admits the following lower bound
ρ( ¯Ad) ≥ρ( ¯A) = σ.
Proof. The first statement is straightforward since ρ(σ ˆW) = σ. The second statement follows from Corollary 2.
4The case of Λ = 0 is, obviously, degenerate, as all agents are totally stubborn and the dynamics terminate in a single step. The
case Λ = I corresponds to the DeGroot model, where there is no asymptotic stability.
