5
3.436
3.438
3.44
Frequency (GHz)
-70
-65
-60
-55
-50
-45
 Transmission (dB)
3.436
3.438
3.44
Frequency (GHz)
-200
-100
0
100
200
 Phase (dego)
Raw Data
Filtered
(a)
(b)
Raw Data
Filtered
Fig. 4. (a) Zoomed-in transmission spectrum (magnitude) of the device from
Fig.3 showing the effect of filtering out the EM crosstalk and the triplet transits
(red curve) on the raw data (black) (b) Effect of filtering on the phase response.
In this device, the EM crosstalk has a far greater effect than the tt, but as we
move towards impedance matched transducers and more complicated circuit
elements, the situation is expected to be reversed.
The effect of this spectral distortion on the ring resonator
transfer function can be seen in Fig.4, which shows a zoomed-
in spectral transmission of the pulley coupled device from
Fig.3(a). The as-measured (raw data) spectral transmission is
shown in black (Fig.4). By applying a notch filter of 100 ns
width [14], centred at t = 0, we can remove the EM crosstalk.
By further applying a series of notch filters (time gates) of
200 ns width centred on the triple-transit peaks (labelled tt
in Fig.3(b)), we can remove all the triplet transits from the
data in the time domain before transforming back to the
frequency domain. This filtered data, with the EM crosstalk
and triple transits removed, is shown by the red curve labelled
filtered in Fig. 4. One can clearly see that both the magnitude
and the phase response are dramatically improved once the
EM crosstalk is removed. Removing the triplet transits has
a negligible effect in this case, but will become increasingly
important in more complicated devices envisioned in future
PnIC platforms. One feature of note is that the EM filtering
has changed the spectral position of the resonator modes, seen
most easily in Fig.4(a) by noting the location of the dips for
the black and red curves. We believe this occurs because the
EM background has a non-trivial phase profile, but we don’t
quantitatively understand the shift, especially as the shift in
frequency appears random, cf. the redshift for the first dip,
negligible shift for the second and a blue shift for the third
dip in Fig.4(a).
IV. QUANTIFYING MULTIPATH INTERFERENCE
While the discussion so far has focused on elucidating
the temporal dynamics of GHz acoustic fields in PnICs by
identifying the different features observable in the temporal
transform of the VNA data, here we show that we can
quantitatively model, with some simplifications, the scattering
response of the device and extract the interface reflection
coefficients that cause the multipath interference effects. As
noted above, one of the main challenges [1] in scaling PnIC
circuits from O(1) to O(10) spectral components in the near-
term is minimizing these interface reflections.
We return to the pulley coupled device shown in Fig.3(a)
and re-plot the time domain transmission in Fig.5(b). In
Fig.5(a), we graphically outline the different potential routes
(numbered chronologically) the signal can take from transmit-
ter to receiver and indicate the corresponding temporal delay
for each path in Fig.5(b). It is important to keep in mind
that the waveguide resonator junction functions as an acoustic
beam splitter. Therefore, for instance the path labelled 3(a)
in Fig.5(a), single waveguide transit and single ring transit, is
actually traversed in the following order: the pulse propagates
half the waveguide length, couples into the ring, completes a
ring transit and couples back out into the waveguide wherein
it traverses the second half of the waveguide. To illustrate
another example, path 5 single waveguide transit and double
ring transit starts out identical to path 3(a), but after the first
ring transit, we are here tracking the pulse component that
stays within the ring when it encounters the beam splitter,
undergoes another transit of the ring and the couples out into
the waveguide. The diagrams in Fig.5(a), especially those with
ring transits involved should be interpreted in this schema.
We can construct a simplified model of the system response
(cf. Appendix A for further details) by noting, as a first approx-
imation, that the complete time response trace is made by the
same pulse shape taking different paths (with corresponding
delays) from transmitter to receiver. This simplification allows
us to use the measured first arriving pulse (the direct transit) as
a template to generate the complete time response by adding
the appropriate delay for each paths and the corresponding
attenuation to fit the measured response (cf. Appendix A for
details on the fitting procedure). Using the measured pulse
response allows us to work around the problem of accounting
for the spectral distortion introduced by the (transmit and
receive) IDTs and the complex phase shifts at the waveguide
taper interface. Measuring the excess attenuation between a
