3
α
α
α
Å
Å
Å
Å
Å
Å
Å
Figure 1. (a)-(c) DART 447 MHz images showing the evolution of the radio depression with the solar limb indicated by the
partial circle in white. (d)-(f) and (g)-(i) Same as panels (a)-(c) but for the AIA 304 ˚A and AIA 211 ˚A base difference images,
respectively. (j) CHASE Hα line center image showing the pre-eruptive filament. (k) and (l) CHASE Hα line center and blue
wing 1.0 ˚A images evidencing the invisibility of the filament during the eruption. The contours in white outline the radio
depression as shown in panel (a). The arrows in yellow indicate the EUV and Hα filament during the early stage. The arrows
in cyan mark the flare ribbons and post flare loops. The white boxes mark the visible part of the radio depression and EUV
filament. The evolution of the erupting filament at the AIA 211 ˚A and 304 ˚A between 02:00 UT and 04:00 UT is shown in the
animation. The real-time duration of the animation is 12 s.
(An animation related to this figure is available.)
3. RESULTS
The quiescent filament of interest erupted on 2024 March 17th, accompanied by a C2.6 class flare5. After a gradual
increase, the GOES 1-8 ˚A soft X-ray flux peaked at 02:36 UT. The flare ribbons and post flare loops (cyan arrows in
Figure 1) can be clearly identified at the EUV passbands (for more details, please see the animation accompanying
Figure 1).
Interestingly, the DART observed the entire eruption process, showing that the filament was closely
associated with the region of pronounced brightness depression in the metric-decimetric images, even though it was
less visible at the beginning (see Figure 2 and the animation accompanying Figure 2). In contrast, the filament was
clearly visible in the CHASE Hα line center images prior to the eruption (Figure 1 (j)). Around 01:20 UT, it began to
rise slowly, as clearly identified in the AIA EUV images (see the animation accompanying Figure 1). After a period of
acceleration (∼1 hour), the filament gradually became invisible in the Hα line center images but appeared in the blue
wing images, indicating a Doppler shift caused by the outward eruption of the cool materials. The propagation of the
filament eruption can be well traced at both the EUV and radio passbands until exceeding the solar limb. The eruption
finally resulted in a faint partial halo CME as observed by the LASCO C2 coronagraph after 03:36 UT (marked with
5 For
flare
information,
please
refer
to:
https://www.lmsal.com/solarsoft/latest events archive/events summary/2024/03/17/gev
20240317 0205/index.html
