mechanics was found in [10], using a neural network variational wavefunction.
Monte Carlo
simulations of the thermal partition function of the string-theoretic BMN matrix quantum me-
chanics also exhibit the desintegration of a fuzzy sphere saddle, which is usually interpreted as
a deconfinement transition [11–14]. The localisation formula (1) allows us to study the dynam-
ics of a maximally supersymmetric model, with an explicit string-theoretic realisation, without
needing to perform intensive matrix Monte Carlo simulations.
The structure of the paper is as follows. In §2 we evaluate the partition function numerically,
with the results shown in Figs. 2 and 3. The high Ωphase shows the featureless dominance of the
maximally irreducible representation — which at large Ωhas the spacetime interpretation of a
probe D1-brane [1]. In §3 and §4 we show that the low Ωphase is dominated by a highly reducible
representation that is mostly, but not entirely, built from copies of the one-dimensional irrep —
at low Ωsuch representations have the spacetime interpretation of a gas of D-instantons. As Ωis
increased through the transition, and the highly reducible representations become sub-dominant,
they can eventually be described by a weakly curved supergravity background carrying NS5, D5
and D1 charges [2]. The connection between representations and brane charges is reviewed in §5.
In §6 we show that these geometries arise from placing spherical (p, q) fivebranes in a background
flux. Towards the transition, however, it is necessary to work in a different duality frame involving
a single probe spherical D5-brane. The various regimes are summarised in Fig. 1. We conclude
in §7 with an interpretation of the phase transition in terms of spontaneous symmetry breaking
and a discussion of the implications of our results for understanding emergent spacetime in the
polarised IKKT model.
Figure 1: Phase structure of the polarised IKKT model. Top row: spacetime physics of the
irreducible representation, which is dominant at large Ω2N (shaded red). Middle row: spacetime
physics of the maximally reducible or ‘trivial’ representation, which is dominant at small Ω2N
(shaded yellow). Bottom row: appropriate description of the matrix degrees of freedom. The
various regimes shown are discussed throughout the paper, this figure may be useful as a roadmap.
Matrix perturbation theory is discussed in [1].
4
