contribute to the divergent part of the symmetry breaking in our model. In contrast, in
the Abelian case such a Green function cannot receive contributions either divergent or
ﬁnite and non-evanescent at any order because any local breaking could not be written
as the BRST variation of a dimension ≤4-counterterm. Also, in the the non-Abelian
one-loop calculations of Refs. [15, 20] this Green function was irrelevant since it became
eﬀectively power-counting ﬁnite due to the particular structure of the b∆-vertex Feynman
rule in Eq. (2.16), which can be seen to cancel the highest power in loop momenta if
the ghost line of the b∆-vertex is external to the diagram. These ﬁnite terms vanish in
Eq. (3.1), as announced at the end of Sec. 3.1.
Checking the quantum action principle
In the Abelian two-loop study of Ref. [21] we veriﬁed the correctness of our procedure
by checking the validity of certain Ward identities dictated by an intact Slavnov-Taylor
identity. The simplest example is given by the transversality of the gauge boson self-
energy,
pνΓRen
GaνGbµ(−p) = 0,
(3.16)
which was valid once the appropriate symmetry-restoring counterterms had been found.
As explained in Sec. 3.1, our method is to determine the counterterms via Eq. (3.7),
corresponding to the RHS of the quantum action principle (3.4). The check then corres-
ponds to an explicit evaluation of the LHS of Eq. (3.4), corresponding to the Ward and
Slavnov-Taylor identities. Indeed for the subrenormalized action Eq. (3.4) yields in this
sector,
ΓDReg
caρcν ΓDReg
GcνGbµ(−p) = (∆· Γ)DReg
Gbµca(p).
(3.17)
The equation must be valid by virtue of the quantum action principle. However, expli-
citly checking it is highly nontrivial since the structures on the RHS, where we exploit
(evanescent) operator insertions and only need to evaluate UV poles, are manifestly dif-
ferent from the ones on the LHS, where ordinary Green functions appear whose ﬁnite
parts matter.
Thus it is desirable to also perform such quantum action principle checks in the non-
Abelian case in as many sectors as possible. While in the Abelian case the important
Ward identities correspond to a few rather straightforward relations between ordinary
Green functions, the non-Abelian identites are more involved. Only Eq. (3.16) manages
to preserve its simple structure for the ﬁnite breaking in the non-Abelian case, albeit
still subject to more numerous contributions in the full intermediate steps of the LHS of
Eq. (3.17).
To illustrate the nature of these checks and the appearing diﬃculties we focus on the
example relation
ΓDReg
caρbµΓDReg
ψjβψiαGbµ + ΓDReg
ψjβcaRkδΓDReg
ψkδ(−p1)ψiα(p1) −ΓDReg
RkδcaψiαΓDReg
ψjβ(p2)ψkδ(−p2)
= (∆· ΓDReg)ψjβ(p2)ψiα(p1)ca(p),
(3.18)
which is obtained by functional diﬀerentiation of both the LHS and RHS of Eq. (3.4)
w.r.t. the ﬁelds {ca, ψiα, ψjβ}. On the right-hand side we ﬁnd the breaking Green function
(∆· Γ)ψψc just as in Ref. [21]. This Green function is computed as part of the procedure
10
