A&A proofs: manuscript no. main
Fig. 4. Projected Hβ emission and Doppler shift of the spiral BLR best-fit. The top left panel is the projected BLR emissivity normalized to the
maximum emissivity for the Hβ, while the right top panel represents the Doppler shift of each BLR element. The bottom panels show a zoom of
the emissivity (left) and Doppler shift (right) on the central region of the BLR.
We note also that if the variability of PG 1302-102 is due to
Doppler boosting, as in the model presented in D’Orazio et al.
2015, observable effects should be evident by comparing multi-
ple spectra taken at different times (Ji et al. 2021, Bertassi et al.
in prep.). Indeed, we expect variability in BELs to be different
depending on the geometry of the BLR (disturbed or not) and
on the source of variability itself (Doppler-boost vs. red noise).
Song et al. (2021) analyzed a few spectra taken at different times
of PG 1302-102 containing multiple BELs (Lyα, CIV and CIII)
without observing variability consistent with the Doppler boost-
ing scenario unless assuming strong misalignment between the
BLR and the plane of the binary.21However, their analysis was
limited to a few good-quality spectra taken at different times, a
factor that could have affected their findings.
Consistently with the results from RM campaigns on AGNs
with asymmetric Hβ emission (Zastrocky et al. 2024), we argue
that the BLR of PG 1302-102 shows deviations from a purely
spherical or disk-like emissivity distribution. We do not exclude
the recent merger of two separate BLRs being a possible cause
21 If the binary plane is perpendicular to the BLR, then, in the reference
frame of the BLR, the Doppler effect should be smaller. However, given
the extended size of the BLR and the uncertainties on its geometry, it is
not clear what the net effect would be on the variability of broad lines.
of such perturbations. However, given the absence of variability
in the BELs emission, we argue that self-gravitating instabilities
are more likely to be an explanation for the emission coming
from the BLR.
The perturbed BLR scenario is also supported by its ca-
pability of simultaneously reproducing the peculiar emission
profiles of the Hγ, Hβ, and the observed flux excess at λ ≃
5000Å. Indeed, the analysis presented in Sec. 3.1 of the spec-
trum of PG 1302-102 revealed an additional component, which,
if associated with the Hβ, demonstrates high redshift (∆µVB ≃
4000 km/s) and a large broadening (FWHMVB = 12600 km/s).
This is the first time such component has been detected in
PG 1302-102, however, the same feature has already been ob-
served in different quasars (e.g., class B1 and B1+ quasar, Su-
lentic et al. 2002). One possibility could be this component not
being associated with the Hβ but with the emission from the Fe.
In our approach, we fixed the ratios of the different Fe multiplets
from Véron-Cetty et al. (2004). Different conditions and geome-
tries of the BLR and of the ionizing source might play a role in
changing the multiplet ratios without needing any further com-
ponents. In the case where the component is associated with the
Hβ, gravitational redshift from gas close to the SMBH might be
a possible explanation. In such case, assuming only gravitational
Article number, page 10 of 13
