Evidence for Intrinsic charm in the proton
71
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
x
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
xc+(x, Q = 1.65 GeV)
Evolution PDF basis
Flavour PDF basis
Figure 3.3: The default 4FNS charm PDF at Q = 1.65 GeV compared to a result obtained by parametrizing
PDFs in the flavor basis instead of the evolution basis.
basis PDFs Σ and T15. One may thus ask whether this choice may influence the final results for
individual quark flavors, specifically charm. Given that physical results are basis independent,
the outcome of a PDF determination should not depend on the basis choice.
In order to check this, we have repeated the PDF determination, but now using the flavor basis,
in which each of the neural network output neurons now correspond to individual quark flavors,
so in particular, instead of Eq. (3.1), one has
xc+(x, Q0; θ) = (1 −x)βc+NNc+(x, θ) ,
(3.2)
where NNc+(x, θ) indicates the value of the output neuron associated to the charm PDF c+. The
4FNS charm PDFs determined using either basis are compared in Fig. 3.3 at Q = 1.65 GeV. We
find excellent consistency, and in particular the valence-like structure at high-x is independent
of the choice of parametrization basis.
Dependence on the charm mass.
The kinematic threshold for producing charm perturbatively
depends on the value of the charm mass. Therefore, the perturbative contribution to the 4FNS
charm PDF, and thus the whole charm PDF if one assumes perturbative charm, depends
strongly on the value of the charm mass. On the other hand, the intrinsic charm PDF is of
non-perturbative origin, so it should be essentially independent of the numerical value of the
charm mass that is used in perturbative computations employed in its determination (though it
will of course depend on the true underlying physical value of the charm mass).
In order to study this mass dependence, we have repeated our charm PDF determination using
different values for the charm mass. The definition of the charm mass which is relevant for
kinematic thresholds is the pole mass, for which we adopt the value recommended by the Higgs
cross-section working group [245] based on the study of [246], namely mc = 1.51 ± 0.13 GeV.
Results are shown in Fig. 3.4, where our default charm PDF determination with mc = 1.51 GeV
is repeated with mc = 1.38 GeV and mc = 1.64 GeV. In order to understand these results note
