massless. The question is if the presence of the Coulomb branch modifies the categorical equiv-
alences between the two phases. Evidence comes from the mathematics literature, where similar
phenomena were observed for manifolds of complex dimension two. In [75] it was observed that
the homological projective dual of the K3 given by a codimension 6 complete intersection of linear
equations in G(2, 6) is a Pfaffian cubic in P5, i.e. the dimensions of the allegedly dual theories do not
match and exceptional collections have to be added. A similar phenomenon occurs for an Enriques
surface considered by Hosono and Takagi [76, 77]. In this case the homological projective dual has
the correct dimension, but suffers from nodal singularities. To obtain an equivalence of categories,
one again has to add exceptional collections. The GLSMs associated to these two examples are
both non-regular. We suspect that the necessity for adding exceptional collections is related to the
Coulomb branch at infinity. On the other hand, a non-abelian non-regular GLSM associated to a
non-compact Calabi-Yau has recently been considered in [33]. The authors were able to find grade
restrictions rule and compute monodromies despite the existence of the Coulomb branch at infinity.
A final remark in relation to D-branes concerns to the Coulomb branches at the phase boundary.
To our knowledge, in all the Calabi-Yau GLSMs that have been studied so far, it has been observed
that the D-brane that becomes massless at the singular point closest to the phase is the structure
sheaf of the Calabi-Yau in the respective phase. Considering the ζ ≪0-phase of our model, there
are two singular points at the same distance to the phase. It would be interesting to study what
this means for D-branes becoming massless in this case.
Acknowledgements
We thank Thorsten Schimannek for helpful advice and for sharing preliminary results of his work
[78] which also contains examples with Z3-torsion. We further thank Konstantin Aleshkin, Philip
Candelas, Will Donovan, Mohamed Elmi, Kentaro Hori, Shinobu Hosono, Pyry Kuusela, Xenia
de la Ossa, Mauricio Romo, Emanuel Scheidegger, Eric Sharpe, and Hiromichi Takagi for helpful
discussions and comments. We thank BICMR, MATRIX Institute, and the University of Queens-
land for hospitality. Furthermore, we thank Mainz Institute for Theoretical Physics (MITP) of
the Cluster of Excellence PRISMA+ (Project ID 390831469) for hospitality and partial support.
JK thanks Gakushuin University, Kavli IPMU, and the University of Vienna for hospitality. JK is
supported by the Australian Research Council Future Fellowship FT210100514. JM is supported
by a University of Melbourne Establishment Grant. JM is not supported by the UoM decision to
evict him from his office and exile him to a geology building during the final stages of this work.
A.
Computing the topological string free energies
Higher genus topological string free energies for compact CY3 are computed and discussed in
[34, 36, 37, 79]. We use the polynomial approach to solving the topological string [35, 66], see also
[4]. The holomorphic three-form Ωon Y provides the K¨ahler potential K for the metric on the
moduli space of complex structures M of Y , and also the Yukawa coupling Cφφφ, through
K(φ, φ) = −log

i
Z
Y Ω∧Ω

,
Cφφφ(φ) = −
Z
Y Ω∧∂3
φΩ.
(A.1)
36
