this way for argon is of order a few fs[35, 36]; with a graphene monolayer sandwiched
between the metal and argon, the on-resonance value of τD varies from ∼3 fs to 16 fs
(depending on the level of graphene-metal interaction)[34]; and for argon decoupled
from the substrate via an underlying Ar/Xe spacer layer, the value of τCT increases
to over 50 fs[35]. (Indeed, the calculations of Gauyacq and Borisov[38] predict values
of τD as large as 7 picoseconds for thick argon films.) In the context of the Ar@C60
system where there is marginal mixing of the argon and fullerene density in the
ground state, one might initially, and perhaps na¨ıvely, expect the charge transfer rate
to be relatively slow – comparable, at least, to that for the decoupled and weakly
interacting Ar-on-graphene and Ar-on-Xe systems. (Although see the section titled
Role of the Z+1 approximation below.) This is not at all what we find.
Despite the apparent chemical isolation of the encapsulated argon atom within the
fullerene cage, the on-resonance value of τD for bulk Ar@C60, 6.6±0.3 fs, shows
that not only does electron delocalization occur on a time scale that is up to three
orders of magnitude faster than that predicted for “bare” argon atoms condensed in
a thick multilayer film (see, for example, Table II of Gauyacq and Borisov[38]) but
that the charge transfer rate is comparable to that for argon separated from a metal
substrate (namely Pt(111)) by a graphene monolayer[34], despite the Ar@C60 solid
having a band gap larger than 2 eV. Moreover, the primary trend of a reduction in
delocalization time as a function of increasing photon energy (Fig. S4) is entirely
opposite to that observed for argon adsorbed directly on a variety of metal surfaces
(including Ag(111)), where the band structure of the substrate (and the concomitant
wave-vector matching requirement) leads to larger values of τD as ℏω is increased[45].
These observations all point to a substantial coupling and mixing of the core-excited
argon 4s state with the surrounding carbon cage, rather than an isolation of the excited
state within the endofullerene. To interpret this mixing of the argon and fullerene
density, and to gain a deeper understanding of the concomitant rapid transfer of the
photoexcited 4s electron, we turn to quantum chemistry calculations.
Beyond the confines of the cage: Ar 4s delocalization
Despite the seeming lack of any interaction beyond dispersion forces in the end-
ofullerene crystal (a van der Waals solid), there is clearly a relatively facile
delocalization pathway available to the photoexcited Ar 4s electron. Excited-state
calculations exploiting the maximum overlap method (MOM)[21, 22] (see Methods
and S.I.) provide key insights into the rapid escape of the encaged Ar 4s electron.
(A justification of our use of the MOM, and a comparison with time-dependent
density functional theory (TD-DFT) calculations, is given in the SI. We also discuss
relativistic considerations at length in the SI.)
Fig. 3 shows isosurfaces and radial distribution functions for the ground-state and
excited-state 4s orbitals, with the latter calculated using the MOM. To estimate the
spatial extent of the ground and photoexcited states, we have integrated the spheri-
cally averaged radial density distribution and determined the fraction of the density
6
