CAMulator
B.2
Global moisture budget conservation scheme
For an air column, the time tendency of total precipitable water (Mv) is governed by the balance between the vertically
integrated moisture flux divergence, evaporation, and total precipitation:
∂
∂tMv = 1
g
∂
∂t
Z p0
p1
qdp = −∇· 1
g
Z p0
p1
(vq)dp −E −P
(14)
Here, q represents the specific total water content, while E and P correspond to evaporation and total precipitation,
respectively, with units of kg · m−2 · s−1.
On a global scale, the divergence term in equation (14) vanishes, implying that the global sum of Mv is primarily
modulated by the spatially averaged evaporation (⟨E⟩) and precipitation (⟨P⟩), with an additional residual term ϵm
indicating conservation errors:
−
∂Mv
∂t

−⟨E⟩−⟨P⟩= ϵm
(15)
By convention, downward precipitation results in a positive ⟨P⟩, whereas ⟨E⟩is typically negative due to upward
evaporation.
To enforce moisture budget closure, precipitation is adjusted during the correction step via a multiplicative factor:
P ∗(t1) = P (t1) ⟨P ∗(t1)⟩
⟨P (t1)⟩,
⟨P ∗(t1)⟩= −
Mv (t1) −Mv (t0)
∆t

−⟨E (t1)⟩
(16)
where ⟨P ∗(t1)⟩denotes the globally adjusted precipitation necessary to achieve moisture conservation. This correction
is uniformly applied across all grid points.
B.3
Global total atmospheric energy conservation scheme
For a given air column, its vertically integrated total atmospheric energy (A) is defined as follows:
A = 1
g
Z p0
p1
(CpT + Lvq + Φs + k)dp
(17)
The terms on the right side of the equation (17) are thermal energy, latent heat energy, potential energy, and kinetic energy,
respectively. Lv is the latent heat of vaporization, and Φs is the geopotential at the surface. Kinetic energy (k) is defined
as k = 0.5 (v · v). The specific heat capacity of air at constant pressure (Cp) is defined as Cp = Cpd(1 −q) + Cpvq.
The formulation of equation (17) has some limitations, which will be addressed in a separated section below.
The tendency of A is determined by the divergence of vertically integrated moist static energy (h = CpT + Lvq + Φ),
kinetic energy, and other energy sources and sinks:
∂
∂tA = −∇· 1
g
Z p0
p1
v (h + k)dp = RT −FS
(18)
Where RT and FS are net radiation and energy fluxes on the top of the atmosphere and the surface.
RT = TOAnet + OLR
FS = Rshort + Rlong + Hs + Hl
(19)
Where TOAnet is the top-of-atmosphere net solar radiation, OLR is outgoing longwave radiation. Rshort, Rlong, Hs,
and Hl are the surface net solar radiation, surface net longwave radiation, surface net sensible heat flux, and surface net
latent heat flux, respectively. Frictional heating is ignored in FS.
For global sum, the divergence term in equation (18) is zero, and the global sum of the tendency of A is balanced by its
energy sources and sinks, subject to a residual term:
20
