27
crista and canal walls. However, previous results based on this assumption Selva et al.
(2009) required a very small Young’s modulus, close to 5 Pa, to match experimentally
observed deformations (Selva et al. 2009). This is an extremely low value, perhaps indicating
the softest material in the human body, and is unrealistic when compared to other “soft”
biological tissues (Goriely 2017). We suggest that this anomalous stiffness of the cupula may
be a result of the clamped boundary conditions on all sides of the cupula, as used here and
as usual in the vestibular literature (Rabbitt & Damiano 1992), may be incorrect; typical
anatomical drawings suggest that the cupula is only clamped on a part of its boundary, and
is free to move on other regions of the boundary. This would increase the apparent flexibility
of the cupula, creating similar system behaviour with without requiring an unusually small
Young’s modulus.
Our model may also allow for other phenomena within the vestibular system to be
investigated. An interesting avenue using the techniques developed here is the light cupula
phenomenon (see Lee et al. 2024, for a review of the concept), as well as related concepts such
as the buoyancy hypothesis to explain balance loss after alcohol intake (Brandt 1991). These
essentially state that when alcohol is consumed, ethanol diffuses faster into the cupula than
the surrounding endolymph, changing their density ratio (which under normal functioning is
very close to one, so that the cupula is neutrally buoyant). As ethanol is less dense than water,
the cupula would then become negatively buoyant, deforming differently than ordinarily and
sending incorrect signals to the nervous system. To account for this in our model, we would
need to include a buoyancy term so that the cupula can float or sink through the endolymph.
Acknowledgements. We acknowledge fruitful conversations with Dr Miguel Vaca, Dr Eduardo Martin
Sanz, Prof. Michael Gresty and Prof. Adolfo Bronstein. We are further grateful to Prof. Sarah L. Waters and
Prof. Ian M. Griffiths for their invaluable feedback on an early version of the project. For the purpose of
Open Access, the authors will apply a CC BY public copyright license to any Author Accepted Manuscript
version arising from this submission.
Funding. JCV is funded by a St. John’s College scholarship.
Declaration of interests. The authors report no conflict of interest.
Data availability statement. The data that support the findings of this study will be made openly available
in the Oxford Research Archive.
Author ORCIDs. Javier Chico-Vazquez, https://orcid.org/0009-0008-7536-6978.
Dominic Vella, https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1341-8863
Derek Moulton, https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3597-7973
Appendix A. Details for numerical solutions
The governing equations from Section 2 were solved in COMSOL for different values of
the Young’s modulus. The equations were solved on a moving grid, without neglecting the
geometric nonlinearity and including the nonlinear terms in the Navier–Stokes equations.
As mentioned previously, the cupula is modelled as a full three-dimensional solid, without
assuming it is a thin structure and with a finite thickness, 𝑡ℎ.
In Figure 12 we plot the deformation of the cupula, by showing (left panel) the deformation
of the cupula in the direction normal to the flow and (middle panel) the deformation of the
cupula in the direction along the flow. In the first case, we observe that the deformation is
large in the centre of the structure and zero on the edges, as expected. However, the structure
does not seem to be clamped as might have been expected — the edge exhibits a finite
gradient. This disagreement might be an effect of the finite thickness of the cupula used
in the numerical simulations, or alternatively, might occur because of numerical artifacts
and lack of resolution near the edge. For completeness, we have also included the analytical
