Role of mechanical effects on the excitation spectra of microwave-dressed Rydberg
states in a cold atomic cloud.
H. Failache,1, ∗J.A. Muniz,1 L. Velazco,1 D. Talento,1 and A. Lezama1
1Instituto de F´ısica, Facultad de Ingenier´ıa, Universidad de la Rep´ublica,
J. Herrera y Reissig 565, 11300 Montevideo, Uruguay
(Dated: April 9, 2025)
We explore the excitation spectra of cold 87Rb atoms to the 55D3/2 Rydberg state in the presence
of microwave (MW) radiation as a function of MW frequency. The spectra reveal several features
around the transition-frequencies between adjacent Rydberg states. We argue that some of these
features are indicative of variations in the Rydberg excitation probability while others result from
the removal of atoms from the cold cloud as a consequence of a MW induced strong dipole-dipole
inter-atomic force. Our claim is supported by experimental observations and theoretical modeling.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Rydberg atoms - in which an electron has been
promoted to a high energy state close to the ionization
limit - have long attracted the interest of the atomic
physics community [1].
They possess universal char-
acteristics largely independent of the specific atomic
element. Their wave-functions and energy levels can be
calculated with extreme precision thanks to the quantum
defect theory [2] and this, in turn, allows the precise
evaluation of most atomic properties [3]. Arguably the
most relevant property of Rydberg atoms are the large
values of the electric-dipole matrix elements between
neighboring electronic states resulting in a very large
atomic polarizability. As a consequence, Rydberg atoms
are extremely sensitive to electromagnetic (EM) fields
either externally imposed or due to the presence of other
Rydberg atoms.
The extreme sensitivity of Rydberg atoms to EM
fields has long been used as a sensitive tool for the
detection and measurement of ambient fields [4].
It
has also allowed the realization of fundamental tests of
quantum theory in the nearly ideal configuration of a
single two-level atom in the presence of a single photon
in a unique EM mode [5].
In addition, the sensitivity of Rydberg atoms to EM
fields results in the possibility of strong dipole-dipole
interaction (DDI) between Rydberg atoms at large
distances (several micrometers).
Such interaction can
be exploited as a means to couple two otherwise inde-
pendent atomic systems. It also results in a significant
shift of atom-pair energy levels with respect to infinitely
separated atoms.
As a consequence, two sufficiently
close atoms cannot be both excited to the same Rydberg
state via narrowband excitation, an effect known as
the Rydberg blockade [6–8].
Both effects,
distant
atoms coupling and Rydberg blockade, have attracted
∗heraclio@fing.edu.uy
considerable interest in recent years as useful tools for
quantum information processing [9–12].
In cold atom samples the inter-atomic forces resulting
from the DDI can be strong enough to accelerate
the atoms to speeds beyond the thermal velocity and
possibly expel the atoms from the trapping volume
[13–18].
Also, many-body interactions may result in
modifications of the spatial atomic distribution [14, 19].
In
most
experiments
concerning
Rydberg
states,
atom ionization is employed for detection. It is a very
sensitive technique which allows single atom detection
and Rydberg energy level identification.
However, it
requires the presence of electrodes near the observed
volume and a Channeltron detector inside the vacuum
chamber.
An alternate all-optical Rydberg detection technique
is provided by electromagnetically induced transparency
(EIT) [20].
It relies on two-photon excitation of the
Rydberg transition using as an intermediate state a
lower atomic level.
When the two-photon resonance
condition is met, the absorption of either exciting beams
is reduced. EIT has the advantage that the necessarily
setup can be entirely placed outside the vacuum cham-
ber.
It also allows a good spatial selectivity since the
probing lasers can be tightly focused on the sample. It
is however less sensitive than ionization since it requires
a significant optical density of the atomic sample.
EIT has been extensively used in cold Rydberg atoms
experiments [21–23].
Recent experiments exploit, as a spectroscopic tool,
the atom-loss resulting from Rydberg excitation in cold
atomic clouds. The detection is performed by monitor-
ing the number of atoms remaining in the cloud after
Rydberg excitation.
This can be achieved by atomic
cloud absorption measurement [24] or by monitoring
the cloud brightness in a magneto optical trap (MOT)
[25–28].
Electric-dipole-allowed
atomic
transitions
between
arXiv:2504.06218v1  [physics.atom-ph]  8 Apr 2025
