4
B.
Z2 Josephson topology
We start with a 3D superconductor with a space-group
symmetry of P1 (No. 1), where the only lattice symmetry
is the trivial identity operation E. The JT of a ˆx-oriented
π-junction is characterized by three Z2 topological invari-
ants (ν0; νy, νz) due to the inherent time-reversal symme-
try (TRS) Θ [49, 50]. Specifically, the nontrivial strong
index ν0 = 1 will enforce a pair of 1D helical Majorana
modes circulating all “edges” of the junction, as schemat-
ically shown in Fig. 1 (c). When ν0 = 0, the value of weak
index νy (νz) further informs the existence of a Kramers
pair of Majorana flat bands along the edge normal to ˆy
(ˆz) direction.
Starting with a JT phase with ν0 = 1, we can re-
cover a Z4 vortex by including a second ˆy-directional π-
junction that explicitly spoils the TRS. The helical Majo-
rana edge modes around the original π-junction will then
experience a TRS-breaking mass domain, proportional to
∆0sgn(y). As a result, a single MZM will appear as a
domain-wall zero mode at the crossing between two or-
thogonal π-junctions, i.e., the surface vortex center [as
shown in Fig. 1 (b)]. On the other hand, a π-junction
with ν0 = 0 and a nontrivial weak index (e.g., νy = 1)
will correspond to a trivial vortex line. This is because
the degenerate edge flat bands enforced by νy = 1 are
smoothly deformable into two pairs of helical Majorana
modes at ky = 0 and ky = π, respectively. After dimen-
sional reduction, we now have two overlapping vortex
MZMs, which, without additional protection, can always
get hybridized and lose their Majorana nature.
The above boundary matching process is generalizable
to a vortex line along a general direction ˆn.
Notably,
the dimensional reduction will bridge a π-junction and a
vortex line that are parallel to each other. Namely, the
pairing-flipping domain plane Σ of the junction must ful-
fill ˆn ∈Σ, where ˆn is the direction of the vortex tube. For
example, a π-junction along ˆx features a domain plane
with a Miller index of (100), which is parallel to any vor-
tex line perpendicular to ˆx, e.g., one along ˆz.
Knowing the Z2 index ν0 of the π-junction, we imme-
diately arrive at
ζ = ν0,
(3)
where ζ ∈Z2 is the 1D class-D topological invariant for
the parallel vortex line [7]. When ζ = 1, the vortex line
is topologically equivalent to a Kitaev Majorana chain
with one exponentially localized MZM at each line end.
We dub this fully gapped VLT phase a Kitaev vortex.
C.
Inversion symmetry and second-order
Josephson topology
Lattice symmetries compatible with junction geome-
try can enrich the topological structure of π junctions.
For example, the odd-parity nature of the π-junction re-
quires the electrons and holes to transform oppositely
under a spatial inversion operation P. Specifically, we
have P = τz ⊗P(e), where P(e) is the normal-state inver-
sion operation and τ0,x,y,z denote the Pauli matrices for
the particle-hole degrees of freedom. Clearly, P anticom-
mutes with the particle-hole symmetry Ξ = τxK, where
K is the complex conjugation. This property allows us
to define a Z4 inversion symmetry indicator κ [51, 52] for
the target π-junction Hamiltonian HπJ,
κ ≡
X
Ki∈TRIM
1
2[n+
Ki(HπJ) −n+
Ki(H0)] (mod 4),
(4)
where n+
Ki(h) is the number of even-parity occupied
BdG states of h at a time-reversal-invariant momentum
(TRIM) Ki.
Notably, H0(k) ≡τz ⊗IN is a constant
reference Hamiltonian that shares the same inversion op-
erator and matrix rank as HπJ(k). Since κ ≡ν0 modulo
2, κ = 1 or 3 indicates a Z2 topological JT and hence a
nontrivial Kitaev VLT as well.
On the other hand, κ = 2 implies a novel second-order
JT phase with two inversion-related corner-localized
Majorana Kramers pairs that are protected by both
P
and Θ,
as schematically shown in Fig. 1 (d).
This phenomenon resembles the boundary physics of
bulk second-order topological superconductors with odd-
parity Cooper pairings [53, 54]. Similar to the case of
a weak Z2 topological junction, the corner Majorana
Kramer pairs here can be smoothly deformed into two
pairs of helical Majorana edge modes through a fine-
tuning of the edge physics. As a result, we expect the
second-order JT phase to inform a trivial VLT after the
dimensional reduction.
D.
Mirror-Chern Josephson topology
Another
crystalline
symmetry
of
interest
is
the
domain-flipping mirror reflection Mx, with {Mx, Ξ} = 0
due to the π-junction geometry. We find Mx = τ0⊗M (e)
x ,
where the normal-state mirror operation (M (e)
x )2 = −1
for spinful fermions. Notably, Mx manifests as an on-
site Z2 symmetry for junction-bound states.
As a re-
sult, the π-junction Hamiltonian always admits a block-
diagonal form with HπJ(ky, kz) = H+ ⊕H−, where H±
carries an mirror index mx = ±i.
One can thus de-
fine a mirror Chern number CM = (C+ −C−)/2, where
C± is the Chern number defined for each mirror sec-
tor [55, 56]. The value of CM ∈Z informs the number of
Mx-protected helical edge modes around the π-junction.
Notably, these helical modes are generally not Majorana
modes since {Mx, Ξ} = 0, and they may cross zero energy
at some generic momentum k0. Clearly, a junction with
an odd mirror Chern number is Z2 topological, following
ν0 ≡CM (mod 2).
Updating a π-junction to a vortex breaks both Mx
and Θ simultaneously.
A magnetic mirror symmetry
ΘM = MxΘ, however, is preserved, which transforms the
vortex Hamiltonian as ΘMHv(kz)Θ−1
M = Hv(−kz) [57].
