that for a successful BBN the temperature of the plasma should be TBBN > 4MeV [78] and
the upper limit on the energy scale of inflation, Hinf/Mpl ≲2.5×10−5 [67, 68], one obtains
the following allowed range for the PBH masses, given by [62–65]
10g ≲MPBH,0 ≲109g.
(2.11)
Since the position of the Gaussian peak sets the mean mass of the distribution of PBH,
we choose kpeak to fit accordingly inside this mass range. Although the parametrization
of the peak of the power spectrum is rather arbitrary, we, in essence, try to reproduce
a Starobinsky-like model [79] with a feature in the potential that produces the peak, as
explained in the introduction. This allows us to select the values of the decay rates in
terms of the expected temperature of reheating of these models [80–82]. Thus, we consider
the following range of inflaton decay rates for our analysis
Γmin
ϕ
= 10−25Mpl < Γϕ < 10−19Mpl = Γmax
ϕ
,
(2.12)
which implies reheating temperatures of 106GeV to 109GeV. We have checked that Γmax
ϕ
does not conflict with the PBH. That is, they form before the field decays. Also, for Γmin
ϕ
,
we select the scenarios where PBH dominate before their evaporation (otherwise they
do not produce GWs). In any case, the decay rate of the inflaton should be considered
carefully.
It could be the case that when the PBH dominate, the temperature of the
surrounding radiation (2.9), due to the field’s decay, is higher than the temperature of the
PBH themselves (2.10), which delays the evaporation process and allows a longer PBH-
dominated phase. We consider this when computing the GWs from the PBH-dominated
phase in Sec. 4. However, this effect on the production of GWs, if any, is minimal.
3
Primordial black hole dominance
In this section, we describe the collapse process of a perturbation into a PBH under the
KP formalism and compute the fractional energy density ΩPBH. Then, assuming that the
scalar field decays into radiation, we study the evolution of the energy densities of the field,
radiation, and the PBH. Finally, after determining the conditions for a PBH-dominated
era, we show the power spectrum of Poissonian fluctuations of the energy density of the
PBH fluid.
3.1
Khlopov-Polnarev formalism
As stated in the introduction, in a matter-dominated era, the formation probability of a
PBH relies on the fraction of sufficiently spherical regions to undergo collapse. This is the
initial scenario proposed by Khlopov and Polnarev in the 80’s [21–25]. In an almost spher-
ical collapse, gravity pulls matter radially inward toward the center, but in an anisotropic
collapse, matter collapses faster in some directions than in others. If these differences are
significant, shear stresses can disrupt the formation of a PBH [83]. However, a moderate
anisotropy can allow collapse. For instance, if a perturbation is slightly elongated or de-
formed but still retains a strong central gravitational potential, it can collapse into a PBH.
– 6 –
