real-world deployment. However, DI-QKD requires satisfactory demonstration of Bell non-locality over
long distances, and as such introduces demanding technical requirements, in particular related to the
distance limitations (signal loss requires advanced quantum technology such as quantum repeaters) and
high efficiency (high-quality detectors, sources, devices) required to achieve reasonable key rates.
In this section we discuss the current outlook towards real-world implementation of DI-QKD, focusing
on the current promising experimental platforms, technical challenges, and possible solutions. In Section
6.4, we discuss the efforts towards real-world deployment of QKD in general, including efforts towards
standardization, interoperability, and integration into cybersecurity and network architecture, since future
implementation of DI-QKD will most likely benefit from most of this groundwork. When possible, we
highlight specific or unique challenges that DI-QKD will likely encounter on the road to real-world
deployment.
6.1. Bell loopholes in the DI-QKD scenario
Conclusive Bell tests must be performed with space-like separation between measurement processes,
as discussed in Section 2.4.2. However, this is not a requirement for DI-QKD, since to be able to guarantee
the security we must ensure that the users stations do not leak any information to an adversary Eve,
even at sub-luminal velocity. From Eve’s point of view it is most likely much easier to install a backdoor
that sends information from a user’s devices to her station, rather than make them communicate with
each other to fake a Bell inequality violation.
Thus, DI-QKD calls for complete isolation of the measurement stations, involving shielding–electromagnetic
or otherwise–to avoid broadcasting of any type of signal related to measurement basis choices and out-
comes. In addition, whether the quantum systems are photonic or stationary, the users stations are con-
nected by a photonic channel, which in principle opens a backdoor for side-channel attacks using external
light sources, as has been exploited for fake Bell violations [142], in QKD [10–15] and QRNGs [455, 456].
To isolate the users stations, a switch or shutter mechanism should be used to block the optical channel
after the relevant optical signal has passed, and before the measurements are performed. In a recent
DI-QKD implementation with trapped ions, this was achieved by shifting the ions out of the focal point
of the collection lens, thus decoupling them from the optical link, and also scrambling the quantum state
after measurement, so that the state after measurement (and thus the measurement result) could not be
determined by a third party probing the ions [51].
Another difference between Bell and DI-QKD scenario lies in the memory loophole (see Section 3.11.).
The ability of the devices to remember the inputs and outcomes of the previous rounds to be used in
the future has been proved to be of very little consequence for Bell inequalities already in Ref. [457].
For DI-QKD, on the other hand, memory attacks pose a very serious threat [62, 206].
While some
countermeasures against them are possible, there is no known method of full protection.
The experimental loophole which is of crucial importance for both Bell and DI-QKD scenarios is
the detection efficiency loophole, which currently is the main problem in experimental realizations and
implementations, as we address in the next section.
6.2. Detection efficiency and channel losses
The issues of detection efficiency and channel losses are intimately related in determining the perfor-
mance characteristics of a DI-QKD link. In both all-photonic setups and those with stationary qubits,
the efficiency in which photons can be detected at a distant measurement station is a critical metric in
determining the overall performance characteristics of the system.
The overall detection efficiency of a photon can be expressed as η = ηcηℓηmηd, where ηc is the coupling
efficiency from the source to the optical link (ex: optical fiber), ηℓis the transmission efficiency of the
optical link, ηm is the efficiency of the measurement device, and ηd is the quantum efficiency of the
detector.
The efficiencies ηc, ηm and ηd depend upon specific characteristics of the source, the optical compo-
nents of the measurement device and detectors. For example, losses can range from near zero up to a few
dB in the case of coupling from an optical source into an optical fiber 17. While bulk optical components
such as (polarizing or non-polarizing) beam splitters can present very low losses ≤0.5% (∼0.02dB),
fiber-based components can have losses up to a few dB. State-of-the-art commercial superconducting
single-photon detectors typically have ηd ≤0.85, but efficiencies reaching over 0.95 have been reported
17Here we give in efficiency in terms of probability, and losses in terms of dB. For loss L, one has η = 10−L/10.
71
