The Hamiltonian in Eq. (3) is written in a general way. That is, for each atom of the catalyst and, if
desired, for each atom of the reactants, one can decide how many of the electrons are removed, if any.4 A
conservative approach would be to employ the pseudoion description only for the atoms in the extended
catalyst, particularly for those atoms away from a chemically active site, whose main purpose in the catalyst
is to provide increased electronic delocalization (as would appear in a realistic extended system) and behave
as an effective (small) thermal bath. However, one may liberally and flexibly use pseudoions as replacements
to all-electron atoms, and check the convergence of the results when varying the number of DoF combined
into pseudoions. Such quantum dynamical simulations are completely out of reach for classical computers,
and could produce valuable scientific insight. For example, relative reaction rates between configurations
(e.g., computed from two different catalyst surfaces/motifs) may display systematic error cancellation giving
rise to more physically accurate numerical results than one might apriori expect, and be sufficiently accurate
to rank their relative reactivity. In any case, under reasonable choices the coarse-grained treatment of bulk
catalytic properties leads to drastic savings for the quantum algorithm compared to the full simulation under
the Hamiltonian in Eq. (1), with the number of electrons cut by a factor of 10 or more, and lower momentum
cutoffs for the plane-wave basis set by a factor of up to 1000 [67], at a relatively small price of a more
complicated form of the modified electron-ion interaction term.
2.2
Physically salient and algorithmically efficient quantum state preparations
The choice of the initial state is consequential and it is informed by a range of considerations. We want our
choice to capture salient physical features, but only to the extent that they impact the physics of interest,
while leaving any remaining freedom to improve algorithmic efficiency.
This ensures that we can make
maximal use of limited quantum resources to glean useful physical insight.
As discussed in the introduction (Sec. 1.1), a typical catalytic reaction involves adsorption of reactant
molecules onto a catalyst surface – possibly with in-situ surface modifications – bond reconfiguration of
the reactants usually through key intermediate (often rate-determining) states, and desorption of the newly
reconfigured products. Here we specifically target the study of reaction mechanisms, i.e. bond reconfigura-
tion, the “quantum heart” of catalytic reactions. The DoF of reactant molecules (or catalyst species) can
be approximately decomposed at the initial time into four independent classes: the translational motion
of the center of mass (CoM), the overall rotational motion of the molecule, internal vibrational motions
of the bonds, and the electronic motion. The total state for each chemical species at the initial time is
taken to be the product of the wavefunctions for each of its motional classes. Details including algorithmic
implementations will be given in Sec. 4, while here we only introduce the main conceptual ideas.
Translational Motion
Statistical mechanics considerations might suggest preparing the CoM translational degrees of freedom of
each reactant as a Gaussian wavepacket (e.g., of minimal uncertainty), with velocity taken from a Maxwell
distribution at the reaction temperature T. However, it is typically the case that most initial kinematic
configurations will be unlikely to undergo bond reconfigurations – the reactants might not reach the catalyst
surface at the same space or time, might spend considerable time hopping on the surface of the catalyst
to/away from the active sites, or might reach the surface at speeds or angles of incidence unsuitable for
adsorption, a prerequisite for a catalytic reaction to occur. We wish to remove these inactive initial configu-
rations from our simulation as much as prior knowledge and chemical intuition allows, while still capturing
relevant physical features:
1. Chemically active kinematic configurations: For optimal use of quantum computational resources, suf-
ficiently strong mutual interactions between species (reactants and catalyst) should develop within a
suitably short time, i.e., we would like the reactants to reach the catalyst surface at similar times,
and fairly quickly. On the other hand, if the reactants approach the surface with sufficiently large
velocities, adsorption is unlikely. Hence, while ideally we would initialize the reactants far from each
other and the surface to ensure small initial interactions – thus justifying independent state prepara-
tion of each chemical species as per commonly-invoked molecular chaos hypothesis – for the sake of
4The HGH pseudopotentials often give a couple of options for a given atom, usually corresponding to natural division of
core and valence electrons based on the orbital structure and filling of the atom.
10
