Computing Canonical Averages with Quantum and Classical Optimizers:
Thermodynamic Reweighting for QUBO Models of Physical Systems
Francesco Slongo1 and Cristian Micheletti1, ∗
1Scuola Internazionale Superiore di Studi Avanzati (SISSA), Via Bonomea 265, I-34136 Trieste, Italy.
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
Abstract. We present a general method to compute canonical averages for physical models
sampled via quantum or classical quadratic unconstrained binary optimization (QUBO). First, we
introduce a histogram reweighting scheme applicable to QUBO-based sampling constrained to spe-
cific intervals of an order parameter, e.g., physical energy. Next, we demonstrate that the scheme
can accurately recover the density of states, which in turn allows for calculating expectation values
in the conjugate ensemble, e.g., at a fixed temperature. The method can thus be used to advance the
state-of-the-art characterization of physical systems that admit a QUBO-based representation and
that are otherwise intractable with real-space sampling methods. A case in point are space-filling
melts of lattice ring polymers, recently mapped in QUBO form, for which our method reveals that
the ring catenation probability is non-monotonic with the bending rigidity.
Introduction The possibility of evaluating multiple
solutions concurrently makes quantum computing ideally
poised to solve optimization tasks in ways that are radi-
cally different from conventional methods. A prominent
class of combinatorial problems solvable with quantum
algorithms is quadratic unconstrained binary optimiza-
tion (QUBO), which includes SAT, maximum clique, and
graph coloring.
Solving a QUBO problem is equivalent to finding the
ground state configuration(s) of a quadratic Ising-like
Hamiltonian:
H0(σ) =
X
i
hi σi +
X
i̸=j
Jij σiσj ,
(1)
where the h variables are the local external fields, J is
a symmetric interaction matrix, and the σs are binary
variables taking values of either 0 or 1.
In pursuit of potential advantages offered by quantum
optimization and simulations [1–10], and to leverage the
practical speedups of special-purpose classical Ising ma-
chines [11–14], researchers are increasingly recasting con-
ventional sampling simulations of discrete physical sys-
tems as QUBO problems [15–35]. The mapping typically
involves a one-to-one correspondence of the real-space
configurations of the original system and the degenerate
ground state solutions of an appropriate QUBO Hamil-
tonian. Uncorrelated configurations of the physical sys-
tems can thus be obtained by performing independent
and unbiased minimizations of the QUBO Hamiltonian
in the abstract space of its binary variables, followed by
backmapping the solutions to real-space representations.
For soft matter systems, such as dense phases of
polymers, resorting to the QUBO-based sampling on
fully-quantum or hybrid classical-quantum annealers can
be significantly more efficient than conventional Monte
Carlo sampling in real space [33].
Remarkably, the
∗cristian.micheletti@sissa.it
speedup benefits can be reaped, albeit to a lesser degree,
even when the QUBO minimization is performed classi-
cally. A case in point is sampling maximally dense lattice
ring polymers with infinite bending rigidity [33]. Com-
pared to real-space advanced sampling methods, numer-
ical benchmarks show that classical QUBO-based sam-
pling takes the runtime scaling with system size, N, from
N 5.4 down to N 3.7.
QUBO-based sampling thus holds the promise of
bringing significant performance improvements com-
pared to Monte Carlo methods to many other instances
of hard physical problems [15, 32, 36–39], including pro-
tein design strategies and RNA secondary structure pre-
diction [35, 40, 41]. However, one known limitation is
that QUBO-based sampling is natively tied to the micro-
canonical ensemble, unlike Monte Carlo methods, which
naturally operate in the canonical ensemble. This is be-
cause QUBO schemes, as long as they are free of biases
[42, 43], allow for covering the ground state manifold
uniformly so that different energy-minimizing states are
sampled with equal probability.
This limitation can be partly overcome in specific con-
texts, e.g., when excited states returned by quantum an-
nealing runs are informative about the low-temperature
Gibbs ensemble of the physical model [5, 7, 38, 44,
45].
However, even aside from considerations of fair
sampling[43, 46, 47], a general approach for calculating
Boltzmann averages for QUBO representations of physi-
cal systems is still lacking.
In response to this challenge, here we introduce a
QUBO-based scheme that enables computing canonical
expectation values by combining the use of slack variables
and a thermodynamic reweighting scheme. First, slack
variables are introduced in the Hamiltonian to restrain
the order parameter of interest, e.g., the energy of the
physical model, within specific intervals. Next, a suit-
able weighted histogram method is used to combine data
from overlapping intervals and thus recover the density
of states. The latter is finally used to calculate expec-
tation values in the conjugate ensemble, e.g., at a fixed
arXiv:2504.07094v1  [quant-ph]  9 Apr 2025
