27
In the case of the NLSE, N depends on the field, and
the above approximation breaks down.
There is mul-
tiple choices for when to sample the field, i.e.
before
or after the first and second exponential multiplication.
The following sampling choice conserves the convergence
properties of (112) (Javanainen and Ruostekoski, 2006):
E1 = e
iδz
2 g|E0|2E0
(113)
E2 = eiδzDE1
(114)
E3 = e
iδz
2 g|E2|2E2,
(115)
where N(E) = V + g|E|2. This gives one step of the
algorithm, we then loop over the
L
δz times until the end
of the nonlinear medium cell to get the output field.
This method converges with O(δz3) temporal accuracy
and O(δr2) spatial accuracy. As explain in (Weideman
and Herbst, 1986), the stability condition is δz ≤
δr2
π .
The strategy to balance performance and precision is to
choose δr such that δr < ξ, and adjust δz to satisfy the
stability condition.
In the case of the simple Euler scheme presented
above, all of the steps are diagonal in real and Fourier
space. This means that all calculations can be carried
out element-wise over the real and Fourier space grids.
This makes it particularly suited for GPU acceleration
as this type of hardware is heavily optimized for such
matrix calculations, as well as packing a lot of comput-
ing power at an accessible price.
Compared to CPU-
based implementations, GPU-based solvers offer impor-
tant speedups depending on problem size and hardware
(Aladjidi et al., 2024). This makes it possible to model
large optical systems with high spatial and temporal res-
olution.
Open source packages are available to imple-
ment this approach without any pre-existing knowledge
of GPU programming (Aladjidi et al., 2024).
VII. RECENT EXPERIMENTAL ADVANCES
During the last decade, experiments with fluids of light
have moved towards more and more connections with ul-
tracold atomic quantum gases. Using similar vocabulary
and formalism, this has opened a new era for the field
with three objectives in mind: i) validate the paraxial
fluid of light systems as a potential platform to study
quantum gases; ii) improve our understanding of quan-
tum gases with new observables or better resolution using
fluids of light with respect to ultracold atomic systems;
iii) invent novel optics experiments directly inspired by
ultracold quantum gases. These three goals are some-
what chronological. The fluid of light community made a
clear effort initially to settle this system as a solid and rig-
orous equivalent of ultracold quantum gases at the mean-
field level, observing superfluidity, Bogoliubov dispersion,
vortex nucleation, etc. In a second step, extending the
knowledge of quantum gases thanks to the specific tools
available for fluids of light has shown great results in
turbulence, Bose-Bose mixtures and out-of-equilibrium
dynamics. The third step is not clearly established yet.
While several original optics experiments have been con-
ducted, no truly novel nonlinear or quantum optics phe-
nomena has been discovered yet. We will propose a few
ideas along this direction at the end of this review.
A. Hydrodynamics and nonlinear dynamics
Hydrodynamics is one of the main testbed for fluids of
light. Compared to atomic BECs, fluids of light gives ac-
cess to direct imaging of the beam intensity and off-axis
digital holography allows to reconstruct the phase of the
light field and thereafter the velocity field. Historically,
these studies were targeting the observation of bright
and dark solitons to demonstrate the nonlinear nature
of these systems, where the balance between diffraction
and nonlinearity allows for the formation of self-confined
waves (Fleischer et al., 2003).
Subsequently, study of
jetlike tunneling (Cohen et al., 2013), optical analogue
of the Laval nozzle (Fouxon et al., 2010) and Rayleigh-
Taylor instabilities (Jia et al., 2012) have reinforced the
hydrodynamics interpretation. In the past years, several
other topics have emerged. Several studies have focused
on the formation of dispersive shock waves, analogous to
those observed in other fluid systems, including atomic
BECs (Abuzarli et al., 2021; Azam et al., 2021; Bienaim´e
et al., 2021; Copie et al., 2020; Dieli et al., 2024; Walczak
et al., 2015; Wan et al., 2007; Xu et al., 2015). These
shock waves manifest when perturbations propagate at
different speeds due to dispersion and nonlinearity, lead-
ing to oscillatory structures.
Notably, the dynamics of shock waves in fluids of
light have been quantitatively analyzed using Whitham
modulation theory, showing good agreement with ex-
perimental observations (Azam et al., 2021; Bienaim´e
et al., 2021).
Blast waves, characterized by increased
pressure and flow followed by a negative pressure wind,
have also been experimentally generated and studied in
fluids of light, providing insights into compressible fluid
dynamics in different spatial dimensions (Abuzarli et al.,
2021).
Similarly, dam break experiments have been
conducted in fluids of light, where the interaction of
dispersive shock waves propagating in orthogonal direc-
tions gives rise to a 2D ensemble of solitons (Dieli et al.,
2024). These experiments involved measuring analogous
physical properties like hydrostatic pressure, density,
and particle velocity, and showed good agreement with
hydrodynamical models.
Very tightly connected is the study of topological de-
fect formation, particularly vortices. Experiments have
demonstrated the spontaneous generation of vortices fol-
lowing perturbations (Aladjidi, 2023), such as the snake
