The limiting cases that control the phase transition in Fig. 2 are especially simple. The max-
imally irreducible representation has ND1 = 1 and NNS5 = N, while the trivial representation
has ND1 = N and NNS5 = 1. We can ask whether the corresponding geometries are good super-
gravity backgrounds over the parameter regimes where the representation in question dominates
the partition function. The behaviour of the curvature and dilaton in the background for general
representation is discussed in [2]. We collect the relevant results in Table 1.
It is seen that the
Representation
eϕ ≪1
Ric l2
s ≪1
Max irreducible
N1/2 ≪Ω2N
Ω2N ≪N1/2
Max reducible (trivial)
N1/4 ≪Ω2N
Ω2N ≪N3/2
Table 1: Parameter regime over which the spacetimes corresponding to the two extremal repre-
sentations have small dilaton and are weakly curved close to the non-trivial cycles. Here Ric is
the Ricci scalar in the string frame. All factors of gs are incorporated into eϕ.
spacetime for the maximal irreducible representation is never a good supergravity background,
in the sense that it is either stringy or quantum. The D1-brane backreacts gravitationally before
the transition, at Ω2N ∼N1/2, but does not enter a classical gravitational regime. In Fig. 1 we
have denoted the entire regime below the classical probe D1-brane description as a ‘fluctuating
D1-brane’. The first to onset are worldvolume stringy fluctuations [1] and then later bulk gravi-
tational fluctuations. On the other hand, the spacetime for the trivial representation is a good
background over the range N1/4 ≪Ω2N ≪N3/2 (in the following §6 this range of validity will
be reduced by a further consideration). However, this range is strictly above the phase transition
at Ω2N ∼1, and hence the trivial representation is sub-dominant there.
The same range of validity, N1/4 ≪Ω2N ≪N3/2, was obtained from a matrix perspective
in [3]. There it arises as the condition for the collective field (34) to have a classical saddle point
in the trivial representation and, more generally, low-lying representations with order one charge
NNS5 = q. Specifically, it is found in Appendix D of [3] that
ρq(x) ∼( ˆR2 −x2)2 .
(35)
We will discuss the value of ˆR in the following §6. It determines the size of the conducting
plates in the supergravity Poisson problem in the limit zs ≪Rs, in the notation of [3]. However,
the form of (35) suggests an additional interpretation.
The collective field is the eigenvalue
distribution of a matrix that carries an SO(7) label. The distribution (35) is therefore naturally
thought of as a uniform six-sphere embedded in R7 and projected down to one of the Cartesian
axes. In §6 we will show, by working in a dual SL(2, Z) frame, that ˆR is indeed precisely the
radius of a spherical (p, q) fivebrane.
6
The fivebrane saddle
We have just seen that the maximally irreducible representation is not described by a good
supergravity background at any value of Ω. However, at large Ω2N ≫N3/2 it can be described
by a probe D1-brane in a simple ‘cavity’ background, carrying N units of worldvolume flux [1]. In
13
