5
However, after early debates [3, 20, 26, 27, 41], be-
fore 2015, it was commonly believed that when the roton
mode of a dipolar gas dynamically reaches full softening,
e.g. upon tuning as below a∗
rot, the system undergoes an
abrupt dynamics resulting in the rapid loss of the BEC –
the collapse [51, 57–62]. This collapse occurs due to the
dominance of attractive interactions at some finite mo-
menta, triggering a sharp local density increase, which,
in turn, leads to strong losses via three-body processes.
It resembles the collapse occurring in contact-interacting
gases or dipolar gases confined in traps elongated along
the dipole direction.
Yet, in the latter cases, the col-
lapse is driven by the softening of the k →0 phonon
modes and occurs, if adiabatic, through a global density
increase (see also discussion in IV A). Within the MF the-
ory described in III A, no ground states of finite density
exist for as < a∗
rot, providing the static counterpart to
the dynamical instability described above.
At the end of 2015, a groundbreaking discovery mod-
ified this prevailing understanding. An experiment re-
vealed the surprising survival of the degenerate gas of
164Dy on long time scales after quenching to the MF in-
stability regime [11].
Furthermore, tiny density struc-
tures were formed in the gas. At first, the origin of the
stabilization was not understood [11, 63–65]. Soon after,
however, a parallel was drawn to a recent prediction that
contact-interacting mixtures could be stabilized through
beyond-MF effects, i.e. related to the quantum fluctua-
tions of the field ψ [66, 67].
In a perturbative picture, beyond-MF effects give rise
to a correction to the energy and chemical potential of
the degenerate gas beyond the MF terms comprised in
the brackets of Eq. (3). The leading-order correction is
given by the Lee Huang Yang (LHY) term, which for
dipolar gases reads
µLHY(n, ϵdd) =
32
3√π gn
p
na3sF(ϵdd) ≡γQFn3/2.
(7)
This term acts as an effective repulsive interaction term
with steeper scaling with n than MF (see two last terms
in Eq. (3)). The function F(ϵdd) is given by F(ϵdd) =
1
2
R
dθk sin θk(1+ϵdd(3 cos2 θk−1))5/2 [68–70]. The above
formula is derived for a uniform unconfined gas and for
ϵdd < 1 but is commonly directly used for ϵdd ≥1 and
for trapped systems through local density approximation.
This is justified as µLHY is dominated by the contribution
of large-k modes, corresponding to small spatial struc-
tures compared to the trap size. These modes are also
hard modes and insensitive to the phonon instability oc-
curring at ϵdd ≥1 in unconfined systems (see III B 1).
This instability instead yields a small imaginary part in
µLHY due to the soft modes’ contribution, which is dis-
carded [71–73].
While this correction is usually small in weakly inter-
acting gases with
p
na3s ≪1, it becomes important in the
special case where MF interactions nearly cancel while as
remains finite. This is exactly what can happen in mag-
netic gases, as the DDI competes with the short-range
interaction and can cancel its contribution at MF level
with as ∼add ̸= 0 [12, 67, 71–73]. In the presence of
weak MF attraction, µLHY stabilizes states with higher
but finite density compared to the MF repulsive case.
This applies both in the dynamics, preventing collapse,
and at equilibrium, yielding quantum-stabilized ground
states.
The density scale is set by (7) and as ∼add.
Such a stabilization mechanism is universal and applies
to all gases, if sufficiently dipolar, regardless of the trap
configuration. Stabilization was not observed in previous
studies using chromium [59, 60] due to its smaller dipo-
lar length, add = 15a0, which makes three-body losses
dominate over the LHY term (7) [5].
As the gas remains weakly interacting, an effective
MF treatment of the beyond-MF stabilization is possi-
ble. This is done by adding the LHY term (7) to the
bracket in the right-hand side of the GPE (3) [12, 71–
73]. This modified equation is known as the extended
GPE (eGPE).
The discovery of the quantum-fluctuation stabilization
mechanism was confirmed by further experiments [12,
13, 67].
While the states created in the seminal work
of Ref. [11] were highly excited due to the specifics
of the protocol, soon after, ground states of different
nature were formed.
Hereafter, we review the wealth
of quantum-stabilized states observed and predicted in
magnetic dipolar quantum gases.
IV.
QUANTUM-STABILIZED GROUND
STATES
A.
Ground state Modulation
The characteristics of ground and excited states sta-
bilized beyond the MF instability depend on the mode
that softens and drives the instability.
While phonon
modes always drive the instability in contact-interacting
gases, this differs in dipolar gases. As reviewed in III B
and III C, the mode driving the instability can be either
phononic or rotonic depending on the relative configura-
tion of trap, excitation, and dipoles, see Fig. 2.
This
underlies the quantum stabilization of diverse ground
states, being either unmodulated or modulated.
1.
Phonon-driven MF instabilities and unmodulated states
Phonon-driven MF instabilities underlie quantum-
stabilized unmodulated ground states [74]. These states
have yet unique properties: Even in the absence of con-
finement in some or all spatial direction(s), they are
(non-uniform) localized solutions [75–77]. They are thus
self-bound under the competition of MF and beyond-
MF interactions, and form an ultradilute liquid, warrant-
ing their droplet designation [78]. In trapped systems,
droplet states can also occur and display the distinct
