where κ2 = 8πGN = 1/M 2
p , GN is Newton’s constant, Mp ≃2.4×1018 GeV is the (reduced) Planck
mass, and ΛC ≃10−122M2
p is the cosmological constant. Expanding in terms of a canonically
normalized metric fluctuation hµν around some fixed background ¯gµν, i.e. gµν = ¯gµν + 2κhµν, we
can note that κ = 1/Mp and its positive powers play the role of interaction couplings of negative
mass dimension. Additionally, it can be verified that the superficial degree of divergence of the
most divergent diagrams is equal to 2L + 2, where L is the number of loops: the UV divergences
get worse as the number of loops increases. These aspects indicate that GR is non-renormalizable
when quantized in the framework of perturbative QFT.
Despite this failure, a well-defined effective field theory (EFT) treatment of GR can still be
formulated [30] and quantum-gravity predictions can be trusted up to energies below a cutoff
scale which, for example, in pure Einstein’s gravity is given by the Planck mass but can also be
lower if the coupling to matter is switched on [31–33]. The local part of this gravitational EFT
action is given by
SEFT =
Z
d4x√−g
 1
2κ2 (R −2ΛC) + a1R2 + a2RµνRµν
+ a3κ2R3 + a4κ2RµνρσRρσ
αβRαβµν + · · ·

,
(6)
where the dots stand for all possible local operators that are compatible with the geometric
structure and symmetries of GR. In the absence of matter, the terms that are proportional to the
classical field equations can be removed by performing a field redefinition of the metric tensor [5].
The coefficients ai are dimensionless and their physical value can be obtained by renormalization
up to errors proportional to positive powers of the ratio E/Mp, where E is some characteristic
energy scale and Mp could also be replaced by a lower cutoff if matter is present. It is important
to remark that in this EFT description the higher-order operators do not introduce any extra
degrees of freedom in addition to the massless spin-two graviton.
The story that is usually told is that the perturbative QFT framework starts failing to provide
an accurate description of the gravitational interaction at energy scales where the EFT of GR
breaks down and that one should therefore resort to some non-perturbative QFT methods or opt
for a beyond-QFT approach to analyse these and higher energy scales [34–38].
However, it is certainly good methodological practice, before abandoning the perturbative
QFT framework for quantum gravity, to seek a four-dimensional QFT of gravity that extends
GR at high energies and is compatible with the guiding principles listed in the previous section.
In particular, we should ask the following question:
Does a strictly renormalizable QFT of gravitational interaction exist?
We will now show that the answer is YES and then analyse the theoretical and phenomenological
implications of the strict renormalizability paradigm for quantum gravity.
5
