48
Tools and methodology
2.2.2. Treatment of theoretical uncertainties
Completely orthogonal to the experimental uncertainties are the uncertainties arising during
the computation of theory predictions. In the following, we delineate how scale variations
can be used to estimate the missing higher order uncertainties (MHOU) arsing in pQCD and
propagated to a PDF fit by means of a covariance matrix. Scale variation are justified by RGE
invariance and have the advantage that can be performed in a coherent way for all the very
different theoretical predictions entering in a PDF fit. Other independent types of theoretical
uncertainties such as due to nuclear corrections [150] or the approximate N3LO incomplete
higher order uncertainties (cf. Section 4.1.2) can also be added to the theory covariance matrix
whenever needed.
MHOU from scale variations.
As we have sketched in Section 2.1, theoretical predictions for
high energy proton-proton scattering depend on two quantities that are computed perturbatively
by expanding in as(Q2): the partonic cross-sections or coefficient functions, Eq. (1.80), and
the anomalous dimensions, Eq. (1.74), that determine the scale dependence, of the PDF. The
MHOU on the predictions is due to the truncation of these perturbative expansions at a given
order.
In principle, if a VFNS (see Section 1.4.2) is used, a further MHOU is introduced by the
truncation of the perturbative expansion of the matching conditions that relate PDFs in schemes
with a different number of active flavors. If one is interested in precision LHC phenomenology,
then physics predictions are produced in an nf = 5 scheme, but PDFs are also determined by
comparing to data predictions whose vast majority is computed in the nf = 5 scheme. Hence,
the matching uncertainties only affect the small amount of data below the bottom threshold or
charm threshold. The MHOU related to the matching conditions are thus subdominant and we
neglect them here.
We thus focus on MHOUs for the hard cross-sections and anomalous dimensions. For each
perturbative result MHOUs are obtained by producing various expansions, that differ by the
subleading terms that are generated when varying the scale at which the strong coupling is
evaluated. Given a perturbative quantity, we construct a scale-varied NkLO coefficient function
¯C(as(Q2), ρ) = am
s (Q2)
k
X
j=0

as(Q2)
j ¯Cj(ρ)
(2.15)
by requiring that
¯C(as(ρQ2), ρ) = C(as(Q2)) [1 + O(as)] ,
(2.16)
which fixes the scale-varied coefficients ¯Cj(ρ) in terms of the starting Cj. Here ρ denotes the
ratio between the physical scale Q and the unphysical scale µF , µR that appears upon imposing
RGE invariance of the perturbative quantity. At any given order the difference between C and ¯C
