8
as the well known Mn12 and Fe8 MNMs [56, 57], the giant
spin describes the whole magnetic core of the molecule,
and within the ground multiplet local spin operators are
all proportional to the total spin operators, Sk = AkS.
Thus, the low-energy Hamiltonian and equation 39 can
be formulated in terms of the total spin only. Given the
illustrative purpose of the present example, to maintain
simplicity and avoid specifying the internal spin structure
of any particular MNM, we assume k-independent values
for Γk
ηη and projection coefficients Ak (i.e., Ak = S/Ns,
Ns being the number of ions). Thus, Equation 39 can be
expressed solely in terms of the total spin. The effective
Hamiltonian has the form:
HS = S · DZF S · S + B · Γ · S,
(40)
where DZF S is the zero field splitting tensor, B is the
external magnetic field vector, and Γ is the gyromagnetic
ratio tensor. DZF S can be written as
DZF S =


−D/3 + E
0
0
0
−D/3 −E
0
0
0
2D/3

,
where D and E are defined starting from the initial com-
ponents of the tensor Dxx
ZF S,Dyy
ZF S,Dzz
ZF S, referred to the
x, y, z coordinate axes: D = Dzz
ZF S −1
2Dxx
ZF S −1
2Dyy
ZF S,
E = 1
2(Dxx
ZF S −Dyy
ZF S). We assume a realistic value of
D = 25 µeV [56, 57] and a low level of rhombicity, with
E/D = 0.02. The magnetic field is supposed to be ori-
ented along the z direction, i.e. B ≡Bˆz, with B = 0.07
T. Moreover, we consider a diagonal, isotropic Γ tensor,
with components Γxx = Γyy = Γzz = 2.0 µB, where
µB is the Bohr’s magneton. After diagonalization of the
Hamiltonian 40, the energy levels are labeled from 0 to 20
following an ascending order across the spectrum. Cor-
respondingly, the associated eigenstates are labeled from
|0⟩to |20⟩. Since E is small, the anisotropy nearly rep-
resents a double-well potential. Eigenstates can then be
associated to one of the two wells depending on the sign
of ⟨Sz⟩. Note that the sign of D corresponds to an easy-
plane anisotropy, with small values of ⟨Sz⟩in low-lying
states.
In order to show the link between the coherence factor
of a superposition of two eigenstates and the relative ∆
parameter as defined in 39 and depicted in section IV B,
we start by considering the set of seven lowest energy
levels within the spectrum.
For each possible pair of
states, a coherent superposition is prepared.
The characteristic values of ∆are calculated for each
pair. and are summarized in the legend in figure 1. The
coherence factor decays, computed by using the CCE
method (up to second order), are displayed in figure 1.
The timescale is normalized by taking as a reference the
time employed by the fastest curve to reach the value of
0.001, which is approximately 0.1 µs. It is evident that,
by gradually decreasing the value of ∆with a proper
choice of α and β, it is possible to increase the value of
the coherence factor of the system. This result is in per-
fect agreement with the theoretical calculations carried
Figure 1: Top: coherence factor over time of the pair su-
perpositions of states corresponding to seven lowest en-
ergy levels of the spectrum. Bottom: legend displaying
the representative color for each superposition and the
corresponding value of ∆.
out in subsections IV A and IV B. We stress the fact that
even differences on the second decimal place of ∆con-
tribute to the ordering of the curves. It is important to
notice that, in principle, one should evaluate the expecta-
tion values of the x and y components of S too, according
to what has been stated in equation 35. However, in this
specific case, those quantities are null ∀α, β.
What we have shown so far is a good, illustrative exam-
ple of the concrete implications of the theory developed
in section II. The more similar the eigenstates of a su-
perposition from a magnetic point of view (expectation
values of spin magnetic moments), the lower the value of
∆and, therefore, the longer the coherence time. Further
insights can be gained by considering composite systems
made of multiple spins spatially located in different po-
sitions, as it will be discussed in the following section.
B.
System with competing interactions
According to the definition of the parameter ∆in 38
and 39, we expect that the leading terms causing deco-
herence are differences in the expectation values of local
spin operators, instead of total spin operators, as one
could expect at first glance. To demonstrate this result,
we propose as a second example a system composed of
five S = 1/2 spins interacting through competing inter-
