2
Hadronic molecules and multiquark states
Fig. 1 Visualisation of the substructure of possible tetraquark configurations in the doubly heavy sector, with Q ( ¯Q) and q (¯q) denoting
heavy and light (anti-)quarks, respectively: (a) hadroquarkonium, (b) compact tetraquark, (c) hadronic molecule. While the first two are
typically compact with their size dictated by the confinement radius, the last one can be very large if the state is located close to the
pertinent two-hadron threshold.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Since the early days of the quark model, multiquark states are proposed to exist—they are already mentioned in the famous works by
Gell-Mann [1] and Zweig [2]. The first calculation proposing a multiquark structure for concrete states was performed by Jaffe and Johnson
within the MIT bag model: The nonet of light scalar mesons, nowadays called f0(500), f0(980), a0(980) and K∗
0(700), were proposed to be
tetraquarks (¯q¯qqq) [3]. Only one year later Voloshin and Okun [4] argued for the existence of deuteron like states in doubly heavy systems.
The idea was picked up later by T¨ornqvist [5]. In the previous section strong experimental evidence was presented for the existence of states
beyond the most simple structures allowed by the rules for the formation of hadrons within QCD, especially in the doubly heavy sector (for
reviews, putting emphasis on different aspects, see Refs. [6–14])—this is why we start the discussion for this class of states that we use to
introduce the various structure assumptions currently discussed in the literature. We will come back to candidates for multiquark states in
other sectors towards the end of this section. In the doubly heavy sector there were states found that decay into a heavy quarkonium state
together with a light hadron. Examples are T¯bb(10610) and T¯bb(10650), also known as Zb states, observed in the Υ(nS )π, n = 1, 2, 3, and
hb(mP)π, m = 1, 2, final states and Pc¯c(4312), Pc¯c(4440) and Pc¯c(4457) observed in J/ψp final states. Since the production of the heavy
quarkonium in the course of the decay is heavily suppressed within QCD due to the OZI rule, the ¯QQ pair must have preexisted in the wave
functions of the observed states. Since they on the other hand carry charge (or, equivalently, non-vanishing isospin), they are identified as
tetraquarks and pentaquarks, respectively1.
In addition to the explicit multiquark states mentioned in the previous paragraph there are also states that qualify for multiquark states
not because of their quantum numbers, but because of their unusual properties, difficult if not impossible to accommodate within the most
simple realisations of the quark model or variants thereof. Prominent examples of this class are the ψ(4230), also known as Y(4230), a
vector state that decays, e.g., into D ¯D∗π and J/ψππ but not into D(∗) ¯D(∗) as is expected for a ¯cc state, and the χc1(3872), also known as
X(3872), which decays by far dominantly into D0 ¯D∗0, although its mass basically coincides with the threshold of this channel, while the
decays into J/ψππ and J/ψ3π appear to be heavily suppressed.
In this section the different proposals put forward for the structure those states, sketched for tetraquarks in Fig. 1, are reviewed. The
presentation focusses on what imprint in the particle spectrum and observables the different structures would leave, if they were to be the only
or the by far dominant component in a given state. This is also what is mostly discussed in the literature as of today. However, in principle
some mixing between the different structures is possible as well. We come back to this interesting question in section 8. The different
structures shown in Fig. 1 differ by the assumed sub-structures within the hadron. Those are either color neutral (for hadro-quarkonia or
hadronic molecules) or carrying a color charge in form of (anti-)diquarks.
The link between QCD and the different assumed structures of the multiquark states is provided by the approximate symmetries of QCD
and their breaking, most notably SU(2) flavor (also known as isospin symmetry), embedded in the larger SU(3) flavor symmetry and heavy
quark spin symmetry.
In addition, also chiral symmetry plays a crucial role for some systems. SU(2) (SU(3)) flavor symmetry were an exact symmetry of
QCD, if the charges and masses of up and down (up, down and strange) quarks were equal, since the QCD interaction is flavor blind (up
to some quark type dependence entering through the scale dependence of the QCD coupling constant). Since the up and down quark mass
difference is much smaller than any hadronic scale, isospin symmetry is typically realised with an accuracy of better than a few percent.
As the strange quark is much heavier, SU(3) flavor symmetry is realised only with some 30% accuracy, however, SU(3) breaking mass
differences within multiplets of compact states are typically (largely) explained by the mass added in by the strange quark. For hadronic
molecules the situation is more complicated as is discussed below.
1The prefixes tetra and penta, denoting four and five, are of greek origin.
