by the feedbacks. We note that the smaller contributions of the forcing at mid- and high-latitudes
is at odds with the larger energy transport changes reported in those regions in the fixed-SST runs
in Section 4.a. This can be explained by the fact that the surface fluxes, as noted above, are not
constrained in this case, and indeed their changes absorb most of the energy transport changes,
leaving the TOA radiative budget largely unaltered.
We proceed with the radiative kernel approach to decompose the forcing, feedbacks, and their
sum (as introduced in Section 2b) into contributions from changes in specific humidity (Fig. 7,
red curves), lapse rate (Fig. 7, green curves) and surface temperature (the Planck response, yellow
curve). There is no region where a single component clearly dominates, but we can nevertheless
relate each contribution to changes in the associated physical fields.
We start with the meridional structure of the radiative forcing (i.e., the TOA anomaly induced in
the fixed-SST runs by prescribing 𝐹0 = 4 m.s−1.day−1). We show in Figure 8 (panel b) and Figure 9
(panel a) the time- and zonally-averaged specific humidity and temperature changes, respectively.
In the superrotating state, the atmosphere is drier than the control in the tropics, moister in the
mid-latitudes, and slightly drier close to the poles. This explains qualitatively the meridional
structure of the contribution of specific humidity changes to the radiative forcing (Fig. 7, panel
b): drier air results in decreased optical depth, increased OLR, and negative forcing, all else equal
(conversely for moister air). Similarly, Figure 9 (panel b) shows that the lapse rate increases in
the tropics, decreases in mid-latitudes, and increases again close to the poles, which matches the
meridional structure of the lapse rate contribution to radiative forcing (Fig. 7, panel b).
However, the way the two effects combine into the net radiative forcing (Fig. 7, panel b) is more
subtle. To understand it, we consider jointly the emission level changes due to specific humidity
changes (Figs. 8 and 9) and the spatial distribution of temperature changes. Close to the equator,
the drier atmosphere results in a significantly lower emission level, which is not compensated for
by the lapse rate changes. Although the temperature in the superrotating state at the new emission
level is cooler than it was at the same level in the control run, it is warmer than the temperature at
the emission level in the control run, hence the OLR is larger: specific humidity effects dominate.
Moving poleward, the competition between the two effects progressively changes: while the
atmosphere is still drier compared to the superrotating state, it is less so and the emission level
changes are smaller. At the same time, the lapse rate changes amplify. The combined change
18
