8
creased transparency, occurring when a MW frequency
around 14.5 GHz is used, results from a depletion of the
atomic cloud along the path of the Rydberg exciting
lasers beams. The transient evolutions shown in Fig. 4
reveal the existence of an additional atom-loss channel
allowed by the presence of the MW. Finally, the trap-loss
spectrum plotted in Fig. 5 together with the absorption
spectrum clearly points to the variation of the number of
atoms in the cloud as the common cause of the observed
spectral features.
It is well established that atomic excitation into
Rydberg levels results in the loss of atoms from the cold
atomic cloud [24–28]. In consequence, the atom-number
reduction responsible for the increased transparency
occurring for MW frequencies around 14.5 GHz could,
in principle, be explained by an increase of the Rydberg
excitation probability. However, as illustrated in Fig. 7,
only minute enhancements of the double pair excitation
probability were obtained for all the tested sets of param-
eter values consistent with the experimental conditions.
For a given choice of the pair geometry, the small
enhancements of the transition probability observed on
either side of the central peak are roughly two orders
of magnitude smaller than the central reduction of the
excitation probability.
The relative magnitude of the
central excitation probability-reduction compared to the
off-resonance probability-increase structures becomes
even larger after radial and angular integration since
the central structure is always present while the small
off-resonant structures are displaced depending on R
and θ.
Given the quantitative failure of the transition prob-
ability variations to explain the observed atom-loss
occurring for MW frequencies detuned from resonance,
we notice that for such MW frequencies, |D, F⟩(|F, D⟩)
pairs can be excited as a consequence of the DDI (red
trace in Fig.
7).
The DDI potential energy of the
doubly excited pairs roughly corresponds to the absolute
value of the MW detuning from the Rydberg transition
frequency (several hundred MHz).
The resulting force
is sufficient to accelerate the atoms and expel them
from the observed region in a few tenths microseconds
(see Fig 11 in the Appendix).
We hypothesize that
such mechanical effect is at the origin of the observed
MW-induced atom removal.
The rate equation model
developed above based in our hypothesis leads to
predicted spectra in good qualitative agreement with
the observations.
It is interesting to observe that the agreement between
the observations and the calculated spectra appears to
be somehow better when the narrower Gaussian radial
probability distribution g(R) is used (dotted lines in Fig.
9) instead of the nearest neighbor distribution p(R). This
may indicate that the atomic positions in the cloud may
not actually be random or that many-particle effect could
play a role. In fact, regular spatial arrangements or the
emergence of spatial correlations have been observed or
predicted in strongly interacting Rydberg atoms (under
conditions different from those of our experiment) [19,
43, 44].
V.
CONCLUSIONS
We have presented experimental observations that
reveal the existence of a MW induced atom-loss mech-
anism occurring for MW frequencies detuned from
Rydberg transition frequencies by several hundred MHz.
The experimental results as well as the theoretical model
provide strong indication that the MW induced atom
removal is the result of the mechanical effect arising
from strong DDI between doubly excited Rydberg atom
pairs.
The MW induced mechanical effect revealed here can
be considered as a practical means to manipulate Ryd-
berg atom systems. Ideally, it could allow the removal of
selected Rydberg pairs. Unfortunately, one must keep in
mind that the selection of the MW frequency does not
warrant spatial selectivity given the fact that different
pair geometries have similar dressed-pair energies (see
Fig. 6). However, the number of the DDI eigenvalues
depends on the number of magnetic sublevels involved
in the transition (12 for a D →F transition), the spatial
selectivity should be substantially improved for an S →
P transition.
The experimental observations presented in this arti-
cle, as well as their interpretation, are largely affected by
the disordered nature of our sample (cold gas). A better
insight into the mechanisms at work and their application
is to be expected from experiments performed on better-
controlled atomic samples such as dipolar traps [45] or
optical lattices [46].
VI.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are thankful to L. Lenci for his contribu-
tion to the early stages of the experiment, to A. Saez
for valuable technical assistance and to C. Cormick for
pertinent remarks on the manuscript.
This work was
supported by ANII, CSIC and PEDECIBA (Uruguayan
agencies).
