2
versal physics for these S =
1
2 kagome antiferromag-
nets.
The measured intensities provide unprecedented
insight into the relevant spin-spin correlations, which al-
lows us to clearly distinguish intrinsic kagome correla-
tions from impurity-induced correlations. Comparisons
with numerical calculations further support the case for
a QSL ground state. Finally, the data are consistent with
the presence of a spin gap of ∼J/15, suggesting that a
gapped quantum spin liquid is present in these materials.
SPIN EXCITATIONS MEASURED BY
INELASTIC NEUTRON SCATTERING
Using a new crystal synthesis technique, we grew
large (up to ∼5×5×0.1 mm), high quality single crys-
tals of deuterated Zn-barlowite (ZnxCu4−x(OD)6FBr,
x ≃0.80). This development enabled our inelastic neu-
tron scattering measurements on a large 0.76 g co-aligned
array of ∼190 of these crystals (Figure 6 in extended
data).
Figure 1 shows representative magnetic scat-
tering intensities in the (HK0) zone for Zn-barlowite,
compared to that of herbertsmithite, at T=1.7 K. The
Zn-barlowite signal, proportional to the dynamic struc-
ture factor S(q, ω), is shown in the left halves of pan-
els (a) and (c) at energy transfers of ℏω=0.4 meV and
ℏω=1.3 meV, respectively (after background subtraction
and symmetrization detailed in Methods and figure 7
in extended data).
The left halves of panels (b) and
(d) show similar measurements on herbertsmithite using
data from Han et al. [13].
The higher energy 1.3 meV scattering reveal patterns
that are very similar between Zn-barlowite and herbert-
smithite, suggesting universal behavior. In contrast, the
lower energy 0.4 meV scattering patterns differ notably,
such as the intensity variations along the (1,0,0) versus
the (1,1,0) directions. Panel (e) depicts the crystal struc-
ture of the materials, highlighting the differences between
the interlayer impurity positions. In contrast to the cen-
tered impurities in herbertsmithite, the impurities in Zn-
barlowite are shifted to lower symmetry positions and
are expected to couple to the nearest kagome moments
differently [26, 34]. Our results suggest that the low en-
ergy scattering originates primarily from the impurity-
kagome correlations which are different between the ma-
terials [13, 26], while the higher energy scattering origi-
nates primarily from the kagome planes, which are struc-
turally nearly identical. These observations indicate that
the intrinsic kagome moments in both materials exhibit
similar universal QSL excitations.
Modeling the observed scattering patterns allows us to
make a quantitative identification of the intrinsic versus
the impurity-induced spin correlations [13].
The right
halves of panels (a-d) in Figure 1 model the correspond-
ing left-half data using a weighted sum of contributions
from only the six bond types with the shortest in-plane
distances. This model confirms that the high energy scat-
tering is dominated by kagome layer correlations, while
the low energy scattering in Zn-barlowite is dominated by
impurity to kagome correlations. Further details on the
spin correlations and the empirical model are discussed
below.
A more detailed look at the dynamic structure factor
S(q, ω) in shown in Figure 2. Panels (a,b) show the in-
FIG. 1.
Comparison of magnetic excitations between
candidate kagome QSL materials, showing universal
behavior, with distinct low-energy impurity-related
scattering. (a-d) Comparisons between measured and mod-
eled magnetic neutron scattering intensity for Zn-barlowite
(a, c) and herbertsmithite (b, d) [13] for energy transfers of
ℏω=0.4 meV and ℏω=1.3 meV, respectively (see the Spin Cor-
relations and Numerical Comparisons section). Black circles
in b and d indicate scattering from phonons or tails of the
Bragg peak intensity near the [1 1 0] positions, which are
not captured by the magnetic model. All data shown were
taken with incident energy Ei=3.32 meV and T=1.7 K. Zn-
barlowite data was taken at the Cold Neutron Chopper Spec-
trometer at Oak Ridge National Laboratory and contours
in (a, c) are respectively integrated over [0.3,0.5] meV and
[1.2,1.4] meV to match the resolution of the data from Han
et al. [13]. (e) Crystal structures of two triangular plaque-
tte layers of Zn-barlowite (left) and herbertsmithite (right).
Cu, O, and Zn atoms are shown to highlight differing inter-
layer impurity positions and kagome layer stacking between
the materials.
