Elimination of spurious oscillations on photoemission spectra
10
Figure 4 shows the spectra corresponding to rightward, leftward, and total
emission for the same square well and laser pulse considered previously. First, we
numerically verify that projecting onto the basis Ψ(r,+)
k
and Ψ(l,−)
k
yields equivalent
results for rightward emission, and analogously, that Ψ(l,+)
k
and Ψ(r,−)
k
are equivalent
for leftward emission.
More importantly, we observe that while the left and right
emission spectra are similar, they are not identical. As demonstrated in Ref. [26],
strictly symmetric emission arises under symmetric pulses F(t) = F(τ −t) within the
strong-ﬁeld approximation (SFA). In our case, the pulse is symmetric and the potential
is short-ranged, so the SFA provides an accurate description. The small deviations
from perfect symmetry observed in Fig. 4 stem from the depletion of the ground state
and the residual eﬀect of the short-range potential on the escaping electron.‡ In this
example, the total emission to the right (left) accounts for 49.88% (50.12%) of the
total.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
electron energy (a.u.)
10
-5
10
-3
10
-1
10
1
dP/dE (a.u.)
SPM: Ψ
(-)
SPM: Ψ
(r,-) (Ψ
(l,+))
SPM: Ψ
(l,-) (Ψ
(r,+))
Figure 4. Projection of the photoelectron spectrum from the only bound state
of the same square well and subject to the same laser pulse as in Figs. 2 and 3
onto the scattering wave outgoing from the right Ψ(r,−) or equivalently incoming
to the left Ψ(l,+) (see text) in dashed red line, outgoing from the left Ψ(l,−) or
equivalently incoming to the right Ψ(r,+) in blue dotted line, and the sum of the
two, i.e., projecting onto Ψ(−) or equivalently onto Ψ(+) in black solid line.
Now, we consider photoionization due to a short laser pulse with just two optical
cycles, i.e., τ = 2 × 2π/ω = 15.71 a.u.. In Fig. 5a, we plot the total energy spectrum
calculated by projecting onto stationary eigenfunctions of the box, resulting in a
highly oscillating distribution. By applying the WOM with n = 3 and γ = 0.045,
we can smear the spurious oscillations rather eﬃciently; however, we still observe a
reminiscence of these oscillations at high energy (E ≳1.3 a.u.). In addition, in the
low energy part of the spectrum near threshold (E ≲0.05 a.u.), the WOM spectrum
falls oﬀabruptly.
This is an artifact of the method since it averages an energy
region of width close to 2γ, whose one part lies in the continuum with appreciable
transition probabilities (E > 0) and the other lies below the threshold (E < 0) with no
eigenenergies close to it. Thus, the WOM average in Eq. (12) decreases as the energy
‡ The SFA is exact only for zero-range potentials and in the absence of initial state depletion.
