5
FIG. 4.
An agent agt interacting with the cascade of two
environment channel env1 and env2.
τothers ≪τprotocol ≪τinfo. The protocol has access to a
work reservoir for storing (or retrieving) work.
Under these assumptions, it can be shown [7, 8] that,
similar to equilibrium thermodynamics, the second law
of thermodynamics sets an upper bound on the ex-
pected amount of work extractable from a system with
information-bearing degrees of freedom X. This upper
bound is a state function, known as the nonequilibrium
free energy, F = U −kBT ln 2 H(X), where U is the
memory system’s internal energy, kB is the Boltzmann
constant. Note that we refer to the work as expected be-
cause it is the work that can be expected to be extracted
on average based on the available knowledge about the
input state pX.
In addition, in order to focus on the energetic limits of
information processing alone, we assume that the inter-
nal energy landscape over information-bearing degrees of
freedom is flat and remains unchanged before and after
executing the isothermal protocol, i.e., the internal en-
ergy U does not contribute to the extractable work. Such
a memory model is also known as an information reser-
voir [37]. Then, the second law yields an upper bound
on the expected extractable work W:
W ≤H (Xout) −H (Xin) ,
(14)
from implementing Φ on X, mapping Xin to Xout. Here
and throughout, all work expressions are understood to
be in units of kBT ln 2.
The upper bound in eq. (14), imposed by the second
law, is tight in the sense that it can, in principle, be sat-
urated with protocols under idealized conditions. Con-
crete examples of such protocols are given in [16, 17, 19].
While our work is primarily concerned with the fun-
damental limits imposed by the second law, it should
be noted that more realistic and resource-constrained
assumptions can be incorporated [38–41].
Within our
framework, this is most easily achieved when the ex-
tractable work can still be expressed through a state
function, such as in [40], by replacing F with the new
state function.
With this, the work rate, i.e., the asymptotically ex-
pected work per round that an agent model agtM can
extract using the environment channel env is (see Sup-
plemental Material G 1 for a derivation)
W(agtM →
←env) = ⟨(H (At|Mt) −H (St|Mt))⟩t ,
(15)
with the Ces´aro limit ⟨•⟩t defined in eq. (10). The ex-
istence of work rate is not guaranteed for arbitrary pro-
cesses, as it is possible that the Ces´aro limit in eq. (15)
Environment Channel env
Cwork(env)
Noiseless
0
Memoryless Invariant
max
pA0

H(S0) −H(A0)

Unifilar Product
log |A| −h(S)
TABLE I. Work capacity for different classes of environment
channels (see eq. (18) for a definition of h(S) and Supplemen-
tal Material G 3 for a proof).
does not exist [42]. Note, however, that here the limit
exists because the global Markov chain of the percept-
action loop is asymptotically well-behaved (see Supple-
mental Material B for details). We then arrive at the
following
Definition 5. The work capacity Cwork of an envi-
ronment channel env is defined as
Cwork(env) :=
max
agtM∈A→
←env W(agtM →
←env).
(16)
where A
→
←env denotes the set of all agent models which can
interact with env.
Intuitively, the work capacity captures the maximum
rate at which an agent—optimally tailored to the envi-
ronment channel—can expect to extract work, based on
the second law of thermodynamics.
The existing pro-
tocols for implementing transition matrices [16, 17, 19]
can be leveraged to construct optimal protocols for the
agent model agtM which maximizes eq. (16), making it,
in principle, saturable (see Supplemental Material G 2 for
details).
Returning to the question posed at the beginning of
this section, the energetic limits of agents, in terms of
work rate, are determined by the work capacity of the
environment channel.
Next we will provide some general properties of work
capacity:
Theorem 3. For any environment channel env = νenv
S|A,
work capacity Cwork(env) has the following properties:
(i) (Existence) Cwork(env) exists,
(ii) (Bounds) 0 ≤Cwork(env) ≤ln |S|,
(iii) (Subadditivity under channel cascade, see Figure 4)
Cwork(env2 ◦env1) ≤Cwork(env1) + Cwork(env2).
See Supplemental Material G 3 for a proof. Note that
the bounds in Theorem 3 follow from the canonical
bounds on Shannon entropy.
Due to the Ces´aro limit, work capacity is generally
difficult to compute. However, for special classes of envi-
ronment channels, the expression for work capacity sim-
plifies, as shown in Table I.
