Electric-Field-Controlled Chemical Reaction via 
Piezo-Chemistry Creates Programmable 
Material Stiffness  
Jun Wang†, Zhao Wang†, Jorge Ayarza, Ian Frankel, Chao-Wei Huang, Kai Qian, Yixiao Dong, 
Pin-Ruei Huang, Katie Kloska, Chao Zhang, Siqi Zou, Matthew Mason, Chong Liu, Nicholas 
Boechler, Aaron P. Esser‐Kahn** 
*Correspondence to: aesserkahn@uchicago.edu. 
†These authors contribute equally to this work. 
Abstract 
The spatial and temporal control of material properties at a distance has yielded many unique 
innovations including photo-patterning, 3D-printing, and architected material design. To date, 
most of these innovations have relied on light, heat, sound, or electric current as stimuli for 
controlling the material properties. Here, we demonstrate that an electric field can induce chemical 
reactions and subsequent polymerization in composites via piezoelectrically-mediated 
transduction. The response to an electric field rather than through direct contact with an electrode 
is mediated by a nanoparticle transducer, i.e., piezoelectric ZnO, which mediates reactions between 
thiol and alkene monomers, resulting in tunable moduli as a function of voltage, time, and the 
frequency of the applied AC power. The reactivity of the mixture and the modulus of a naïve 
material containing these elements can be programmed based on the distribution of the electric 
field strength. This programmability results in multi-stiffness gels. Additionally, the system can 
be adjusted for the formation of an electro-adhesive. This simple and generalizable design opens 
new avenues for facile application in adaptive damping and variable-rigidity materials, adhesive, 
soft robotics, and potentially tissue engineering. 
Main 
 
Controlling materials properties with external forces has been transformative in generating new 
modalities1. Light, heat, pH, mechanical force, and electric current have all been used to great 
effect to alter the composition and structure of materials2,3. The resulting  materials  are patterned, 
printed, and restructured with control of length-scale, geometry, and stiffness4. Materials with 
programmable design enable flexible and dynamical modulation in stiffness with compliant 
properties able to respond on-demand to environmental changes5,6. However, among all stimuli, 
an electric field uniquely excels at control, sensing, and distribution of power7,8. Several examples 
in the literature show that an electric field induces physical changes in a material, such as phase 
transitions, which subsequently results in a change in shape or stiffness9. These materials are often 
referred to as electro-programmable materials, and possess responsive reversibility, large-scale 
variability, and multiple-input compatibility for displaying localized stiffness modulation8. For 
example, Silberstein et al. reported a comprehensive computational study on the stiffening of 
