in this limit [1], without using localisation. For the U(N) theory at large Ω
log Zirred
N

Ω→∞
≈cN + 2
3 Ω2N
28
2
+ O(1/N) .
(4)
We are primarily interested in the thermodynamic large N limit of the partition function. The
constant cN ≡N
2

3
2 + log (2π)10
N

. At large Ωthe maximally irreducible fuzzy sphere saddle
describes a spherical, classical probe D1-brane in a background with nonvanishing NSNS flux
and axion [1]. The D1-brane arises as the polarisation of N D-instantons by the background
flux. Fluctuations of the D1-brane geometry are described by a Maxwell field and a scalar.
In the opposite Ω→0 limit, the action (2) becomes the same for each representation.
‘Entropic’ effects are therefore crucial in this high temperature regime. The moduli integrals in
(1) are seen to each develop a 1/Ω2 divergence in this limit, and hence the partition function is
dominated by the maximally reducible representation which has the most moduli integrals. The
constraint (3) allows N copies of the one-dimensional representation, so that n1 = N. The small
Ωdivergences allow the partition function to be evaluated in this limit, again without using
localisation [3]
log Ztriv
N

Ω→0
≈cN + 1
2 log 2e2
3π + log
28
3 Ω2N + O(1/N) .
(5)
In this limit the dominant configurations should be thought of as N well-separated D-instantons.
These are captured by approximately commuting matrices, with the simultaneous eigenvalues
giving the location of the D-instantons. We will see in §6 below that at larger values of Ωthe
D-instantons in this ‘trivial’, maximally reducible, representation coalesce to form (p, q) fivebrane
bound states of NS5- and D5-branes.
The polarised IKKT model therefore exhibits the familiar behavior of a canonical partition
function: a low temperature phase dominated by energy gives way to a high temperature phase
dominated by entropy. In the thermodynamic large N limit, the phases may be distinguished by
the expectation value of the su(2) Casimir. On a given representation the trace of the Casimir is
1
N TrRC2 ≡
1
4N
X
M
nMM(M2 −1) .
(6)
This expression is proportional to the on-shell action (2). At large Ωthe above discussion implies
that ⟨1
N Tr C2⟩≈1
4N2, while at small Ωit follows that ⟨1
N Tr C2⟩= 0. It is natural to suspect
that there is a phase transition between these two regimes. Comparing the limiting behaviours
(4) and (5), one can anticipate that at large N there will be a first order phase transition at
3 Ω2N
28
= O(1) .
(7)
In §2, immediately below, we will find evidence for such a first order transition by performing a
numerical evaluation of the full partition function (1). In particular, the Casimir will be found
to jump abruptly between the two phases.
Phase transitions out of fuzzy sphere configurations have been seen previously in other matrix
models. Such a transition was found by Monte Carlo simulation of a three-matrix integral [8,9],
and an analogous quantum phase transition in the ground state of a three-matrix quantum
3
