25
Figure 15 (a) Sketch of the Analogue Bragg spectroscopy
setup. Counter propagating phonons are injected along the
x axis at the input plane z = 0 using a SLM. Contrast is
measured in the final plane at z = L for various values of the
phonon wavevector. (b) Experimental dispersion relation for
the non-interacting and nonlinear case, respectively shown by
the dark and red curves. More details are in (Piekarski et al.,
2021).
the variance S(k⊥) =
1
Nrep VarNrep [δρ(k⊥)], where the
Nrep subscript represents the averaging over the experi-
ment realizations. In case of cylindrical symmetry of the
system, it is possible to improve the signal further by
calculating an azimuthal average of the signal. Finally,
the static structure factor could then be Fourier trans-
formed back into a real space density-density correlation
and expressed as the second order correlation function
g(2)(r⊥, r′
⊥, z).
G. Analogue Bragg spectroscopy
A typical experimental technique to probe the excita-
tion spectrum and density fluctuations in quantum gases
is Bragg spectroscopy (Stamper-Kurn et al., 1999; Stein-
hauer et al., 2002). In atomic systems, this method relies
on inducing density modulations through short optical
pulses and detecting scattered particles. This technique
have been extended to paraxial fluids of light, using direct
inspiration from the atomic quantum gases approach.
The implementation of analogue Bragg spectroscopy
in a fluid of light involves imprinting a sinusoidal phase
modulation onto the photon fluid using wavefront shap-
ing via a spatial light modulator (SLM) (Piekarski et al.,
2021).
The analogue of a short Bragg pulse is a pair
of counterpropagating phonon-like excitations character-
ized by opposite wave vectors ±kx. These excitations are
imprinted at the input of the medium and then interfere
during propagation through the nonlinear medium, pro-
ducing a measurable standing wave pattern in the pho-
ton density as shown in Fig. 15(a). Experimentally, this
modulation depth is kept sufficiently small to prevent al-
tering the medium’s nonlinear refractive index and thus
stay in the Bogolioubov perturbative regime.
A central application of this technique is the high-
resolution measurements of the dispersion relation. Ex-
perimentally, the contrast of the perturbation density at
the exit plane of the medium is recorded as a function of
transverse wave vector kx. At the input of the medium,
the initial contrast is set to maximum for all kx. Thus, by
identifying the wavevectors corresponding to successive
extrema of contrast at the end of the medium and know-
ing the medium’s length L, the dispersion relation ω(kx)
can be extracted through the relation ω(kx) = pπ/L,
where p is an integer corresponding to all successive ex-
trema as shown in Fig. 15(b). Additionally, this tech-
nique allows for the measurement of the static structure
factor (Piekarski et al., 2021).
This technique can be extended to two fluids Bragg
spectroscopy in presence of miscible binary mixture and
to temporal domain by phase modulation in time using
an electro-optic modulator rather than in space with the
SLM.
H. Effective time propagation
A key limitation of paraxial fluids of light lies in the
fixed length of the nonlinear medium, which imposes
a fixed evolution time since it is not possible to image
within in a nonlinear medium (except in the specific con-
figuration of (Ford et al., 2024)).
In Eq. (66), we introduced a dimensionless form of the
NLSE by rescaling the transverse coordinates with the
healing length ξ =
1
k0
p
2|∆n|
and the propagation di-
rection with the nonlinear length zNL =
1
k0|∆n|. In this
framework, changing ˜z = z/zNL can be interpreted as an
effective temporal evolution. However, since the physical
propagation distance z is fixed by the length L of the
medium, direct control over ˜z via z is not possible.
Fortunately, zNL depends on the optical intensity I and
the nonlinear refractive index n2, both of which can be
tuned.
By adjusting I or n2, one can then effectively
control the evolution time ˜z while still imaging the out-
put plane of the medium. To remain consistent within
the dimensionless framework, the transverse coordinates
must also be rescaled by the healing length, which itself
varies with I and n2.
Figure 16 illustrates this approach.
The left panel
shows the phase of the initial state, featuring two same-
sign vortices. The right panel presents a zoomed-in view
of the central region at the effective time ˜z = 120. The
red and green lines are the trajectories of the vortices as
a function of ˜z.
While this technique allows to probe different values
of ˜z, it remains limited to relatively short-time dynam-
ics, typically ˜z < 160. In Section VI.I, we will explore
how to extend this method by incorporating an electronic
feedback loop, enabling access to longer evolution times.
