Entropy 2024, 26, 612
3 of 84
where ma, za, and pa are the mass, the coordinate location, and the momentum of the a-th
particle, respectively, and G is the gravitational constant. The potential between any two
particles is proportional to the product of their masses and the spatial separation between
them, as expected from dimensionally continuing the well-known potential
V = −Gd
N
∑
a̸=b
mamb
|za −zb|d−2
(2)
of Newtonian gravity in d spatial dimensions, where G1 = πG. When d = 1 the potential
in (1) vanishes, and so the restriction a ̸= b in (1) is not required.
The equations of motion of the OGS (1) are given by Hamilton’s equations
˙za
=
∂H
∂pa
= pa
ma
(3)
˙pa
=
−∂H
∂za
= −2πG∑
b
mamb
∂| za −zb |
∂za
=
−2πG∑
b
mamb sgn(za −zb)
(4)
yielding
¨za = −2πG∑
b
mb sgn(za −zb)
(5)
for the acceleration of the a-th particle.
We see that each particle experiences a constant force from each of the other particles,
where the sign (−or +) of the force from any given particle depends on whether za > zb or
vice versa. The force is therefore always attractive: if za is to the right of zb (za > zb) then
particle a will accelerate leftward toward zb (and b rightward toward a) until they meet,
after which time za is to the left of zb (za < zb) and the force changes sign, accelerating
particle a rightward. This scenario assumes that the particles can pass through each other
without any inﬂuence, as would be appropriate for parallel sheets of particulate matter
where collisions between the particles can be neglected. It is of course possible to include an
additional structure—for example, modelling the particles as impenetrable points would
make them bounce off of each other—but this would detract from the study of pure
gravitational effects. Such an additional structure will not be considered in this article,
apart from the inclusion of attractive and repulsive electromagnetic interactions.
Consider the case N = 2. If the particles are initially separated by some distance d, they
will move toward each other with constant acceleration until they cross, after which the
acceleration of each ﬂips sign. The particles ﬂy apart increasingly slowly until they reach
a maximal separation d, after which they move toward each other again with increasing
speed. After crossing a second time, the particles separate, moving with decreasing speed
until they return to their original positions. Assuming no other interactions, the motion
then repeats perpetually. Prior to crossing, the entire scenario is equivalent to that of a body
of mass m falling near the surface of the Earth.
For N particles, every particle initially undergoes constant acceleration until the ﬁrst
two particles cross. This causes a sign ﬂip in the force between each particle in the crossing
pair, thereby changing the magnitudes (and perhaps signs) of the accelerations of each due
to the presence of the other particles. As more particles cross, this changes the accelerations
of more and more particles, generally yielding chaotic motion.
The simplest example of this occurs for N = 3. The 3-body OGS has been shown to
exhibit a mild form of chaos [3]. This OGS can be mapped to a single-particle moving in two
spatial dimensions in a hexagonal-well potential V(x, y), whose sides are impenetrable ﬂat
sheets. If the masses of all particles are equal, then the shape is that of a regular hexagon;
unequal masses distort this symmetry so that the sides are of unequal length [29,30].
Alternatively, the three-body OGS can be regarded as a single-particle under the inﬂuence
