prototype is scheduled for submission in early 2026.
4
Calorimeter
The PIONEER Calorimeter (CALO) must accurately measure the positions, timing, and energies of
particles emitted from the target, as well as any ‘pileup’ resulting from beam particles decaying in
flight or missing the target. For the Re/µ measurement the CALO will measure positrons in the range
from 0-∼70 MeV. Essential characteristics of the CALO include a uniform response across different
incoming positron angles, extensive coverage to enhance statistics and reduce acceptance correc-
tions, excellent energy resolution, rapid timing, and short pulse duration. A critical aspect of the
π →eν measurement is precisely determining the low-energy tail of the 70 MeV response function.
Achieving PIONEER’s precision target for Re/µ requires minimizing the low-energy tail and accu-
rately measuring the calorimeter’s low-energy response to compare with Monte Carlo simulations.
Simulations have shown that a calorimeter depth of 19X0 is sufficient to minimize contributions
to the tail originating from leakages at the back of the calorimeter. Other contributions to the tail
include photonuclear effects, albedo and lateral leakages.
Building a calorimeter that operates well in this low-energy regime is challenging. The considered
options include a monolithic (unsegmented) sphere of liquid xenon (LXe). The MEG Collabora-
tion [29] has already demonstrated excellent in-its-class energy and position resolution for a 53 MeV
gamma that would emerge from the cLFV decay µ →eγ using a LXe calorimeter and those experts
are playing a central role in designing the PIONEER LXe concept. An alternative approach is based
on tapered LYSO crystal segments that together form a truncated polyhedron geometry in a more
conventional structure. There are different advantages to both approaches.
LXe approach
The LXe option is inspired by the PSI MEG II experiment [29]. This approach is novel - previous
pion decay experiments have used single or arrays of crystal detectors. A monolithic detector allows
the containment of the electromagnetic showers in a single homogeneous volume leading to high
energy resolution and minimization of dead material effects. LXe has excellent properties: high
density, X0 = 2.87 cm; RM = 5.22 cm; light yield ∼65, 000γ/MeV, τdecay ∼40 ns, 65 ps time
resolution. These properties make LXe well suited to precisely measure particle energies in a high
rate environment. The current geometry consists of a partial sphere containing 4.5 tons of liquid
xenon. The scintillation light is collected by photosensors uniformly distributed across the surface
of the calorimeter: chip-on-film (CoF) silicon photomultipliers (SiPMs) on the inner surface of the
detector and photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) on the outer surface. This configuration ensures very
good resolution for incoming decay positrons. The CoF SiPMs, assembled on thin hemispherical
windows, are currently at the research and development stage. A large LXe prototype (∼650 kg of
LXe) is in preparation to test the performance of such assembly and benchmark optical simulations.
Tests with a positron beam at PSI are envisioned in 2026.
LYSO approach
A LYSO crystal design results in a relatively simple event reconstruction and reduced pileup because
only a few crystals are illuminated when a positron strikes the calorimeter; together they create
compact clusters with summed energy and averaged time. Important LYSO characteristics include:
X0 = 1.14 cm; RM = 2.07 cm; light yield ∼32, 000γ/MeV, λpeak = 420 nm, τdecay = 40 ns. LYSO is
radiation-hard and not hygroscopic. These characteristics are attractive, but the performance for
7
