International Journal on “Technical and Physical Problems of Engineering” (IJTPE), Iss. 61, Vol. 16, No. 4, Dec. 2024 
184 
Ripple conversion is used to process these signals and 
locate the leak. In general, this method is based on the 
detection of noise generated in the pipeline when a leak 
occurs [18].  
 
 
Figure 2. Technological figure of acoustic leak detection 
 
Sensors are activated on the right and left of the point 
where the leak occurs, at any point x on a pipeline with 
length L, as shown in Figure 2. In this study [10], 
technologies for extracting the characteristics of acoustic 
signals have been summarized. Experiments highlighted 
the characteristics in the time, frequency, and frequency-
time domains by measuring acoustic leaks and 
interference signals.  
Results indicate that external interference can be 
effectively eliminated through time domain, frequency 
domain, and frequency-time domain characteristics. It 
can be concluded that the acoustic leak detection method 
can be applied to natural gas pipelines and that its 
features can help reduce false alarms and missed alarms. 
Therefore, it can be concluded that the acoustic leak 
detection method can be applied to natural gas pipelines, 
helping to reduce false and missed alarm signals. 
Recently, many authors have extensively studied a 
system using an Internet of Things (IoT) analytical 
platform service to simulate real-time monitoring of 
pipelines and locate leaks within the pipeline [3]. In this 
study, pressure pulses based on the vibration principle of 
pipes are used for pipeline monitoring. The principle of 
time delay between pulse receptions at sensor positions is 
also applied in this research. The primary principle of the 
study was to create a wireless communication device that 
combines, programs, and interacts with Thing Speak IoT 
analytics platform through an Arduino & a Wi-Fi module.  
A total of five channels were created to collect data 
from five sensors used in experimental testing on the 
platform (Figure 3). These signal data are collected every 
15 seconds, and all channels are updated every 2 minutes. 
Thing Speak provides immediate visualization of data 
transmitted by the wireless communication device. 
Online analysis and processing of data were performed as 
it was received [3]. Using a data logging device and air as 
the transport fluid, the measured propagation speed of 
vibration was 355 m/s, ranging from 4.243 m to 4.246 m. 
This yielded only a 3 mm deviation when comparing the 
estimated leak location with the actual measured location 
of 4.23 m. The experimental results demonstrated that the 
performance of the wireless communication device 
compares favorably with that of the data logger and can 
determine the location of damage in actual pipelines 
when used for real-time monitoring. 
 
 
Figure 3. IoT system used for pipeline monitoring 
 
With this communication device and analytical 
platform, it is possible to monitor pipelines in real time 
from anywhere in the world on any device with internet 
access. Integrity management programs are also available 
today that can locate the damage. A thorough, organized, 
and unified integrity management program me provides 
the means to improve the safety of pipeline systems. Such 
a program me provides the information for a pipeline 
system operator to allocate resources for prevention, 
detection, and mitigation actions that will result in 
improved safety and a reduction in the number of 
incidents as Figure 4 [22]. 
It covers performance and prescriptive based integrity 
management 
The 
performance-based 
integrity 
management program me employs more data and broad 
risk analysis, which permit pipeline system operators to 
comply with the requirements of this program me in the 
areas of inspection intervals, tools used, and mitigation 
techniques used. Inspection, prevention, detection, and 
mitigation are all part of the prescriptive process 
necessary to produce an integrity management program 
me. 
Prior to proceeding with the performance-based 
integrity program me a pipeline system operator shall 
first ensure sufficient inspections are performed that 
provide the information on the pipeline condition 
required by the prescriptive based program me. The level 
of assurance of a performance-based program me shall 
meet or exceed that of a prescriptive program me [22]. It 
is known that there are three methods for locating leaks in 
gas pipelines: qualitative, quantitative, and analytical. 
 
 
 
SENSORS 
LEAK 
x 
L 
ACOUSTIK  WAVES 
 
 
Wireless 
Communication 
   Device 
 
   
 
   
Algorithm Development 
Sensor Analytics 
Gas Pipeline 
sensors 
Data Aggregation and Analytics ThingSpeak 
