8 
 
SnTe ratio is only reached after 70 min of sputtering. The measurement also confirms the presence of a SnO layer 
between the film and the substrate, indicated by a grey arrow. 
 
Figure 5. (a) Relative proportion of Sn2+ and Sn0 as a function of the distance from the surface, i.e. the oxide depth profile 
resulting from the fit shown in Figure 4a. The grey plots are the depth distribution functions ðœ‘(ð‘§) of Sn 3d for different 
emission angles with a discontinuity at ð‘§= ð‘‘. (b) The first 20 spectra from a sequence of 80 iterations of AES and 
subsequent Ar+ sputtering (1st spectrum: dotted line; 2nd spectrum: dark blue; 20th spectrum: dark green). A comparison of 
the Auger emission peaks recorded via AES and ARXPS is shown in Figure S5 in the SI. (c) Elemental depth profile as a 
function of sputter time. The x-axis scaling is enlarged on the left side. The SnTe thin film had a nominal thickness of 50 nm. 
The SnTe layer without oxide layers is ð‘‘ð‘‹ð‘…ð‘…â‰ˆ46 ð‘›ð‘š corresponding to a sputtering rate in SnTe of about 1.7 ð‘›ð‘š/ð‘šð‘–ð‘›. (d) 
Average oxide overlayer thickness according to the single-energy-model (eq. 1) as a function of the emission angle in 
comparison with the results of XRR, TEM, and the multiple-energies model with averaged (eq. 2) and distinct (eq. 3) EALs. 
The error bars are the standard deviation of the results from different emission peaks in the same spectrum (calculated 
with the intensity ratios seen in Figure 4).  
Figure 5d summarizes the results obtained for the average oxide layer thickness obtained from the different methods. 
The nominal oxide layer thickness determined by XPS yielded lower results as XRR and TEM, however, in this specific 
case, both methods turned out to be unreliable and sensitive to subjective analysis procedure. It should be reiterated 
that the results of XRR and TEM shown in Figure 5d are consistent with the data over a wide range of values. The 
single-energy model (eq. 1) gave angle-dependent oxide layer thicknesses for the same intensity ratios as used in eq. 3. 
The thickness values appear to decrease from 1.7 nm at low emission angle to 1.1 nm at high emission angle, which is 
lower than the result of eq. 3 for all angles. The difference between the two methods is their assumption about the 
interface sharpness. If, contrary to the single-energy model assumption, the oxide layer has a broad interface, only 
alloys of unknown stoichiometry instead of distinct layers lie within the information depth (as illustrated by the 
overlaid depth distribution functions in Figure 5c). Consequently, eq. 1 systematically underestimates the layer 
thickness, with the deviation increasing at higher emission angles and with broader concentration gradients at the 
interface (i.e. decreasing ð‘˜). This is demonstrated in Figure S6 in the SI. The results indicate that eq. 1 is only reliable 
for sharp interface profiles with ð‘˜> 1. Another contributing factor may be that the EAL increases at large angles due 
to elastic scattering. Usually, EAL values are considered unreliable for ðœƒ> 60Â°.[3]  
