results. Each data point represents a unique configuration of structural parameters, with the resulting 
phase and amplitude of transmitted light. The structural parameters include the diameter and height 
of the nanodisk, period, and the incident angle of the incoming light. As seen in Figure I-a, an important 
characteristic of the datasets is their small size and imbalance, which leads to an overrepresentation 
or underrepresentation of specific values, making it more challenging to develop a high-performing 
model. Neural network approaches typically need large, balanced datasets to achieve good 
generalization [40,43], because they lack knowledge about the underlying physics. Therefore, they 
struggle to learn complex relationship between parameters from limited, imbalanced examples, 
especially when certain parameters are underrepresented. 
Figure I-b shows the phase distribution across different gap sizes in Dataset A, with the Kernel Density 
Estimation (KDE) providing a smoothed view, overlaid with scatter points representing the phase 
values for each gap size. The gap refers to the physical distance between adjacent nanodisks, 
calculated by subtracting diameter from period. The KDE visualization reveals that for the large-gap 
regime (approximately > 50 nm), phase values tend to cluster mainly around the range of 2-4 radians. 
In contrast, in the small-gap regime (approximately below 50 nm), metasurface exhibits a volatile 
phase change with values scattered across the entire 0-2π range. This volatile phase behavior in the 
small-gap region is physically expected due to stronger near-field coupling between adjacent 
structures but causes a significant learning challenge for neural networks. The samples from such a 
region are crucial to reaching the full potential of metasurfaces, as they are often related to high-Q 
resonances and enhanced light-matter interactions [44–52]. Dataset B exhibits a comparable pattern. 
 
 
 
Figure I: a. Histogram shows the frequency of gap values within Dataset A. b. kernel density estimation (KDE) with scatter 
points illustrates the distribution of phase values across different gap sizes in Dataset A. The darker blue regions represent 
higher concentrations of data points.  
 
