Non-reciprocal waves in two-dimensional electron systems with temperature gradient
Aleksandr S. Petrov∗
Laboratory of 2D Materials for Optoelectronics, Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia
(Dated: April 07, 2025)
We demonstrate that the interaction of dc temperature gradient with ac magnetic field in
temperature-biased two-dimensional electron systems leads to formation of a new electromagnetic
mode, a two-dimensional thermomagnetic wave (2d TMW). This wave is transverse electric and
non-reciprocal, and its damping rate can be lower than that of conventional 2d plasma waves. The
Q-factor of 2d TMW is independent of the wave vector. Numerical estimates show that in state-of-
the-art two-dimensional electrons systems the 2d TMW Q-factor is the order of 10−3. We discuss
possible ways to overcome this issue.
INTRODUCTION
Many applications require the transmission of a time-
modulated signal in a given direction without reflections.
In electronics, the simplest way to achieve this goal re-
lies on matching the circuit loads (and when the signal
reaches the end of the circuit, it is completely absorbed
by the receiver). In optics common approaches include
the use of optical isolators and circulators [1] based on
time-dependent [2], nonlinear [3, 4] or non-reciprocal me-
dia [5, 6].
The most common example of non-reciprocity in optics
arises for ordinary materials biased by external magnetic
field (gyrotropic media). Less common options include
biasing conducting media (solid state electronic plasma)
by electric field (which leads to dc current) [7], temper-
ature gradient [8] or intrinsic material non-reciprocity
(topological effects) [9–11]. In these cases the external
bias leads to formation of unidirectional electromagnetic
modes with propagation direction uniquely defined by
the bias direction.
The usual drawback of using (semi)conducting ma-
terials is the relatively high Ohmic loss.
Still, if the
restoring force acting on charge cariers has magnetic
origin, the Ohmic loss is greatly diminished.
Such
oscillations include galvanomagnetic and thermomag-
netic waves (GMWs and TMWs, respectively) in three-
dimensional electron systems (3DESs). These waves were
predicted by Gurevich and Gel’mont [12, 13] in 1960s
and observed by Kopylov in late 1970s in Bi monocrys-
tals [14]. For these waves, the restoring force arises as a
result of rather unusual interaction between the ac mag-
netic field of the wave with external bias (charge carrier
drift for GMWs and temperature gradient for TMWs).
Interestingly, these waves are well-defined even at fre-
quencies order of 100 Hz (whereas the typical charge car-
rier momentum relaxation rate 1/τp ≃1 THz).
With the widespread implementation of 2D materials it
seems natural to search for the analogs of 3D GMWs and
TMWs in two dimensions. Recently we conducted the
corresponding analysis for galvanomagnetic waves and
found that 2D GMWs (a) exist (b) are unidirectional (c)
their damping rate can be lower than the standard 1/2τp
plasmon damping rate (d) the 2D GMW Q-factor does
not exceed the 3D GMW Q-factor [6]. Still, the proper
design of 2DES surroundings may help to increase 2D
TMW Q-factor.
The 3D TMW is isothermal and has the following dis-
persion [13]:
ω = −α1c(k, ∇T) −i k2c2
4πσ3d
τ
,
(1)
where α1 is the Nernst-Ettingshausen coefficient, k is the
wave vector, ∇T is the constant temperature gradient in
the 3DES, c is the speed of light, σ3d
τ
= e2n3dτp/m is
the static 3DES conductivity, e > 0 is the elementary
charge, n3d is the background carrier density, τp is the
effective carrier momentum relaxation time, m is the ef-
fective mass. Eq.(1) dictates that the TMW is unidirec-
tional, and its quality factor Re ω/Im ω →∞in the long
wavelength limit.
The aim of this work is to search for the two-
dimensional analog of 3D thermomagnetic wave [13] and
analyze its properties.
THEORETICAL MODEL
We consider an infinite two-dimensional electron sys-
tem (2DES) with homogeneous carrier density n0 that
is sandwiched between two materials with permittivities
εi, i = 1, 2. A constant temperature gradient ∇T is ap-
plied along the x-axis, which leads to formation of a com-
pensating electric field; no current is present in the sys-
tem (Fig. 1).
The general material relation for an electric field E that
arises in isotropic conducting system subject to magnetic
field H, electric current j and temperature gradient ∇T
reads:
E =ρ0j + ρ1j × H + ρ2H(j, H)+
α0∇T + α1∇T × H + α2H(∇T, H),
(2)
where ρ0 −ρ2 is the resistance, ρ1 is the Hall resistance,
α0 is the thermoelectric coefficient, α1 is the Nernst-
Ettingshausen coefficient, ρ2 and α2 are longitudinal
magnetothermoelectric coefficients.
arXiv:2504.06061v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  8 Apr 2025
