15
1d the repulsive interactions drive the fermions to the TLL state which is shown to possess
the universality class of the 1d Fermi gas. It is quite remarkable that the scaling properties
of the TLL parameters near the point kF →0 of transition related to the FS order parameter
P is universal, while many other quantities and correlation functions are known from the
exact results to be non-universal: exponents of the power-law functions explicitly depend on
couplings. We think that such universality stems from invariance of the Fermi sea volume
with respect to interactions (the Luttinger theorem) across all dimensions d = 1, 2, 3, and
from the geometric (or topological) nature of P.
We identify the FS as a quantum critical manifold where the exact inverse temperature
single-particle fermionic Green’s function G−1 vanishes in the limit T →0. The available
rigorous results for the thermodynamic potential Ωindicate that the FS is the manifold
where Ωhas non-analyticities, but the rigorous proof relating special (singular) points of
the partition function Z to the exact Green’s function for a general interacting case is still
lacking. The d = 1 case is an exception: the Fermi points can be identified by the poles
of the partition function of the Tomonaga-Luttinger model in its representation of the free
bosonic field.
Although the volume of the Fermi sea (i.e., the order parameter P for the gapless phase)
is unaltered by interactions, the role of interactions in the stability of the gapless phase, its
boundaries and other properties near transition points, need to be further studied case by
case. This is left beyond the scope of the present work.
An interesting correspondence between ideal Bose and Fermi gases can be established.
One can easily check from a textbook analysis of the paradigmatic Bose-Einstein condensa-
tion (BEC) [57] that this phase transition accompanied by appearance of the condensate, is
signalled by a pole of the partition function, when the chemical potential of the gas vanishes
at the critical temperature of BEC. The ideal Fermi gas undergoes a phase transition at
T = 0: the Fermi sphere appears as a manifold of zeros of the partition function.
Z −→
(
∞
BEC (Bose)
0
FS
(Fermi)
This brings a certain harmony between two types of ideal quantum gases, alleviating mis-
conception that only the Bose gas can undergo a phase transition.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Z. Nussinov for a helpful discussion and for bringing important references to my
attention. The author acknowledges financial support from the Russian Science Foundation
(RSF), grant No. 24-22-00075, https://rscf.ru/24-22-00075.
Appendix A: Lifshitz transitions in two-leg ladder model
We start from the Heisenberg spin-1
2 two-leg ladder:
HS =
2
X
α=1
N
X
n=1
n
Jα(n)Sα(n) · Sα(n + 1) + hα(n)Sz
α(n)
o
+
N
X
n=1
J⊥(n)Sα(n) · Sα+1(n).
(A1)
