logistic regression or support vector machines with linear kernels), trained on the information encoded by IXα
over a relevant subset of the configuration space. In other words, Ifeat
Xα is the model trained on the classical
data {(FXα(x), IXα(x))}. We refer to ˜IXα as the fingerprint for molecule Xα. A set of M fingerprints are
compiled to form the fingerprint-based species counters via CX1,...,XM defined above (viewing the fingerprints
acting on the appropriate subspace of R3ηion).
By construction, machine learning models involve layered compositions of linear functions and a simple
nonlinear function (e.g.
tanh).
As before, the compiler appends additional logic onto the fingerprints
functions, which can be also be implemented coherently, possibly with the use of extra ancilla (to coherently
implement classically irreversible logic).
Hence, coherent implementation of both the feature map and
the feature indicator map (and therefore ˜IXα), and additional compiler logic only utilizes straightforward
coherent arithmetic and logic. The full expression for the proposed form of the fingerprinting function is
detailed in Sec. 6. Critically, it is obtained from a simple logistic regression model, involves only additions
and multiplications, and requires only ionic distances as input.
Readout
We may either directly measure the chemical species counts or we may implement amplitude estimation.
For the latter, we first flag a subset of the count registers indicating a subspace of interest, e.g. all pieces of
the wavefunction that contain a desired set of product molecules, perform amplitude amplification on that
subspace, and hence measure the amplitude for which such products occur as a result of the reaction, with
quadratic improvement over naive sampling in terms of the total end-to-end quantum resources..
In summary, in this framework, collections of simple ionic configuration features, such as bond lengths
or bond angles, can be used to classify chemical species via a classical machine learning model, and the
resulting feature indicator maps are tabulated for all desired chemical species. Composition of the feature
maps and the learned feature indicator gives chemical fingerprints, which are then mapped to species counts
via a reaction-specific compiler. These fingerprint-based species counters are coherently implemented using
arithmetic and logic in order to identify and evaluate production rates for all chemical species of interest
in the wavefunction of a chemical reaction. Algorithmic implementation of the fingerprints, along with a
classical simulation to exemplify and validate the QCI protocol, are discussed in detail in Sec. 6.
2.4
Results for a sequence of increasingly challenging applications
We consider 3 classes of chemical reactions to exemplify our approach. In each of the classes, there are one
or more problem instances, where an instance is an exact specification of pseudoions, supercell, and basis.
Table 1 displays all specifications for the problem instances. Here, |G|, |G| denote the sizes of the plane-wave
bases for electrons and pseudoions, determined by the respective momentum cutoff vectors Λ, Λ. Note that
Λtrunc is a hard-cutoff vector for the pseudoion-pseudoion interaction (for details, see Sec. 3.1 and Sec. 3.2).
The 3 classes represent:
1. Ammonia - Boron Trifluoride: We consider a typical Lewis acid-base interaction NH3+BF3 ⇌NH3BF3,
where NH3 donates its sp3 lone-pair to the vacant p orbital of the BF3 to form a dative covalent bond.
This simple system is fundamental in understanding electron donation, charge transfer, and bond
stabilization, key processes in catalysis and molecular recognition. There is only one instance in this
class.
2. Direct Methane to Methanol (DMTM): Two-dimensional transition metal doped Boron-Nitride (BN)
is considered an interesting class of catalysts that can be used to convert methane to methanol, a
highly significant process in scientific and industrial applications to remove and economically repurpose
(into fuel, chemical feedstock, etc.) the potent greenhouse gas, methane. We consider 4 increasingly
demanding representations of such a system divided into 1 molecular instance and 3 extended instances.
The molecular system is a Pd-O complex bonded to 3 NH2 groups. The extended systems are of the
form of m × m conventional unit cells with 1 B and 1 N atom each, and a single B atom replaced by
a Pd-O complex. All instances have a single CH4 molecule.
14
