charged leptons, there is no relevant difference between the derivative and the pseudoscalar
coupling cases, except a small unconstrained window for ALP masses in the 30–200 MeV
mass range for the latter case.
6
Conclusion
Axion-like particles (ALPs) arising as pseudo-Goldstone bosons from a spontaneously bro-
ken approximate global symmetry are one of the most well-motivated ways to extend the
Standard Model with a new state below the GeV scale coupled feebly to known parti-
cles. While couplings of ALPs to SM gauge bosons and SM quarks have been studied in
great detail, the case of leptophilic ALPs, which couple dominantly to charged leptons,
has received much less attention. In the present work, we have filled this gap by providing
an exhaustive overview of the relevant constraints from beam-dump, flavour and collider
experiments, as well as from theoretical considerations and astrophysics.
First of all, we have pointed out that the precise definition of leptophilic ALPs is rather
subtle since the assumed absence of tree-level couplings to photons leads to a distinction
between ALPs with pseudoscalar couplings and ALPs with derivative couplings. We take
a complete model-independent perspective and discuss both interactions in parallel, high-
lighting their differences.
In both cases, effective interactions of ALPs to photons are generated through lepton
loops, which depend on the momenta of the ALP and the two photons. If all particles
are on-shell, one reproduces the standard photon coupling, but for off-shell particles, the
loop function depends non-trivially on the momenta, which are specific to the relevant
experimental setup. We have shown that this effect plays an important role in the analysis
of electron beam-dump experiments such as E137 and collider constraints from, e.g. LEP
and have derived suitable approximations that can be used to simplify the analysis.
In our analysis, we have then considered separately the three cases where ALPs couple
only to one generation of charged leptons, as well as the case of universal couplings to all
charged leptons. In all cases, we find that E137 gives highly relevant constraints, even if
both the production and decay of the ALPs proceed exclusively via loop-induced photon
couplings. Further relevant constraints come in particular from searches for missing energy
and displaced decays at NA64, in particular when using a muon beam. Indeed, future
runs of NA64µ constitute a highly promising way to further probe the parameter space of
leptophilic ALPs.
For cases in which the ALPs couple to muons, beam dump experiments are not sensitive
to ALP masses above the threshold ma > 2mµ, where ALPs rapidly decay back into
muons. In this parameter region, future searches for di-muon resonances at Belle II [79]
are particularly promising. Below the threshold, relevant sensitivity may come from the
planned proton beam-dump experiment SHiP [99] as well as from the proposed forward-
physics experiment FASER2 [100], both of which can exploit the presence of secondary
muons in hadron showers to search for leptophilic ALPs. A detailed study of this production
mode, including Monte Carlo simulations of the secondary muon distributions, is left for
future work. Finally, an improved understanding of the bounds from SN 1987A for all the
– 31 –
