14
FIG. 9.
Mean ancilla state fidelity as a function of number of syndrome extraction rounds under the gate noise model, for
different rates of ancilla error. The means are calculated from 10 training runs per combination of ancilla and physical error
rate, where the physical error rate ranges from p = 0.001 −0.01, and the ancilla error rate is expressed as a fraction of the
physical error rates and denoted by fanc. The standard deviations in fidelity are not displayed to ensure visibility.
is the propagation of Pauli errors from ancilla qubits
to physical qubits through the combination of CNOT
gates and rotation gates, which transform the Pauli er-
rors into non-Pauli errors that are undetectable by the
stabiliser code. Although our results come from a sin-
gle system consisting of a 2-qubit VQC and the [[4,2,2]]
error-detecting code, the physical phenomena that give
rise to these results are clearly generalisable to other com-
binations of QML and QEC algorithms.
We conclude
from our results that any QML algorithm and QEC code
implementation where rotation gates need ancilla qubits
to logically encode non-transversally, will allow errors to
propagate between ancilla and physical qubits, leading to
the formation of exotic errors in the physical qubits. If
the QEC code employed is not able to detect or correct
for these types of errors, the effectiveness of the QEC
code is significantly hampered at high error rates and
training accuracies achievable by the QML system will
also be limited. The specific limit on achievable accuracy
depends on the ancilla error rate and the capabilities of
the QEC code.
These findings indicate that practical implementation
of QML algorithms on NISQ systems requires considera-
tion of both the logical encoding associated with the QEC
code and the code’s capacity to detect a wide range of
error types, in addition to error mitigation approaches
to be used in conjunction with the QEC code.
Given
the limitations of a purely QEC-based approach, it is
worth exploring alternative methods to use in addition to
QEC codes. For example, flag qubits may be employed
to address errors on the ancilla qubits before they have
a chance to propagate to the physical register. If errors
propagating between ancilla and physical qubits cannot
be fully corrected or detected, we cannot perform QML
algorithms with logical error rates suppressed to arbitrar-
ily low levels even with fully fault-tolerant systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge the support of the CSIRO
Impossible Without You Program. This research/project
relied on the use of resources and services from the
CSIRO’s High Performance Computing cluster (Petri-
chor).
