11
One strategy takes the idea of quenched disorder, where dif-
ferent shapes and sizes of nanoislands gives different switch-
ing fields, and directly modifies the switching field distribu-
tion by making some islands larger or smaller71,114 or com-
posed of different magnetic materials115 (e.g., CoFe and NiFe)
such that they reliably reverse at different magnetic field am-
plitudes.
This allows access to an enhanced range of mi-
crostates via simple global field. An example is a bicompo-
nent square lattice ASI with thin and wide bars arranged in
a ‘staircase’ orientation that can lead to all four ASI vertex
states71. This approach is illustrated in Figs. 4(b-c). First, the
array is globally saturated. Then, global magnetic fields are
applied, such that only the wide bars reverse, which allows
access to the four type 1-4 vertex states. The type 1 ground
state is attained by applying the second wide-bar reversal field
along the vertical columns of wide bars.
The high-energy
type 4 ‘monopole’ state is attained by applying the second
wide-bar reversal field horizontally (in the x-direction), per-
pendicular to the columns of wide bars. A slightly different
approach modifies the switching field distribution, not by al-
tering the nano-islands themselves but by applying localized
fields to offset the global field; this has been achieved by the
introduction of localized exchange bias fields116.
A final approach leaves the switching field of the islands
unperturbed, but attempts to steer the magnetization dynam-
ics by controlling the topology or boundary conditions of the
ASI system. This might take the form of ‘seeding’ monopole
nucleation sites through the introduction of defects117 or nu-
cleation sites at the system boundaries118. In connected ASI
structures, the direction in which monopoles can propagate
through the ASI systems once they have nucleated may fur-
ther be constrained by controlling the vertex connectivity and
topology119–121, which may be tuned so that domain walls
propagating through vertices follow either deterministic or
stochastic trajectories.
While many lattice modifications have been demonstrated
to be effective as proofs-of-concept, this approach has not
been investigated as thoroughly as the techniques based on
magnetic and thermal field protocols. Lattice modification
offers direct control over which microstates can be accessed
while retaining the ability to rapidly switch between different
configurations by simultaneously addressing all islands with
a global field. Therefore, exploring lattice modification as a
means of systematic microstate control would be a promising
avenue to a simplified and fast ASI control.
C.
Deterministic Control
While the global field compatibility of the methods spec-
ified so far is attractive, the catch is that the accessible mi-
crostates are still hard-coded at fabrication, limiting flexibility.
We will now turn to deterministic methods, which, in princi-
ple allow any microstate to be accessed.
To control the microstate of an ASI system deterministi-
cally, a means of locally reversing the magnetization of in-
dividual islands is required.
This has been demonstrated
in three ways so-far: surface-probe writing72,122,123, opti-
cal control73,124,125 and electrical control of anisotropy via
magneto-ionics126.
Surface-probe control has so-far used the stray dipolar mag-
netic field of a magnetic force microscope tip (see Sec. VI A)
to locally manipulate the ASI microstate. The first demon-
stration of this approach combined the local tip magnetic field
with a globally applied field, such that away from the tip the
global field was below the nanoisland coercive field, but close
to the tip the sum of the global and the tip fields was suffi-
cient to drive magnetic reversal122. After this, it was shown
that a sufficiently strong magnetic tip could induce topologi-
cal defects in the magnetic structure of the nanoisland, driving
magnetic reversal as the tip scans over the nanoisland with no
requirement for global magnetic field72. This field-free ap-
proach is illustrated schematically in Fig. 4(d), with an exam-
ple of the complex ASI microstates accessible with such local
control shown via experimental MFM data in Fig. 4(e). The
latter method was used to locally manipulate ASI arrays into
a magneto-toroidal state123. To overcome the limited speed
at which a magnetic force microscope tip can be moved be-
tween islands, it has been proposed that the localized mag-
netic field used to trigger magnetic reversal could be provided
by the stray field of a domain wall driven through a ferromag-
netic wire by a spin-polarized current127. Another possibility
might be spin torque switching of particular islands or subsets
or islands. Nevertheless, to date magnetic writing techniques
based on scanning localized magnetic fields over islands re-
main too slow for application to large numbers of islands.
Similar to surface probe writing, optical control of ASI
has been demonstrated with and without the need for addi-
tional global magnetic fields. The first example used a fo-
cused laser beam to plasmonically heat selected nanoislands,
reducing their coercive field such that they could be switched
by a global magnetic field while leaving other nanoislands
unaffected124,125. Another approach was demonstrated with-
out the need for global magnetic fields, using just a focused
laser beam to all-optically toggle-switch the magnetization
state of NiFe ASI nanoislands73 – illustrated in Fig.
5(a).
This was a somewhat surprising result as all-optical mag-
netic switching techniques typically need more complex mag-
netic materials such as ferrimagnetic alloys128 or multilayered
materials129, due to switching mechanisms which rely on dif-
ferent demagnetization speeds in different sublattices within
alloys128 or optically-induced spin transfer between layers129.
Purely thermal optical switching (e.g., optically-induced heat-
ing and subsequent demagnetization) was shown to be an un-
likely explanation in the NiFe ASI study73 due to the repeat-
able toggle switching and non-random fidelity of the demon-
strated written states, including long chains of specific vertex
types. Further investigation is needed to reveal the physical
mechanism responsible for the all-optical switching in NiFe
ASI.
Microwave-assisted switching in ASI has been demon-
strated. But is not yet fully deterministic. Local control was
demonstrated using a weak global magnetic field combined
with local RF excitation to reverse nanoislands close to the
RF antenna74 [illustrated in Fig. 5(b)]. This exciting direc-
tion has clear compatibility with the development of reconfig-
