We observe that for values of µ −µc close to the threshold, within the range µ −µc ∈
[10−4, 10−2], the numerical results exhibits a scaling law behavior. Specifically, we perform a
linear fit in logarithmic scale for this range, using the relation MPBH(tPBH) = KMH(µ−µc)˜γ.
For this fitting, we find ˜γ(β = 1) ≈0.307 ± 5 · 10−3 and ˜γ(β = 3) ≈0.300 ± 2 · 10−3. This
scaling behaviour is expected for the final PBH mass MPBH in the critical regime of the
gravitational collapse10 [13, 15, 85–87] with a critical exponent γ ≈0.356 universal and only
dependent on the equation of state parameter. However, we do not find the critical exponent
˜γ to be ˜γ = γ. This suggests that the accretion from the FLRW background (increasing the
value of the initial PBH mass MPBH(tPBH)) plays a significant role in restoring the critical
exponent ˜γ matching with γ. Although the values of ˜γ are similar for both cases of β tested,
the exponents are slightly sensitive to the range of µ −µc used for the fitting. Therefore,
we can not guarantee that this is a profile-independent quantity at this moment. A more
detailed investigation of this interesting finding, requiring simulations with µ closer to the
threshold and with more curvature profiles, lies beyond the scope of this paper and is left for
future research.
In the top-right panel, we show the time evolution of the PBH mass for different am-
plitudes µ, and in the bottom-right panel the time-evolution of the Hamiltonian constraint.
The dotted lines correspond to the numerical fits of Eq.(5.1), from which we infer the final
PBH mass after the accretion process. The results for MPBH are displayed in the bottom-left
panel. We find that the PBH mass increases monotonically with the amplitude µ for the
case β = 1 for the range of µ tested. The results are consistent quantitatively11 with those
reported in [41] for the Gaussian-shape profile β = 1. On the other hand, for the profile with
β = 3, the PBH mass reaches a maximum value and then decreases for the highest value of
µ computed, resulting in a non-monotonic behavior for the mass in terms of µ (see also [41]
for the three-zone model profile and [48] for a model with non-Gaussianity). The existence
of the throat structure in the initial data with µ−µc,II > 0, combined with the specific shape
dependence of the profile (pressure gradient effects), significantly influences the PBH mass
behavior. In this regard, further studies analyzing the profile dependence of the PBH mass
for type-II fluctuations are necessary.
6
Conclusions
In this work, we present a new approach based on the Misner-Sharp formalism for conducting
numerical simulations of spherical PBH formation resulting from the collapse of generic
curvature fluctuations. In contrast with the standard approach, we introduce the trace of
the extrinsic curvature K as an auxiliary variable to address issues associated with type-
II fluctuations, particularly the appearance of divergent terms of the form (0/0) due to the
presence of a throat structure characterized by the non-monotonic behavior of the areal radius
R. By doing that, we have obtained a set of time-evolution equations with the corresponding
initial conditions, free from divergences associated with type-II fluctuations.
10Notice that our results for very large amplitudes µ correspond to cases beyond the critical collapse regime,
where the scaling law for MPBH deviates [17].
11There is a factor of 2 difference between the numerical results for the final PBH mass. This is related
to the different definitions of the mass of the cosmological horizon MH. Here, we use rm to define the time
of horizon croosing tH, whereas in [41], the comoving wavelength mode k is used. Both scales are related to
each other by k =
√
2/rm. The difference between the two when computing MH in Eq.(3.16) results in the
factor of 2.
– 19 –
