32
(a)
(b)
Figure 20 (a) Dispersion relation for density and spin modes
in a two-component fluid of light. Data are taken in a rubid-
ium vapor using two circular polarizations. (b) Spin (blue cir-
cles) and density (orange squares) speeds of sound measured
in a saturable nonlinear medium, as a function of the laser
intensity. At low intensity, cs < cd, while in the saturated
regime cs > cd. More details are to be found in (Piekarski
et al., 2024).
Figure 21 Coarsening simulation. Evolution of the magneti-
zation m = (|E+|2 −|E−|2)/(|E+|2 +|E−|2), after injection of
a weak Gaussian speckle on a linearly polarized background,
with g12/g = 1.8.
Each image is taken at different trans-
verse plane during propagation from z/zNL,s = 10, 40 and 100,
where zNL,s = 1/
p
k0(g −g12) is the spin nonlinear length.
photonic fluids. In Bose mixtures, coarsening dynamics
refers to the evolution of an initially unstable mixture
into separated domains, governed by defect formation
and hydrodynamic interactions (Goo et al., 2022).
In
the case of fluids of light, similar mechanisms could be
studied by tuning g and g12 into the regime g12 > g > 0.
This is actually possible when working on the red side of
the D2 line of rubidium.
Recent studies in atomic Bose-Einstein condensates
suggest that the early coarsening stage plays a critical
role in determining the final defect density. The Kibble-
Zurek mechanism predicts that defect formation follows a
power-law scaling with the quench rate, but recent exper-
iments have shown that early coarsening can introduce
corrections to this scaling, leading to defect density sat-
uration (Zeng et al., 2023). This suggests that fluids of
light could be a very relevant platform to study these
effects thanks to the quench dynamics, the ability to de-
tect vortices with high resolution and the control of the
initial kinetic energy spectrum.
Interesting effects are also predicted for point-like vor-
tices in one component that will become massive quasi-
particules due to the second component.
Theoretical
models suggest that the dynamics of these vortices can be
described using a Lagrangian formulation similar to that
of charged particles in a magnetic field, where the vortex
cores behave as massive objects undergoing precession
(Richaud et al., 2021, 2020).
This mass induces novel
inertial effects, such as radial oscillations and modifica-
tions to the equilibrium vortex spacing, which have been
confirmed in numerical simulations of coupled Gross-
Pitaevskii equations and fluids of light could allow to
observe this experimentally.
B. Nonlinear media with cold atoms
Using cold atoms as a nonlinear medium represents an
exciting direction for experiments involving paraxial flu-
ids of light. Even more than traditional nonlinear optical
media described in this review, laser-cooled atomic en-
sembles could provide a deeper control over optical non-
linearities and the possibility to exploit atomic coherence.
The major advantage of using cold atoms lies in
their narrow resonance lines, which drastically reduces
Doppler broadening.
As the optical nonlinearity in
atomic media typically scales as N/∆3, this narrow spec-
tral width allows experiments to approach resonance
closely without encountering the significant absorption
losses inherent to hot atomic vapors. From a typical de-
tuning of ∼5 GHz in hot atomic vapor experiments, it
becomes relevant to set the laser frequency detuned by
the natural linewidth, typically ∼6 MHz for alkali atoms.
It is then possible to win three orders of magnitude on ∆
and therefore nine orders of magnitude on 1/∆3. This is
however compensated by the atomic density N. In warm
vapors, we have seen that the density is typically on the
order of 1013 at.cm−3, while in dense cold atomic cloud
it is on the order of 1011 at.cm−3, which is only 2 orders
of magnitude smaller (Camara et al., 2014). Overall, it
appears advantageous to move to that regime in order to
reach similar ∆n with much weaker intensity.
Moreover, it is possible to refine the excitation scheme
using coherent optical effects such as electromagnetically
induced transparency (EIT), coherent population trap-
ping (CPT), or electromagnetically induced absorption
(EIA) (Lukin et al., 2000). These phenomena are capa-
ble of strongly increasing the effective photon-photon in-
teraction strength. Specifically, coherent nonlinear optics
can generate interactions whose strength, sign (attractive
or repulsive), and spatial range are externally control-
lable, extending the range of accessible quantum hydro-
dynamic regimes. So far, coherent scheme have not been
used in the nonlinear regime to create fluids of light. Or-
ders of magnitude tell that the maximum nonlinear phase
shift will not overpass the one observed in warm vapors,
however it will be reached at a much lower number of
