6
the idler photons, Colin cannot distinguish whether the
signal photons are single or entangled.
Colin may also want to check if the photons from Bob
to Alice have any unexpected phases (no “−” phases
are expected in normal DL04). But this does not give
him any evidence that Bob and Alice are trying to do
covert communication, since the phase changes can also
be caused by Eve, and the two causes will result in the
same distributions, which are indistinguishable.
Colin can also clean the sending photons by preparing
new photons according to a and forward them to Alice.
But this only disrupts potential covert communication
and not solidifying it.
Disruption is inevitable in any
quantum protocol anyways.
Colin can also measure Alice’s returning photons on
their way to Bob and see if there are any unexpected
phases. Again, this does not give any evidence to Colin,
since only Bob knows the initial phases of the photons,
and without this information, Colin can only see random
phase changes, and he cannot tell whether this is due to
covert communication or phase interference by Eve.
A more powerful detect would be for Colin to mea-
sure Bob’s sending photons, recover b, re-prepare new
entangled photons according to strings a, b as well as a
newly sampled random Bell state selection string c′, and
forward a new A-batch to Alice. Bob will know that his
sending photons are being intercepted, but he cannot sig-
nal Alice in any way, particularly during the ﬁrst error
rate estimation phase, since this will alert Colin. Alice
does not know the signal photons have been replaced, and
she will encode both m and m′ as scheduled, and returns
the encoded B-batch to Bob. Colin then measures Alice’s
encoded photons and recovers her covert message m′ by
measuring Bell state changes. He can do this because he
has the corresponding idler photons.
This detection does not work either. This is because
m′ is a random message, Colin cannot tell if the Bell
state changes are caused by covert communication or
Eve. This is why this covert channel can only be used to
distribute random keys rather than arbitrary messages.
Otherwise if m′ is a low entropy message, Colin can im-
mediately tell the existence of covert communication.
In this detection, there is a more subtle way for Colin
to detect covert communication. Since he has the idler
photons, whenever Alice applies a unit operation on the
signal photon, it will aﬀect the idler photon. Colin can
simply observe whether the same photon is being ﬂipped
multiple times within a very short time (in standard
DL04 each photon is ﬂipped by Alice one time at most).
But this detection can be avoided if Alice chooses ran-
dom timings to ﬂip the signal photons in order to mimic
eavesdropping from Eve.
Note also that in this attack, Colin cannot eventually
obtain a common string m′ between Alice and Bob, be-
cause he has destroyed the entanglement of Bob’s initial
pairs, there is no way he can fake a new batch of return-
ing photons such that Bob can still recover m′, even if he
knows all the secrets a, b, m′.
This means that it is not only true that Colin cannot
detect covert communication, but also true that Colin
cannot obtain any secret key m′ shared by Alice and
Bob’s via this covert channel. He can only disrupt po-
tential covert key sharing, which is what Eve can do as
well in any quantum protocols via eavesdropping.
Note that the other cover communication idea does not
work, namely Bob uses another random basis selection
string a′ diﬀerent from the a that he agreed with Colin
beforehand. This is because in the ﬁrst error rate estima-
tion phase, Bob has to publish the a that Colin expects,
and for this a, Alice’s measurement will not match Bob’s
true states with high probability. This means that the
security check will not pass with high probability, and
there will be no reason for Alice to continue the protocol
and return any photons to Bob.
Note also that the proposed covert communication idea
cannot be directly applied in BB84. This is because with
one pass of photons, even if Alice (in BB84, Alice is the
photon sender) initially uses entangled photons and em-
beds Bell state changes into the entangled pairs, Bob will
not have any advantage in recovering the message m′ over
Colin or Eve. Bob’s advantage only occurs after agreeing
with Alice on some common secret after the BB84 error
rate estimation phase. But that common secret is not
known before Alice encodes the covert message m′. I.e.,
the common secret is independent of the encoding of m′
and thus useless in recovering m′.
IV.
SUBSEQUENT COVERT
COMMUNICATION
In the previous two sections, we have shown how
to perform covert quantum key distribution (where in
BB84 we can send any covert messages, including ran-
dom keys).
We show in this section that, after an initial secret
sharing, Alice and Bob can easily share more and more
random secrets in subsequent communications. The idea
is as follows.
Suppose Alice and Bob has shared a random secret
m′, resulting in a ﬁnal shared key K (e.g., via a hash
function). Alice can then use this K as the basis selection
string a in her next execution of BB84 (or any other
quantum protocols) with Bob, and sends photons with
random states. Denote the state selection string of these
random states as b. Since Bob knows a, he can always
measure the photons in the correct basis, and recover the
state selection string b′ ≈b up to diﬀerences caused by
noise. Assume the noise rate of the quantum channel is
low, they can then use error correcting code to turn b and
b′ into a common secret s. This is the new secret they
share.
In order to fake the controller, in the error rate estima-
tion phase, Alice will publish the basis that Colin forces
her to use, and Bob can simply publish a random ba-
sis. They then (with high probability) announce security
