3
FIG. 1.
(a) Illustration of an interface consisting of two
different filling fractions such that the upstream and down-
stream modes contain different edge structures is modeled as
shown. The chiral modes are shown in blue and red in the
filling fractions ν and νi, respectively. The grey lines between
the two sides show the tunneling channels between the up-
stream and downstream modes to facilitate equilibration. (b)
A schematic of the device used in this work. Here, contacts
S, D1, D2, and G are Source, 2 drains, and ground, respec-
tively. The convention ν > νi is chosen so that the current
always splits by the interface. Points labeled O, L, P, Q rep-
resent noise spots, and points H1, H2 are hot spots.
traveling either upstream or downstream (with respect to
electrical current) while the effective FF (νeff) is positive
(we chose the downstream modes to have positive FF and
the upstream modes to have negative FF). We label the
upstream modes by ν+ and the downstream modes by ν−
with c+ and c−as their respective central charges. In this
model, three situations can arise where c+ > c−(thermal
current is in the direction of electric current) or c>c+
(thermal current is in the opposite direction of electric
current), or c+ = c−(no thermal current) [40]. We also
point out that simple current conservation along the
edges of our device (Fig. 1) tells us the relation between
voltages at certain points on the device.
ν e2
h VO = νi
e2
h VL + (ν −νi)e2
h VL,
(2a)
ν e2
h VQ = νi
e2
h VP + (ν −νi)e2
h VP ,
(2b)
telling us that the points O,P, and, P,Q are at the same
voltages.
We assume N equidistant ‘virtual reservoirs’ across the
length of the edge, which act as gauges for the voltages
and currents at each point along the edge.
Each hy-
drodynamic mode equilibrates with another by charges
(electric and thermal) tunneling across from one mode to
the other. We also assume that the reservoirs themselves
do not accumulate electric or thermal currents, given by
Ij+1,n = Ij,n +
N
X
i=1
i̸=n
Iτ
j,n,i,
(3a)
Jj+1,n = Jj,n +
N
X
i=1
i̸=n
Jτ
j,n,i.
(3b)
Here I(J)j,n represents electric (thermal) current at
reservoir site j of mode n and I(J)τ
j,n,i represents tun-
neling electric (thermal) current from mode n to mode
i at site j. The tunneling currents at a site are coupled
directly to the voltage and temperature differences at the
site as
Iτ
j,n,i = g e2
h ∆Vj,n,i,
(4a)
Jτ
j,n,i = g e2
2h∆V 2
j,n,i + γgκ∆T 2j, n, i,
(4b)
where ∆Qj,n,i represents difference between quantity Q
in modes n and i at site j. From Eqs. (1), (3a), (3b), (4a)
and (4b) we arrive at the following differential equations
for voltage, temperature
∂xV (x) = ΛV (g, γ)V (x),
(5a)
∂xT 2(x) = ΛT (g, γ)T 2(x) + ΛJ(V ).
(5b)
Here, ΛJ(V ) is a result of the Joule heating and hence is
a function of the voltages. Solving them for the tempera-
ture and voltage profiles as a function of x show that the
potential along the interface edge is constant throughout
the length, except towards the end, where a sharp voltage
drop is observed [40].
The drop in power because of this drop in voltage
causes the downstream end of the edge to heat up, which
is referred to as a Hot spot. The hot spot can now act as
a thermal source to any mode capable of carrying ther-
mal current. Fig. 1 shows two interfaces and their cor-
responding hot spots labelled H1 and H2. Consider any
edge that is on the interface of the two different filling
fractions like, for example, the segment LH2; upstream
modes along the segment can carry heat from the hot
spot towards L, and as it travels upstream, there is al-
ways a probability of the thermal charge carriers either
getting tunneled across to the downstream mode head-
ing back towards H2 or just maintaining their course to-
wards L, which is an entirely random process and can
be affected by the length of the edge to allowing for dif-
ferent degrees equilibration. Therefore, if the edge LH2
is such that the net thermal current is in the upstream
direction (anti-ballistic), then at point L, one would see
fluctuations in the thermal charges reaching it because of
random tunneling processes along the length of the edge.
