6 
 
by ABCB* if not specifically distinguished), the darkest area (blue dot) is the ABCA 
domain, and the one with an intermediate contrast (black dot) corresponds to ABAB 
stacking.  
Such stacking assignment is supported by correlating the SNOM result (Fig. 1h) 
with Raman spectroscopy measurements (Fig. 1i). 2D peaks in graphitic multilayers, 
arising from a double-resonance Raman process, are a sensitive probe of local 
electronic band structure, and its spectral shape is widely used to distinguish different 
stacking orders in literature [49-51]. As shown in Fig. 1i, the 2D peak of the ABAB 
stacking (black curve) exhibits the most symmetric spectral shape, while that of the 
ABCA stacking (blue curve) shows the most asymmetric spectral shape, composed of 
a strong peak feature on the lower wavenumber side. The spectral shape of 2D peak in 
the polar stacking (red curve) lies in between the blue and black ones. Our Raman result 
in Fig. 1i is in accord with previous reports [37, 48, 52, 53]. We note that 2D peaks in 
Raman spectroscopy cannot distinguish the two polar stackings.  
We consistently observe the same trend of the near-field optical contrast in all 
tetralayer graphene samples we have measured at charge neutrality (Fig. S2), which 
enables us to readily decipher the polar domains from nonpolar ones based on SNOM 
measurements. Statistically, we find that 26 out of 79 sample flakes show polar domains 
after mechanical exfoliation. We analyze the area percentage of ABCB-type domains 
in 26 samples (statistics shown in Fig. S3), and we find that 11 samples account for 
more than 2% of the scanned tetralayer area and 15 samples account for less than 2%.  
Gate-tunable SNOM imaging on polar states in tetralayer graphene 
We show that gate-tunable SNOM imaging can reveal the full wealth of spontaneous 
electric polarizations in tetralayer graphene. We apply backgate voltages (Vg) to induce 
electron and/or hole doping into tetralayer graphene, meanwhile keeping both the 
tetralayer graphene and the scanning AFM tip grounded (Fig. 1f), such that positive and 
negative Vg induce electron and hole doping, respectively. Our gate-tunable SNOM 
measurements in this study are carried out by abiding by a closed gating loop, that is to 
say, we set out the Vg sweep from 0 V to the positive maximum, then from positive 
maximum to negative maximum passing 0 V, and then return from negative maximum 
back to 0 V. Figures 2a-2h present the representative gate-dependent SNOM images of 
a tetralayer graphene device (device 1) where SNOM data measured from Vg = 0 V to 
