3.
Considerations from mirror symmetry
To gain a better understanding of the Calabi-Yau X in the ζ ≪0-phase of the GLSM, we make
use of mirror symmetry and topological string theory. We will construct the mirror threefold Y of
Y in §3.1, which has complex structure parameter φ. We verify that the values of φ such that Y
has conifold/hyperconifold singularities are in agreement with our previous GLSM analysis.
We will eventually, in §3.3, make a number of claims on the nature of the second MUM point at
φ = ∞. Before we do this, we use §3.2 to review a number of details surrounding MUM points.
Some of this discussion will include very familiar items from [27–29]. We will also discuss transfer
matrices and K¨ahler transformations, which are important to consider in examples with multiple
MUM points as has already been illustrated in [12]. We will further recall certain discoveries of
[2, 4] that concern recently appreciated properties of MUM points.
In [4, §5.4], it is proposed that MUM points in mirror symmetry can be distinguished into com-
mutative and noncommutative MUM points.
This terminology is related to commutativity or
noncommutativity of the underlying Calabi-Yau category. The authors explain that while about a
commutative MUM point one can perform the usual BPS expansions using the Gopakumar-Vafa
formula [57, 58] to obtain invariants n(g)
β , the noncommutative MUM points require a different
treatment using the torsion refined GV formula [2, 4]. We will here delineate MUM points into
N = 1 and N > 1, according to whether the standard GV or the ZN-torsion refined GV formula
should be applied, because we will be taking a bootstrap approach that is sensitive to the value
of N in a way that we aim to make clear to the reader. Further study is required to associate a
noncommutative Calabi-Yau category to the ζ ≪0 phase. In fact, the discussion of [4] contains
the more general possibility of torsion groups that differ to ZN, but this will not be relevant for
our purposes and so we limit ourselves to discussing ZN refinement.
The methods of [4] concern threefolds X with nodal singularities that do not admit a global K¨ahler
resolution. Applying the methods of [4] requires identifying a smooth deformation Xdef, obtained
from X by complex structure deformation. Having identified problems in §3.3, we set about solving
them in §3.4 by identifying this Xdef. We read off topological data of Xdef from the topological
string free energies, and use this to make our ansatz for this smooth deformation. This turns out
to be a familiar hypergeometric threefold.
Having identified Xdef, we go on in §3.5 and §3.6 to provide two integral symplectic bases of solutions
to the PF equation attached to each MUM point, together with full sets of monodromy matrices.
3.1.
The mirror threefold Y and its Picard-Fuchs equation
The polynomials defining the h1,1 = 3 intersection (2.18) have an associated polytope ∆. The
Batyrev-Borisov procedure [59] produces the h2,1 = 3 mirror family eY by first forming a toric
variety P∆∗. In our case, this variety is six-dimensional. Let U1, U2, V 1, V 2, W 1, W 3 be coordinates
on the dense torus T6 ⊂P∆∗. Then the mirror variety eY is birational to the mutual vanishing locus
19
