corresponding torsion reﬁned Gopakumar-Vafa invariants are collected in Appendix C.
Acknowledgements
We thank Amir-Kian Kashani-Poor, Sheldon Katz, Johanna Knapp, Joseph McGovern, Boris Pioline,
Emanuel Scheidegger and Johannes Walcher for useful discussions. Furthermore, we want to thank
Albrecht Klemm and Eric Sharpe for collaboration on previous related work as well as Amir-Kian
Kashani-Poor and David Jaramillo Duque for collaboration on related work in progress.
We are
particularly grateful to Sheldon Katz for insightful comments on the geometries and the torsion reﬁned
invariants. Similarly, we are grateful to Emanuel Scheidegger for explaining to us a new method to ﬁx
the normalization of the ﬂat coordinate around a conifold point (thus allowing the genus g = 2 results
in the example X5), among many other insightful discussions.
2
Geometric preliminaries
In this section we will ﬁrst review some basic properties of projective threefolds with isolated
nodes and introduce the notion of an almost generic Calabi-Yau threefold. We then discuss
how conifold transitions can be used in order to generate examples.
2.1
Almost generic Calabi-Yau threefolds
Locally, a threefold nodal singularity, also known as threefold ordinary double point or conifold
singularity, takes the form
V = { uv −zw = 0 } ⊂C4 .
(2.1)
In order to remove the singularity, one can either deform the deﬁning equations to be uv−zw =
ǫ for some ǫ ̸= 0 – we will refer to this as a smoothing – or consider the resolutions
bV = Bl{u=z=0}V ,
bV ′ = Bl{u=w=0}V ,
(2.2)
that are in fact isomorphic to each other and related by the Atiyah ﬂop.
Since bV is isomorphic to V over the complement of a subset of codimension greater than
one – in this case over the complement of the origin u = v = z = w = 0 – it is called a small
resolution. This implies that the canonical class is unaﬀected by the blowup and KbV ∼0.
Moreover, since bV is obtained from V by blowing up along a divisor, we know that bV is
quasi-projective. 7
Consider now a projective Calabi-Yau threefold X which contains at most isolated nodes
as singularities. Let us denote the set of nodes by S ⊂X and their number by #S. Around
each of the nodes p ∈S one can choose an open neighborhood and perform an analytic
change of coordinates to obtain the geometry (2.1). This implies that there exist 2#S small
7Recall that a projective variety is necessarily compact and a quasi-projective variety can be embedded as
a locally closed subset into a projective variety.
– 6 –
