5
energy term now appears. The new hoppings also cause
the lifting of the degeneracy of the junction states as the
atomic sites hosting the junction states on layers J and
J + 1 are now directly coupled. Nevertheless, symme-
try protects the degeneracy at the valley centre, q = 0,
and |q| = qc. Another consequence of the dispersion is
that the energy of the junction states at q = 0 is no
longer zero. This is because we take energy E = 0 to be
the Fermi level of the bulk crystal which must lie at the
touching point of the continua.
Considering the changes accompanying displacement
of the right crystal, as λ increases from λ = 0, the AB|AB
configuration hosting topological states (top-left panel
in Fig. 3a), chiral symmetry is broken and the junction
states split. As seen in Fig. 3b which shows the evolution
with λ of the electronic states at a fixed wave vector, the
energy splitting increases to a maximum before decreas-
ing so that the states again become degenerate at the
valley centre for λ = 1, the AB|BC configuration. For
this configuration, the junction states are not degenerate
at |q| = qc; instead, the junction state on the valence
band side overlaps with the continuum.
As the right
crystal is slid further, the energy splitting of the junc-
tion states again increases until the states merge entirely
with the continuum when the AB|CA junction configu-
ration is reached at λ = 2. On further sliding discrete
states emerge again, eventually returning to degeneracy
at |q| = 0 when the AB|AB junction is reformed at λ = 3.
The repeated disappearance and emergence of the junc-
tion states from the bulk continuum as the crystals are
displaced with respect to each other can be seen in Fig.
3b, especially for wave vectors away from |q| = 0. Also
shown is an example of the evolution with λ of the low-
energy dispersion for a wave vector outside the topologi-
cally non-trivial range, qxa = 0.15 > qca. Here there are
no topological junction states for any λ; the states inter-
mittently splitting from the continua are not topological.
C.
Discussion and summary
The atomic-scale geometry determines the topological
properties and the presence of junction states at rhombo-
hedral graphite junctions. While it could be argued that
no bonds are explicitly broken when sliding two crystals
with respect to one other, such a process alters the hi-
erarchy of dominant interlayer couplings and effectively
involves the tearing and reforming of bonds.
Despite
changes at the level of a single inter-atomic bond, this
does not constitute a continuous deformation that leaves
topological invariants unchanged and provides a caution-
ary example of how atomistic details might modify any
“topologically robust” properties. Crucially, the rhom-
bohedral graphite system enables investigations of both
topological and non-topological phases, and the transi-
tion between them.
To exclusively focus on junction properties without
complications due to other boundaries our calculations
have considered semi-infinite half-crystals rather than
finite-thickness films. For experimental realizations, it is
necessary to consider how thick the rhombohedral crys-
tals must be to observe the junction states. The primary
impact of finite thickness is to discretize the continuum
states without affecting the topological properties of the
junction. For Bernal-stacked graphene it is typically as-
sumed that films of ten or more layers behave electron-
ically like graphite [31]. Applied to rhombohedral crys-
tals, this would imply compound crystals of ∼20 layers.
It has been shown [32, 33] that electronic Raman scat-
tering can distinguish between Bernal and rhombohedral
stacked crystals, and that stacking faults like those dis-
cussed here lead to observable features [32] in Raman
spectra, enabling an indirect measure of junction elec-
tronic structure.
For thinner films, it would be possible to use surface
sensitive methods as applied to two-dimensional crystals
like graphene multilayers [34] to probe the junction. One
complication is that the signal from the surface state on
the outer surface of a heterostructure made of rhombohe-
dral crystals might overshadow signatures of the interface
state. However, we suggest that this can be avoided by
applying an out-of-plane electric field using an electro-
static gate [35, 36], through surface doping [27, 37, 38],
or tunnelling tips which induce local fields [39]; this would
split the energies of the surface and junction states. Fig.
4a shows an example of a heterostructure consisting of a
rhombohedral trilayer placed upon a rhombohedral-half
crystal. The wave vector-resolved electronic density of
states for the external field E0 = 0.1 γ1
ec ≈10−2 V ˚A−1
is shown in Fig. 4b–see Supplementary Note 7 for the
results with no external field. We have determined the
impact of this electric field by performing a self-consistent
calculation of charge redistribution amongst all the lay-
ers in the heterostructure [40, 41]. We use green, red,
and blue to show the fraction of the electronic state at
a given wave vector localised on the two surface layers
(J + 2 and J + 3) of the heterostructure, the two layers
either side of the physical interface (J and J +1), and the
J −1 and J −2 layers respectively. Because of the finite
thickness of trilayer graphene, dispersion of the interface
states differ in details as compared to Fig. 3a. Never-
theless, the interface states are well separated in energy
from the surface state, and follow a similar evolution with
λ as seen before. For the AB|AB junction, λ = 0, the
green state on the outer surface is clearly distinguished
from the two red interface states. One of the interface
states for the AB|BC junction, λ = 1, is green, because
even at the valley centre it is localised on layers J −1 and
J+2. This demonstrates the difference between the topo-
logically non-trivial configurations AB|AB and AB|BC.
Given the tremendous progress in graphene-based van
der Waals heterostructure fabrication [42, 43] and their
mechanical manipulation [44–46], as well as availability
of rhombohedral crystals with thickness from a few to
tens of layers [25–27], we anticipate that the fascinating
and richly structured junction states proposed can be re-
