50
Tools and methodology
sections) or to different observables for the same process (such as, different distributions
of DY production).
Renormalization scale variations require a categorization of processes and, in this thesis, we
adopt nine categories, namely: neutral-current deep-inelastic scattering (DIS NC), charged-
current deep-inelastic scattering (DIS CC), and the following seven hadronic production pro-
cesses: top-pair; Z, i.e. neutral-current Drell-Yan (DY NC); W ±, i.e. charged current Drell-Yan
(DY CC); single top; single-inclusive jets; prompt photon and dijet.
These choices correspond to the assumption that missing higher order terms are of a similar
nature and thus of a similar size in all processes included in a given process category. Different
assumptions are consequently possible, for instance decorrelating the renormalization scale
variation from contributions to the same process from different partonic sub-channels, or
introducing a further variation of the scale of the process on top of the renormalization and
factorization scale variation discussed above.
We then define a MHOU covariance matrix, whose matrix element between two datapoints i, j
is
CMHOU
ij
= nm
X
Vm
∆i(ρf, ρri)∆j(ρf, ρrj),
(2.21)
where the sum runs over the space Vm of the m scale variations that are included; the factoriza-
tion scale ρf is always varied in a correlated way, the renormalization scales ρri, ρrj are varied
in a correlated way (ρri = ρrj) if datapoints i and j belong to the same category, but are varied
independently if i and j belong to different categories, and nm is a normalization factor. The
computation of the normalization factor is nontrivial because it must account for the mismatch
between the dimension of the space of scale variations when two datapoints are in the same
category (so there is only one correlated set of renormalization scale variations) and when they
are not (so there are two independent sets of variations). These normalization factors were
computed for various choices of the space Vm of scale variations and for various values of m in
Ref. [151], to which we refer for details.
As custom in literature, we consider scale variation by a factor 2, so we set
κf = ln ρf = ± ln 4
κr = ln ρr = ± ln 4.
(2.22)
Also in this case, different choices for the space of allowed variations can be considered,
among others: the 9-point prescription, in which κr, κf are allowed to both take all values
in {−ln 4, 0, ln 4}, with m = 8 (eight variations about the central value); and the commonly
used 7-point prescription, with m = 6, which is obtained from the former by discarding the
two outermost variations, in which κr = + ln 4, κf = −ln 4 or κr = −ln 4, κf = + ln 4. In
Ref. [6] we provide the explicit expression of the covariance matrices with the 7-point and
9-point prescription showing that, the two prescriptions lead to a similar behavior.
