15 
strategies.55 Creation of a clinical medical imaging dashboard for HDs could accelerate detection 
and monitoring of HDs beyond current capacity and timescales, enhance the design and 
implementation of interventions, and lead to improved health outcomes. Continuous monitoring 
of HD data is especially crucial. However, a recent review from 2023 noted that there are less than 
20 fully developed dashboards as well as substantial limits to their technological design and the 
number of SDOH-related variables they cover. Additionally, to date there are no dashboards of 
this type that incorporate AI analyses from medical images as a data source. The development of 
pipelines for creating such dashboard could yield HD metrics through routine health care allowing 
for more real-time assessment of drivers rather than relying solely on periodic local (e.g., the 
Healthy Chicago Survey56) or national epidemiologic (NHANES57) studies. While the HD*Calc 
framework has been incorporated into free software that can be downloaded from NIH websites, 
the software has two relevant limitations: (1) it is available only on Windows, and (2) it assumes 
that data is already in a format called a “health status” or “health rate”, such as average life 
expectancy across groups or mortality rates. In our work, we used the HD*Calc framework but 
created our own software to conduct the calculations on the surrogate features.  
There were some limitations to this study. First, note that the work presented here serves the 
first demonstration of the potential of merging data extracted from medical images into HD index 
calculations. Due to data accessibility, we limited our investigation to two SDOH demographic 
correlates, race and sex. Other possibilities, including intersectional identity of race and sex as well 
as SDOH, will depend upon availability of metadata in datasets. Second, because our goal was to 
rapidly report a feasibility demonstration study for extracting health disparities data from medical 
images, we did not incorporate clinical health measures associated with the lungs, such as smoking 
status. For example, a researcher interested in health disparities in smoking might draw upon 
