3
Input state
Temporal
snapshots
eﬀective time
Final state
x
z
y
non-linear medium
Figure 1 Sketch of the 2D+1 paraxial fluid of light. A laser
propagates along z in a nonlinear medium. Each transverse
plane (x, y) is equivalent to a temporal snapshot. Input state
is user-defined and the final state is measured experimentally.
superfluidity, wave condensation, topology, turbulence,
and, more generally, quantum simulation using photonic
systems, which we will explore in this review.
B. Cavity systems: the emergence of fluids of light
Before going forward on the review of propagating sys-
tems, we mention a broad class of experimental platforms
that study fluids of light in confined geometries. A foun-
dational step in the study of confined photonic system
was provided by the pioneering theoretical work of (Lu-
giato and Lefever, 1987). They introduced the so-called
Lugiato-Lefever equation, which describes the spatiotem-
poral dynamics of light in a driven-dissipative Kerr cav-
ity. This equation established one of the first bridges be-
tween laser physics and hydrodynamics, and these cavity-
based systems have historically supported the emergence
of the concept of fluids of light.
Actually, one of the decisive conceptual advances in
this direction came from a pioneer of the NLSE mapping,
Raymond Chiao (Chiao et al., 1964). In 1999, (Chiao and
Boyce, 1999) proposed the possibility of superfluid-like
behavior in light using the formal analogy between quan-
tum gases and the evolution of an electromagnetic field
within a nonlinear cavity.
Drawing analogies between
nonlinear optics and the hydrodynamics of superfluids,
(Chiao, 2000) suggested that light propagating in non-
linear media could exhibit a Bogoliubov dispersion rela-
tion and proposed several experimental implementations
using hot rubidium vapors or Rydberg atoms in a mi-
crowave cavity (Chiao et al., 2004). While these propos-
als initially faced experimental challenges, they opened
the way to modern fluids of light research and to the best
of our knowledge they invented the expression “fluids of
light”.
The next significant breakthrough came with the ad-
vent of exciton polariton systems. Exciton-polaritons are
hybrid quasiparticles formed from the strong coupling of
photons with excitations in semiconductor microcavities.
These systems inherently possess a driven-dissipative na-
ture, where external pumping and losses play an essen-
tial role in their dynamics. Despite this complexity, ex-
perimental observations of Bose-Einstein condensation
(BEC) (Deng et al., 2002; Kasprzak et al., 2006) and
superfluidity in exciton-polariton systems (Amo et al.,
2009a; Claude et al., 2022; Stepanov et al., 2019) played
an important role in the study of quantum fluids of light
(Amo et al., 2009b). Polaritons demonstrated not only
superfluid properties but also the ability to support ex-
otic nonlinear phenomena, such as solitons (Amo et al.,
2011; Claude et al., 2020; Lerario et al., 2020; Maitre
et al., 2020), vortices (Boulier et al., 2015, 2016; Koni-
akhin et al., 2019; Lagoudakis et al., 2008), and more
recently, topological excitations (Klembt et al., 2018; Sol-
nyshkov et al., 2021; St-Jean et al., 2017) and KPZ uni-
versality class (Fontaine et al., 2022).
These advance-
ments highlighted the richness of driven-dissipative sys-
tems as an experimental platform for exploring quantum
hydrodynamics.
Simultaneously, a parallel line of research emerged in
dye-filled microcavities, where Bose-Einstein condensa-
tion of photons was demonstrated (Klaers et al., 2010a).
Unlike exciton-polariton systems, where the quantum
fluid arises from the hybrid nature of polaritons, photon
BEC relies on thermalization of photons via their inter-
action with a dye medium (Klaers et al., 2010b). This
platform has since been extended to explore the collec-
tive dynamics of photon fluids, including the emergence
of phase coherence, thermalization, and beyond-mean-
field effects in photonic condensates (Busley et al., 2022;
Karkihalli Umesh et al., 2024; Klaers et al., 2012).
C. Removing the cavity: the paraxial fluids of light
Paraxial fluids of light build on this historical back-
ground to form a distinctive branch in the study of quan-
tum fluids of light. Unlike the driven-dissipative dynam-
ics of exciton-polariton condensates or photon BECs in
cavities, paraxial systems evolve as nearly closed systems,
remaining effectively conservative if linear losses (absorp-
tion) are negligible.
Therefore, one key advantage of
paraxial systems lies in their ability to replicate quan-
tum hydrodynamic phenomena without the complexities
of cavity-based dissipation and external driving fields, al-
lowing direct exploration of fundamental quantum fluid
effects.
Early experiments in this field explored soliton in-
stabilities (Swartzlander Jr and Law, 1992; Tikhonenko
et al., 1996), vortex nucleation (Tikhonenko and Akhme-
diev, 1996; Tikhonenko et al., 1995), and pattern forma-
