2
As another option, integral equation methods can be utilized
to optimize an aperiodic ﬁnite metasurface for desired far-
ﬁeld patterns [22]–[24]. In this case, the mutual coupling
between different cells is accounted for and patterns can be re-
alized through a rigorous optimization framework with higher
precision compared to traditional array factor approaches. In
fact, the interactions between cells can be harnessed to excite
auxiliary surface waves that allow for amplitude tapering with-
out deliberately introducing losses [25]. Speciﬁcally, surface
waves can facilitate wave transformations in reﬂection and
transmission with theoretically unity power efﬁciency, that
is limited in practice only by the materials and lossy parts
of the metasurface [25]–[27]. Therefore, the beneﬁts of this
design method lie both on the more accurate modeling of the
metasurface, and on the possibility to achieve higher power
efﬁciency for patterns requiring amplitude tapering through
the excitation of surface waves.
An RIS has been recently optimized based on an integral
equation framework in [13]. Compared to that work, we for-
mulate the integral equations based on analytical expressions
without the need of preliminary simulations to obtain the
Green’s function that depends on the substrate parameters and
the locations of loaded wires. The use of analytical expressions
facilitates the design process, as it is much faster to modify the
density of loaded wires and substrate parameters, until a de-
sirable performance is obtained. Moreover, we incorporate the
unit cell losses into the framework and try to minimize them
during optimization to achieve the highest-possible power efﬁ-
ciency, while maintaining the desired far-ﬁeld radiation. Lastly,
the beamsteering and beamshaping capabilities of the RIS
are explored and veriﬁed experimentally. While the presented
RIS is biased uniformly along one dimension, limiting its
beamforming capabilities to a single plane and TE-polarized
ﬁelds, the design framework can be expanded to RISs varying
in both dimensions, by modifying the Green’s functions [28],
and individually biasing all unit cells.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes the homogenized model used for the design and
optimization of the RIS. The unit cell topology is described
in Sec. III, while simulation results and a comparison with
traditional approaches to design RISs are given in Sec. IV.
The measurements of the fabricated prototype are discussed
in Sec. V and conclusions are made in Sec. VI. Lastly, some
technical details for the extraction of the performance metrics
are detailed in the Appendix. It is noted that our work focuses
on the design framework and electromagnetic performance of
the presented reconﬁgurable metasurface, while it disregards
any communication-related aspects and requirements of RISs
(e.g., channel estimation, modulation schemes) that are often
discussed in theoretical communication-focused works [29],
[30]. Yet, the term reconﬁgurable intelligent surface (RIS) is
adopted herein due to its wide use in similar works focusing
also on the reconﬁgurable manipulation of the reﬂections from
an incident electromagnetic wave.
II. ANALYSIS AND OPTIMIZATION FRAMEWORK
In this section, the framework to model, analyze and op-
timize the RIS is presented. The integral-equation approach
Metawires
Ltot
h
y
z
...
Incident
Z1 Z2 Z3
ZN
ZN-1
(model)
Implemenation
Reﬂected
θ<0
θ>0
Fig. 1.
Sketch of the RIS consisting of N rectangular sheets of homoge-
nized impedances Zn along a length of Ltot. Each homogenized sheet is
implemented with varactor-loaded cells that are repeated periodically along
the x-axis.
solved with a Method of Moments is based on a previous
work presented in [23] for static metasurfaces illuminated by
an embedded source, but the main steps are included herein
for completeness.
A. Geometry and simpliﬁed model
As sketched in Fig. 1, the RIS consists of an impedance
layer etched on a grounded substrate of thickness h, dielectric
constant εr and loss tangent tan(δ). The impedance layer in-
corporates the unit cells, that are loaded with varactors and re-
peat periodically along the x-axis. In turn, the effect of the unit
cells is homogenized into rectangular sheets of width w and
uniform surface impedance Zn = Rn + jXn(n = 1, ..., N),
where N is the number of impedance strips. It is noted that the
RIS has a length Ltot in the y-direction, while it is considered
uniform along the x-axis, i.e. the biasing is identical for the
cells corresponding to the same impedance strip. Furthermore,
the RIS is illuminated by a TE-polarized wave (Einc = Eincˆy)
that induces y-polarized currents. The simpliﬁed model allows
the fast and highly-accurate calculation of the reﬂected far-
ﬁeld pattern through integral-equations for any set of surface
impedances Zn that corresponds to a set of bias voltages Vn.
In turn, this enables the optimization of the applied DC bias
voltages Vn for desired far-ﬁeld patterns.
B. Volume-surface Integral Equations
When the RIS is illuminated by an incident wave, surface
current densities will be induced on the impedance sheets and
the ground plane, denoted by Jw(y) and Jg(y), respectively.
In addition, the effect of the dielectric is considered through
an induced volumetric current density Jv(y, z) that takes
nonzero values within the substrate region. The free-space two-
dimensional (2D) Green’s function is utilized to calculate the
scattered ﬁelds as:
Esc
i (ρ) =







−kη
4
Z
Ci
Ji(y′)H(2)
0 (k|ρ −ρ′|)dl′, i = {w, g},
−kη
4
Z
Si
Ji(y′, z′)H(2)
0 (k|ρ −ρ′|)ds′,
i = v,
(1)
