12
•
Bhattacharyya et al.
4.1.3
Portfolio Optimization.
Solving the QUBO-Relaxed warmstart makes portfolio optimization become a QUBO-Relaxed programming
problem, and as a result there is no longer a dependence on the number of random initializations. Thus, we
don’t distinguish between 10 and 50 initializations. With that being said, both metrics fall under (↑) with GW2
outperforming QUBO-Relaxed.
The instance-specific approximation ratios obtained by QUBO-Relaxed and GW2 are both relatively high (when
compared to other problems), but GW2 is still more than 0.25 standard deviations above QUBO-Relaxed.
In terms of optimal sampling probability, GW2 out performs QUBO-Relaxed, but their probabilities are within 0.25
standard deviations of each other. Notice that these sampling probabilities are significantly further from 1 than the
corresponding instance-specific approximation ratios, corresponding to QAOA states which are superpositions
of both the optimal state and other sub-optimal but still high cost sates. For portfolio optimization in particular,
because the budget constraint is large, any term that satisfies that constraint will have a high cost by default.
The reasoning for why Portfolio Optimization behaves this way is likely due to its QUBO-Relaxedity, which not
only changes the optimization routine for the QUBO-Relaxed warmstart but also impacts the performance of
GW2 (as can be seen empirically).
4.1.4
Maximum Independent Set.
Both MIS problems considering both metrics fall under (↔), specifically following the order of QUBO-Relaxed
with 50 initializations, GW2 Last rotation, then QUBO-Relaxed with 10 initializations.
For MIS, the GW2 warmstart is usually within 0.25 standard deviations of QUBO-Relaxed with 50 initializations.
The instance-specific approximation ratio for MIS-GNP is the only problem and metric for which QUBO-Relaxed
with 50 initializations performs above 0.25 standard deviations of the GW2 warmstart. This suggests that when
even GW2 warmstarts preform better than QUBO-Relaxed with 10 but worse than 50 initializations, the margin
between the best GW2 warmstart and QUBO-Relaxed is not large. Furthermore, MIS problems are a constrained
optimization task, which might explain why increasing the number of initializations for QUBO-Relaxed provides
an advantage over GW2.
5
Conclusion
We introduced a new method for applying semidefinite relaxations to solving QUBO problems via QAOA by
using a mapping from QUBOs to Max-Cut problems as an intermediate step. We benchmarked this approach on
various QUBO problems: Random QUBOs, TSP, Portfolio Optimization, and MIS. As a comparison, we used a
non-QUBO-Relaxed warmstart, QUBO-Relaxed.
We found that the best choice of SDP warmstart was Goemans-Williamson projected onto 2 dimensions, with a
rotation applied to the auxiliary variable introduced in the mapping from QUBOs to Max-Cuts.
Because QUBO-Relaxed relies on a non-QUBO-Relaxed optimization problem, its performance is strongly depen-
dent on the number of random initial conditions tested by the optimizer. To give a fair comparison between GW2
and QUBO-Relaxed we tested both 50 and 10 random initializations for the latter. Empirically we saw that 50
initializations generally outperformed 10 initializations, but this difference was problem dependent. Because this
ACM Trans. Quantum Comput., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2025.
