a multivariate quadratic regression whose dependent variable was the average number of passes and whose
independent variables were 13 model parameters that had been varied. We chose the quadratic regression,
because we expected nonlinear effects of several parameters. We refer readers to ‘Sensitivity analysis’ in Methods
section for details. The result from the regression analysis is summarized in table 2. Moreover, the quadratic
effect of each parameter, assuming all the other parameters assume their mean values, is visualized in Fig. 4.
While constructing the model, we expected several parameters to have limited or trivial influences on the
number of passes. One of such parameters was m, the mass of each player. Since m only affects the inertia
of Passer and Mover [eq. (1e)], we expect it to have a little effect on the number of passes. Indeed, table 2
indicates that m had little significant effect. Although its linear coefficient turned out to be significant, Fig. 4
suggests that its magnitude was negligible. Parameters γ and kr control the confinement mechanism. Since the
mechanism should have little influence over the dynamics inside the court, it is desirable that γ and kr have
little effect on the outcomes. The sensitivity analysis revealed that γ had no significant effect as expected. As
for kr, although it exhibited a certain influence, Fig. 4 suggests that its magnitude was limited. Parameters
T and σ are expected to reflect the competence of the offensive team. Parameter T is the duration of every
pass scene fixed throughout a game. A smaller value of T, which implies faster passes, should reflect the higher
competence of the team. Parameter σ is the standard deviation of the pass angle. A smaller value of σ results
in more accurate passes, and hence implies a higher level. The analysis revealed trivial effects of T and σ.
Namely, the smaller T or σ was, i.e. the more competent OFs were, the greater the average number of passes
was. We note that σ = 0, which corresponds to no fluctuation in pass angles, was outside the value range in our
analysis. In our model, pass angle is measured relative to the vector connecting Passer to Receiver, as explained
in ’Details on the dynamical model’ in Methods section. For instance, a pass whose angle is zero goes towards
exactly where Receiver stands. We expect the pass angle distribution to have non-zero variance, because pass
angles would fluctuate due to not only mistakes but also strategic decisions. That is, if Receiver stands close to
DF, Passer is likely to give a pass in such a way that Receiver moves away from DF before obtaining the ball.
In contrast to T and σ, τ and Lict should reflect the competence of DF. The characteristic time scale of DF, τ,
affects the running speed of DF. With a smaller value of τ, DF runs faster, which would indicate more skilled
DF. Parameter Lict denotes the threshold distance for DF to intercept the ball. Obviously, more experienced
DF is likely to exhibit a larger value of Lict. Fig. 4 illustrates that smaller τ or longer Lict reduced the average
number of passes, which was consistent with our expectation. In short, parameters m, γ, and kr turned out to
have only limited effects on the number of passes as expected. Moreover, parameters T, σ, τ, and Lict exerted
intuitively understandable influences. These results imply the mechanistic plausibility of our model.
An interesting feature in Fig. 4 is non-monotonicity, or optimality in other words. This was salient for β
and Le. Inverse temperature β controls Passer’s accuracy in choosing the wider side when giving a pass. The
limiting case of β = 0 indicates complete randomness. The larger the value of β is, the more probable it is
that Passer gives a pass to the player on the wider side. Parameter Le represents the typical distance of DF to
Passer and to Mover. The curves for β and Le in Fig. 4 suggest the existence of the optimal β and Le values
that maximise the average number of passes. This implies that Passer should give a pass to the narrower side
from time to time, and that Passer and Mover should maintain a certain distance from DF in our model.
Discussion
With the aim of uncovering influence of football players’ behaviour on team performance in 3v1 ball possession
game, we constructed and analysed a dynamical model of the motion of the players and the ball. We argued for
the plausibility of our model by comparing the OF area and the average number of passes between experiments
and simulations (Fig. 3). Taking advantage of our modelling approach, the sensitivity analysis was performed
to examine the influence of each model parameter on the number of passes, which allowed us to investigate the
possible effects of interventions in behaviour. Several parameters turned out to have intuitively understandable
influences as expected, illustrating the mechanistic plausibility of our model. We also found several crucial
parameters that might reflect the competence of a team.
Through the sensitivity analysis, we obtained several implications about the way in which certain aspects
of players’ behaviour affect team performance in 3v1 ball possession game. Firstly, faster and more accurate
passes by OFs are expected to enhance ball possession, according to the results on T and σ. Secondly, the
optimal, small randomness in choosing pass directions may improve ball possession. This is seen from the result
on β. Whereas the ball should mostly go to the wider side (large β), giving passes to the narrower side from
time to time is expected to improve the offensive team’s performance. Finally, the result on Le suggests that
Passer and Mover can enhance ball possession by maintaining the optimal distance from DF. We expect the
optimal value of Le to depend on the size of the court. In this study, the court was a square with 6 m per side.
Therefore, if Le is set to around 6 m, which was longer than the optimal length according to our sensitivity
analysis, Passer and Mover would always be running away from DF. We conjecture that a too large value of Le
8
