Figure 4: Representative conﬁgurations of three metastable states of the chignolin mini
protein – folded, misfolded, and unfolded (from left to right, respectively). The crimson
cartoon represents the backbone of the protein, while the white, gray, blue, and red spheres
represent hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen atoms, respectively.
4.3
Informed resetting
In standard SR, the timing of resetting events is completely decoupled from the state of the
system. It is one of the advantages of resetting as an enhanced sampling method: limited
prior knowledge is needed, and no CVs are required. However, it also means that restarts
sometimes occur very close to the target.
Greater accelerations can clearly be achieved
by avoiding such undesirable restarts. In informed stochastic resetting (ISR), we exploit
information on the progress of the process by incorporating an adaptive, state-dependent
resetting protocol, resulting in higher speedups.
Ref.41 ﬁrst demonstrated the potential of informed resetting for accelerating molecular
simulations. There, a simple form of state-dependent resetting was considered: when it is
time for a resetting event, the system is restarted only if the value of a chosen CV is greater
than some predeﬁned threshold. We ﬁrst studied the modiﬁed Faradjian-Elber potential of
Figure 2(a). Using ISR as a standalone method, and choosing the x-axis as CV, provided a
speedup of > 50 over simulations without resetting. Using the same CV and threshold, but
combining ISR with MetaD, gave a speedup of ∼700. Even when using a very poor CV
(corresponding to the rightmost points in Figure 3(a)), the speedup remained > 200.
We also employed informed resetting to accelerate conformational changes in chignolin
in explicit water. We focused on transitions from a misfolded state to the native, folded
state. Most trajectories ﬁrst unfold before reaching the native state, but some rapidly reach
it directly from the misfolded state (representative conﬁgurations of the folded, misfolded,
and unfolded states are given in Figure 4). By resetting only when unfolding, the MFPT is
decreased by 15 % even without MetaD. Introducing bias along the RMSD-based CV, MetaD
gives speedups of ∼60 when used as a standalone method. Adding standard SR increases
the speedup up to ∼300, but ISR increases it up to ∼950.
13
