8
Figure 8. CBO results for several small molecules. For all molecules, we have 20 agents and Nout = 20 outer iterations, shown
are non-optimized positions initialized far apart (blue), optimized positions from blue initialization (gold), and non-optimized
positions initialized according to distance distribution of gold optimized positions (green). Results in insets sorted on x-axis
based on blue results for visibility. a) LiH (4 qubits, Nin = 50), b) CH4 (5 qubits, Nin = 100), c) BeH2 (6 qubits, Nin = 200).
IV.
CONCLUSION
This work discusses and analyzes a new method to
construct problem-adapted configurations for variational
quantum algorithms.
This is an important issue, as
the choice of entanglement ansatz, determined by the
position-dependent interaction strength between qubits,
plays an important role in both the solvability of the
problem and the avoidance of barren plateaus. In partic-
ular, we leverage the unique advantage of a neutral atom
tweezer platform to be able to place qubits anywhere in
the 2D plane, thus having the ability to create arbitrary
configurations.
Gradient optimization of the qubit
positions has shown to be hard as a consequence of the
divergent nature of the interaction energies.
Instead,
we opt to use a gradient-free CBO algorithm to find
improved qubit configurations. Our work shows that this
consensus-based algorithm is able to effectively sample
the configuration space to find qubit configurations that
lead to faster and lower error solutions of the ground
state minimization problem, for a large scale of random
and practical Hamiltonians.
We also hypothesize that
our algorithm can be used practically unchanged for
other quantum optimization algorithms.
In future work, we hope to improve the cost functions
used in the CBO algorithm to use the size of the gradi-
ent as information, as in Eq. (5). For our found solutions,
we generally see steeper gradients and faster convergence
in pulse optimization. In view of this, our aim is to quan-
titatively investigate the effect our optimized configura-
tions have on the avoidance of barren plateaus. Another
interesting problem would be to examine the correlations
between optimized configurations and the target Hamil-
tonian Htarg.
This could reveal information on better
configuration ansatzes. Lastly, experimental verification
of the optimized configurations versus randomized con-
figurations could be of great interest.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Bas Wijnsma, Raul dos Santos, Emre Akaturk,
Jasper Postema, Madhav Mohan and Jasper van de
Kraats for fruitful discussions.
This research is finan-
cially supported by the Dutch Ministry of Economic Af-
fairs and Climate Policy (EZK), as part of the Quan-
tum Delta NL program, the Horizon Europe programme
HORIZON-CL4-2021-DIGITAL-EMERGING-01-30 via
the project 101070144 (EuRyQa), and by the Nether-
lands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) under
Grant No. 680.92.18.05 and NGF.1582.22.009.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The data supporting the findings are available from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request.
CODE AVAILABILITY
The code supporting the findings is available from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request.
