Illusion Spaces in VR: The Interplay Between Size and Taper Angle Perception in Grasping
CHI ’25, April 26-May 1, 2025, Yokohama, Japan
Table 1: Haptic illusion limits found by key previous studies on perception of size and angle
Study
Results
Barbagli et al. [5]
Force-direction threshold 31.9°
Hajnal et al. [30]
Overestimated the slope with fingers by around 6°
Auda et al. [1]
Virtual size mismatch up to 50% larger than the physical prop
Bergström et al. [6]
Physical size: 3 cm; virtual thresholds: 2.7 cm and 4.4 cm.
Physical size: 6 cm; virtual thresholds: 5.4 cm and 7.32 cm.
Physical size: 9 cm; virtual thresholds: 7.02 cm and 9.18 cm.
Tinguy et al. [50]3
Physical width: 4 cm; virtual thresholds: 3.77 cm and 4.55 cm
Physical angle: 10°; virtual thresholds: 5.62° and 14.56°
Physical curvature: 33 m−1; virtual thresholds: 11 m−1 and 47.08 m−1
To determine the limits of illusions in object perception, many
studies have worked toward estimating the thresholds within which
any difference between physical and virtual objects cannot be re-
liably noticed. These limits now span a range of object properties
(see Table 1). For example, Barbagli et al. [5] estimated the force-
direction discrimination thresholds to be 31.9° when participants
were given force-feedback with mismatched haptic and visual stim-
uli. Hajnal et al. [30] found users typically overestimated object
slopes by around 6° without visual feedback. Auda et al. [1] found
that participants do not perceive the size mismatch for virtual ob-
jects up to 50% larger than the physical prop. They also found that
different displacement had no influence on the results. Bergström
et al. [6] estimated the thresholds of resizing virtual objects from
physical objects. They found that size perception thresholds varied
when the sizes of the physical objects changed, which showed the
thresholds could be influenced by different conditions. The 3 cm
wide cuboid could represent virtual ones from 2.7 cm to 4.4 cm,
while the 9 cm cuboid was only able to represent virtual ones from
7 cm to 9.2 cm. Similarly, Tinguy et al. [50] estimated the thresh-
olds of discrimination of sizes, face orientations and curvatures in
VR separately. The results show Just Noticeable Difference (JND)
values of 5.75%, 43.8%, and 66.66% of the physical objects for the
width, orientation of the prism faces, and curvature of ellipsoid,
respectively.
Importantly, across these works, reported perception thresholds
differ, even when similar factors are being considered (for example
Bergström et al. [6] and de Tinguy et al. [16] report different size
perception thresholds). This may result from a range of factors,
including object properties, grasp specifics, interaction specifics,
and more. Following this, Feick et al. specifically examined the
impact of different factors on perceptual thresholds [22]. They
considered grasp type, movement trajectory, and object weight,
but found no interplay. Crucially, their focus here was not on the
perception of the grasp itself, but rather on the perception of a
reaching movement. That is, they examined the impact of object
properties on co-location, rather than similarity. We expect these
factors (specifically grasp type and weight) to have a larger impact
on similarity as they require alterations of grasp mechanics and
joint forces [49].
This suggestion is further supported by Park et al. [41], who
found an interplay between the primary moment and product of
3The upscaling thresholds are derived theoretical values from their study results.
inertia (MOI and POI, which can be roughly interpreted as differ-
ences in length – MOI – and shape and asymmetry – POI). While
participants waved the objects around during the study, the factors
under discrimination were the geometric properties (thus, exploring
object similarity). They report that participants were very sensitive
to objects with a low MOI, regardless of the POI, but that haptic
discrimination for a large POI degrades rapidly. POI and MOI are
both object offset factors (i.e., they occur outside and away from
the grasp). We seek to add further understanding to interplays in
object similarities, by examining object properties within the grasp
– object size and shape.
Varying object sizes directly impacts the joint orientations and
torque forces experienced in the hand (primarily at the base of the
fingers). Varying the shape of the object further alters the hand’s
pose, especially at the phalanges nearer the fingertips. It can also
alter the direction of slippage at the fingertips, the direction of
tangential forces applied by the fingers, and the cone of friction [56].
As a result of this combined impact on the biomechanics of the
hand, interplays between factors must be examined directly and
cannot be inferred through combinations of studies on individual
factors. In order to understand these interplays, then, we study
multi-dimensional estimation of thresholds.
3
Methods
We conduct a study to model the perceptual thresholds for grasping
physical objects as proxies for virtual objects in VR. Specifically,
moving beyond the existing literature [6], we consider the interplay
between object size and shape (in this case, the taper angle of the
surfaces being grasped).
Where previous work has sought to provide psychomotor func-
tions revealing upper and lower perceptual bounds (i.e., the points
beyond which the user is likely to perceive the difference between
the virtual and physical objects, thus harming the user experi-
ence [25]), by considering multiple object properties together, we
instead aim to provide a multi-dimensional illusion space which rep-
resents the perception thresholds with physical properties and the
virtual ones considered simultaneously. This illusion space should
serve to provide a richer insight into the range of virtual objects
that a given physical proxy object can represent.
Similar to prior work (.e.g, [6]), we adopt a two-alternative forced
choice (2AFC) paradigm [35] for our study. Under 2AFC, a user is
forced to choose between two responses (e.g., smaller vs larger, or
