Space-averaged non-equilibrium Green’s function approach for quantum transport in 3D
2
1. Introduction
The non-equilibrium Green’s function (NEGF) formal-
ism is widely used in solid-state physics and chemistry,
however, it does not always correspond to a single, well-
defined mathematical procedure [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Its ver-
satility makes it applicable to a broad range of systems,
including ultra-small transistors [6, 7], spintronics [8,
9], thermoelectric materials [10, 11, 12], and molecular
electronics [13, 14], 2D materials [15, 16], disordered
systems [17, 18, 19], and optoelectronic devices [20].
The Green functions should be defined according to
the methodology and specific aspects of the system,
such as the model Hamiltonian. The one-body NEGF
method gained popularity in mesoscopic systems in
the late 20th century, originating from the pioneering
work of Caroli in the 1970s [21] and later advanced
by Datta, Meir, Wingreen, and Jauho
[22, 23, 24]
. Here, we refer specifically to the space and energy-
resolved NEGF for mesoscopic systems [25]. The more
fundamental (two-time or contour-ordered) NEGF for-
malism is rooted in many-body perturbation theory,
established through the works of Martin, Schwinger,
Keldysh, Kadanoff, Baym and others [26, 27, 28]. The
procedure for obtaining the energy-resolved NEGF—
for example, from the Kadanoff-Baym formalism—
involves performing a Fourier transform of the two-
time Green’s functions [29, 30].
The space-energy-
resolved NEGF primarily addresses steady-state quan-
tum transport properties, such as transmission prob-
abilities, which are essential for interpreting trans-
port in low-dimensional devices (e.g., molecular junc-
tions). A key strength of NEGF lies in its treatment of
open quantum systems via the concept of contact self-
energy. NEGF is widely regarded as one of the most
powerful and accurate methods in quantum transport
and finds broad applications in both scientific and in-
dustrial contexts
[31, 32, 33]. The NEGF technique
became computationally expensive in higher dimen-
sions to the point that additional mathematical tricks
such as the coupled mode-space approach [34, 35] are
required to practically perform a quantum transport
study in 3D systems like quantum wires. Moreover, im-
plementing NEGF becomes increasingly cumbersome
when material properties—such as effective mass, elec-
tron affinity, or others—vary across the device geome-
try In realistic systems, ideal ballistic transport is dis-
rupted by local imperfections (lattice disorder, dopant
inhomogeneity, or interfacial strain).
To accurately
model these effects in large 3D systems, a robust NEGF
formalism must incorporate spatially resolved mate-
rial properties, allowing for the self-adjustment of local
properties. It is the intention of this letter to introduce
the concept of space-averaged Green’s function asso-
ciated with the cell-centered Finite-Volume (FV) dis-
cretization method. Although a few publications have
reported the existence of the Voronoi FV-NEGF ap-
proach [36], it has not seen further development over
the past decade. For example, in one study, the au-
thors used the finite-volume method to solve the Pois-
son equation, but not the transport equation [37].
We propose that the averaged Green’s function for-
malism can improve the implementation procedure of
the effective mass NEGF in a 3D domain. The pro-
posed method can be regarded as an extension of our
previous work in solving Schr¨odinger-Poisson systems
in a 2D domain [38]. We demonstrate that this ap-
proach can overcome several limitations of the Finite-
Difference (FD) NEGF method.
While the current
work does not explore the full coupled self-consistent
Poisson-NEGF simulations for conciseness, we argue
that the FV scheme can fully realize its potential in re-
alistic Poisson-NEGF applications. Note that the ex-
isting Finite Element (FE) NEGF requires using the
concept of shape functions, which makes the imple-
mentation more complex or less intuitive [39, 40].
2. Method
2.1. Equation of motion for NEGF: problems with the
FD NEGF
In the context of mesoscopic quantum transport, the
retarded Green’s function, GR, is often considered
as the most basic Green’s function and thus plays
the central role.
A straightforward way to derive
the equation of motion for the retarded Green’s
function in a mesoscopic system is to begin with
the time-independent Schr¨odinger equation, using the
Hamiltonian operator,
ˆH, for an infinite physical
domain.
Then,
we
turn
the
wave
(envelope)
function into the retarded Green’s function ( ˆψ →ˆG).
Simultaneously, we add a positive imaginary one-site
energy (denoted below by iη) to the Hamiltonian
and add the Dirac delta function (as the source
of impulse) to the right-hand side of the equation.
This easy justification does not include the particle-
particle interactions and only takes account of particle
