NQG III - Two-Centre Problems, Whirlpool Galaxy
and Toy Neutron Stars
Richard Durran and Aubrey Truman
Department of Mathematics, Computational Foundry, Swansea University Bay
Campus, Fabian Way, Swansea, SA1 8EN, UK
E-mail: a.truman@swansea.ac.uk
”Beauty and Complexity as seen teetering on the Shoulders of Giants”
Abstract.
In the hunt for WIMPish dark matter and testing our new theory, we extend the
results obtained for the Kepler problem in NQG I and NQG II to the Euler two-centre
problem and to other classical Hamiltonian systems with planar periodic orbits. In the
first case our results lead to quantum elliptical spirals converging to elliptical orbits
where stars and other celestial bodies can form as the corresponding WIMP/molecular
clouds condense. The examples inevitably involve elliptic integrals as was the case in
our earlier work on equatorial orbits of toy neutron stars (see Ref. [27]). Hence this
is the example on which we focus in this work on quantisation. The main part of our
analysis which leans heavily on Hamilton-Jacobi theory is applicable to any KLMN
integrable planar periodic orbits for Hamiltonian systems. The most useful results
on Weierstrass elliptic functions needed in these two works we have summarised with
complete proofs in the appendix. This has been one of the most enjoyable parts of this
research understanding in more detail the genius of Weierstrass and Jacobi. However
we have to say that the beautiful simplicity of the Euler two-centre results herein
transcend even this as far as we are concerned. At the end of the paper we see how
the Burgers-Zeldovich fluid model relates to our set-up through Nelson’s stochastic
mechanics.
1. Introduction
Having seen how the asymptotics of Schr¨odinger wavefunctions for the Kepler problem
can explain the formation of planets, planetary ring systems and the evolution of galaxies
from spiral to elliptical, we now turn our attention to other astronomical problems.
Firstly in the next section we discuss the quantisation of the Euler two-centre problem
finding the corresponding gaussian wavefunction for an elliptical spiral orbit converging
to Euler’s solution in the infinite time limit. When one combines this elliptical two-
centre state with our astronomical elliptic states for the Kepler problem for each of
the two centres, using our linearisation principle for the semi-classical mechanics, we
arXiv:2504.06030v1  [math-ph]  8 Apr 2025
