detailed explanations and computation of remaining param-
eters. Herein, we denote the coefficients of the two terms on
the right side of Eq. 19 as diffuse radiance cd and specular
radiance cs.
8. Polarization Rendering
As shown in Fig. 2 and the following rendering pipeline,
we use a polarization image IÏ•pol as the input and leverage
polarimetric BRDF model, characterized by the neural ra-
diance field, to estimate the outgoing Stokes vectors sout,
which lay the foundation for polarization rendering. Re-
fer to Eq. 19 in the supp. for how to render sout using dif-
fuse, specular, and roughness components. Subsequently,
we present a differentiable processing pipeline to estimate
the Ï•pol, eliminating the need for precise polarization an-
gle measurements and facilitating the implicit rendering of
desired polarized images Iout
Ï•pol for loss calculation.
Image
Neural
Radiance Field
Eq. 7 (supp.):
ğ’”!"#
Eq. 1: ğœŒ/ ğœ™
Eq. 2: ğœ™$%&
(avg. of per-pixel ğœ™!"#)
Eq. 3: ğŒ'"#$
Eq. 5: ğ’”%()
$%&
Loss 
Function
9. Implementation Details
The SDF network takes the 3D coordinate as input and ap-
plies the positional encoding (PE) to spatial locations using
6 frequencies. This encoded input is then processed through
8 fully connected layers with 256 channels each, utilizing
ReLU activations. Additionally, the encoded input vector is
connected to the output feature at the 4th layer through a
skip connection. The network outputs the signed distance
value and an extra 256-dimensional geometric feature vec-
tor. Notably, surface normals can be obtained as the normal-
ized gradient of the neural SDF. To initialize parameters of
the SDF network, we utilize geometric initialization meth-
ods as described by Gropp et al. [10].
The diffuse radiance fÎ¸, roughness, and mask prediction
functions share similar network architectures. They take the
concatenation of the geometric feature vector and the en-
coded spatial locations with 10 frequencies as input. The
network is composed of 4 MLP layers with a width of 512
channels. The output structures contain 3 channels with
sigmoid, 1 channel with softplus, and 1 channel with sig-
moid, respectively. For the estimation of specular compo-
nents [27], we enable the network to reason about radiances
with the integrated directional encoding of roughness and
the encoded reflective directions with PE of 2 frequencies.
gÎ¸ also uses 4 fully connected MLP layers with 512 chan-
nels per layer and outputs 3 channels with the softplus.
Our algorithms are implemented in Pytorch [21]. In our
experiments, we use a batch size of 512 rays, each sampled
at 128 locations. We use the Adam optimizer [15] (Î²1 =
0.9, Î²2 = 0.999) with a learning rate that begins at 5Ã—10âˆ’4
and decays exponentially to 5 Ã— 10âˆ’5 during training. To
better warm up the training, in the early 10k iterations, we
define Lrgb as the loss between the predicted radiance c in
Eq. 16 and the ground truth. In the next 5k iterations, we
replace c with the diffuse components of sout
Ï•pol, which are
subsequently used for loss computation. In addition, The
refractive index of the object is set to 1.5. The optimization
for a single object typically takes around 200k iterations to
converge on a single NVIDIA Titan X GPU (âˆ¼2 days).
