0.005
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
displacement [˚A]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
SRME(κ)
float64
float32-highest
float32-high
mixed
Figure 8: Variation of the evaluated 𝜅SRME with displacement step size as used by Phonopy
to estimate the second- and third-order derivatives – for different PyTorch precision levels.
The hatched bar refers to an experiment using low precision for the geometry optimization
(float32-high) but a high precision for the subsequent finite difference evaluations (float64).
other datasets is an important topic for future research. If the degradation of direct forces is a
common occurrence across a range of downstream finetuning datasets, then improved forms of
distillation may become essential. The distillation method used in this work is rather basic and
does not make use of new, hessian-based methods for MLIPs [36, 44].
Appendix I:
Effect of filtering OMat24
During development of the Orb-v3 potentials, we observed that all models (conservative or
direct) suffered from undesirable out-of-distribution behavior when trained on the full OMat24
dataset and evaluated on homo-nuclear diatomics, as shown in the far left column of Figure
10. Interestingly, models with such diatomics still had low 𝜅SRME values for small bulk crystals,
indicating that that this was not a general pathology across all systems, but emerged in the
OOD setting of a two-atom system with one edge per atom.
Also shown in Figure 10 are different attempts to filter the OMat24 dataset. The central two
columns show different amounts of filtering based on outlying energies, forces and stress. Such
filtering was strongly beneficial, but still insufficient as large kinks remained in the energy
surface. The only completely effective strategy that we tried was to remove all non-AIMD data,
as depicted in the far right column.
Arguably, this is a dissatisfying outcome as we would like to avoid discarding valid DFT data.
Whilst we broadly in favour of retaining as much of a model’s training data as possible, it
remains unclear if the large proportion of "rattled" systems in OMat24 (45% of the data), and
the amount by which they are rattled, is generally beneficial or not for the current generation of
universal MLIPs, or whether the problems we have observed are unique to more unconstrained
architectures.
18
