5.3.3. High-dimensional measurement-device-independent QKD
So far, all mentioned protocols were for two-dimensional encoding systems using Z and X bases.
In this section, we review protocols developed for higher dimensions. Chau et al. [347] introduced the
protocol which they called the mother-of-all QKD protocol and its MDI variants for qudits, including
the round-robin differential phase protocol [348] and the Chau15 protocol [349]. However, these were
experimentally infeasible due to challenges in realizing high-dimensional Bell states. Hwang et al. [350]
proposed a d-dimensional MDI-QKD protocol, proven secure under the condition of zero QBER. Jo
et al. [351] proposed a three-dimensional MDI-QKD (3d-MDI-QKD) protocol with mutually unbiased
bases (MUBs) comprising time and energy bases [352]. Bell state measurements in 3d-MDI-QKD use
nine maximally entangled states in a three-dimensional bipartite system, enabling a secret key rate of
˜r ≥log2 3−2Q−2h(Q), where Q represents state error rate. This protocol achieves higher secret key rates
than the original MDI-QKD for low transmission losses, suitable for short-distance communication, but
faces feasibility challenges in realizing high-dimensional Bell state measurements with linear optics [353].
Sekga et al. [354] introduced a qutrit-based MDI-QKD protocol employing biphotons and Mach-Zehnder
interferometers, achieving significant secret key rates for moderate distances. Dellantonio et al. [355]
extended QKD to generalized Z and X bases in d dimensions, demonstrating unconditional security with
improved performance in low dark-count scenarios. Cui et al. [356] proposed a high-dimensional MDI-
QKD protocol utilizing hyper-encoded qudits with polarization and spatial-mode degrees of freedom,
yielding a fivefold improvement in secret key rates.
This was further extended by Yan et al.
[357]
and Li et al. [358] to multi-degree-of-freedom encoding. The limitations of long-distance QKD due to
decoherence prompted solutions like quantum repeaters, as discussed by Erkilic et al. [359]. Their MDI-
QKD protocol surpasses the PLOB bound [360] using high-dimensional states optimized for increased
key rates at shorter distances, though these advantages diminish with greater transmission distances due
to photon loss.
5.3.4. Continuous-variable measurement-device-independent QKD
While two-dimensional discrete protocols can achieve long-distance communication, they often suffer
from low key rates, making them unsuited for metropolitan network requirements. A solution to this
challenge can be found in adopting continuous-variable (CV) systems. One significant advantage of a
CV-QKD protocol is its compatibility with standard telecommunication technology, particularly because
it does not rely on single-photon sources, which are the most vulnerable to attacks in discrete-variable
QKD (DV-QKD) protocols. Another significant advantage is that, in a typical QKD protocol, users
often need to allocate a portion of their raw data to estimate communication channel parameters, such
as the error rate. This results in a trade-off between the secret key rate and the accuracy of parameter
estimation in the finite-size regime. However, it has been demonstrated that this constraint does not apply
to continuous variable QKD. In continuous variable QKD, the entire set of raw keys can be utilized for
both parameter estimation and secret key generation without compromising security [361]. In addition,
CV-QKD systems might be more suitable to coexist with classical data transmission in optical fibers,
since the local oscillator required for homodyne detection can act as a mode filter, reducing classical
Raman noise from the quantum signal.
As such, there is considerable interest in continuous-variable MDI-QKD (CV-MDI-QKD). The first
CV-MDI-QKD protocols were originally introduced by Pirandola et al. [101], Li et al. [362] and Ma et
al. [363]. The protocol operates as follows: Alice and Bob randomly prepare coherent states, denoted as
|α⟩and |β⟩, respectively, where the amplitudes α and β are modulated by Gaussian distributions with
zero mean and sufficiently large variances. These prepared states are then sent to an intermediary party
(Charlie) for measurement. To establish secret correlations, Charlie performs a CV Bell measurement
and communicates the outcomes to Alice and Bob. This Bell measurement is executed by mixing the
incoming modes using a balanced beamsplitter. The measurement corresponds to the quadrature op-
erators ˆ
q−= (ˆqA −ˆqB)/
√
2 and ˆ
p+ = (ˆpA + ˆpB)/
√
2, and the classical outcomes are combined into a
complex variable denoted as γ = (q−+ ip+)/
√
2. The most general eavesdropping strategy involves a
joint attack encompassing both Charlie’s measurement device and the two communication links, namely
Alice-Charlie and Charlie-Bob. Since the protocol is based on Gaussian modulation and the detection
of Gaussian states, the optimal eavesdropping technique employs a Gaussian unitary approach [364]. By
introducing a reconciliation efficiency factor denoted as ϵ ≤1, the secret key formula can be modified as
follows:
r := ϵI(A : B) −IE.
(166)
where IE is the upper bound on Eve’s information.
62
