Appearance of Multiple Spectral Gaps in Voltage-Biased Josephson Junctions
Without Floquet Hybridization
Teng Zhang,1, 2 Tatiana de Picoli,1 Tyler Lindemann,1, 2, 3 Jukka I. V¨ayrynen,1 and Michael J. Manfra1, 2, 3, 4, 5, ∗
1Department of Physics and Astronomy, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA
2Birck Nanotechnology Center, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA
3Microsoft Quantum Lab West Lafayette, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA
4School of Materials Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA
5Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA
(Dated: April 9, 2025)
A time-periodic drive enables the engineering of non-equilibrium quantum systems by hybridiz-
ing Floquet sidebands. We investigated DC voltage-biased planar Josephson junctions built upon
epitaxial Al/InAs heterostructures in which the intrinsic AC Josephson effect is theoretically ex-
pected to provide a time-periodic drive leading to Floquet hybridization. Tunneling spectroscopy
is performed using probes positioned at the ends of the junction to study the evolution of the local
density of states. With applied drive, we observe multiple coherence peaks which are studied as a
function of DC voltage bias and in-plane magnetic field. Our analysis suggests that these spectral
gaps arise from a direct mesoscopic coupling between the tunneling probe and the superconducting
leads rather than from a Floquet-driven gap opening. Our numerical simulations indicate that an
increase in the ratio of junction width to coherence length will enhance the contribution of Flo-
quet hybridization. This work lays a foundation for the exploration of Floquet physics utilizing
voltage-biased hybrid superconductor-semiconductor Josephson junctions and provides means for
distinguishing direct couplings from genuine Floquet effects.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Shallow III-V semiconductor quantum wells hosting a
high-mobility two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) with
strong spin-orbit coupling coupled to epitaxial aluminum
realize a hybrid platform for exploration of topological
superconductivity in a tunable Josephson junction ge-
ometry [1–7]. A key attribute of Josephson junctions is
that the superconducting phase difference between the
leads may be utilized to generate novel state configura-
tions. Recently, static phase bias achieved by embedding
a planar Josephson junction in a superconducting loop
threaded by magnetic flux has been widely used to pro-
mote and explore topological superconductivity [2, 6, 7].
When the DC current through a planar Josephson junc-
tion exceeds the critical current, a finite DC voltage
bias (VJ) is generated and the superconducting phase
difference becomes time dependent, resulting in an in-
trinsic alternating current at a frequency proportional
to VJ. This process is known as the AC Josephson ef-
fect. The AC Josephson effect is an attractive path to-
ward dynamic control of the superconducting state. Re-
cently, a proposal for Floquet-enhanced topological su-
perconductivity driven by the intrinsic AC Josephson
effect has been put forth [8, 9].
In this proposal, the
system is effectively driven at the Josephson frequency
f = 2eVJ/h. Typical Josephson frequencies are tens of
GHz for a planar Josephson junction built upon epitaxial
Al/InAs heterostructures. This relatively high drive fre-
quency may lead to less stringent requirements on the
∗mmanfra@purdue.edu
coherence time for the Floquet hybridization state, a
crucial parameter for Floquet engineering [10, 11]. Al-
though Floquet physics has attracted significant theoret-
ical attention, experimental study in condensed matter
systems is challenging and still in its infancy. It is im-
portant to develop experimental platforms and identify
signatures of Floquet physics that may be used to distin-
guish among competing mechanisms. For example, both
photon-assisted tunneling and Floquet theory may pro-
duce a similar replica of the tunneling conductance peaks
under microwave drive, as reported in Refs. [12, 13].
Here we present an experimental and theoretical study
of gate-tunable planar Josephson junctions built upon a
hybrid epitaxial Al-InAs 2DEG heterostructure in which
we measured the tunneling conductance at the two ends
of the central InAs strip using probes formed from quan-
tum point contacts (QPCs), as shown in Fig.
1.
We
study the evolution of the tunneling density of states
(DOS) at the ends of the junction as a function of DC
bias current and the applied in-plane magnetic field.
When the DC current generates a finite voltage across
the Josephson junction, we observe the emergence of two
pairs of conductance peaks.
One pair of conductance
peaks is centered around zero bias, while the other pair
is centered at the bias voltage VJ. With an increasing DC
bias current or an increasing in-plane magnetic field, the
conductance peaks disperse, and the voltage separation
between the coherence peaks is reduced. Comparing our
experimental results with predictions of Floquet theory
and a simple three-terminal model of our device, which
assumes the tunnel probe couples directly to the two su-
perconducting leads, we attribute our experimental ob-
servations to strong coupling between the normal tunnel-
arXiv:2504.06246v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  8 Apr 2025
