10
•
Bhattacharyya et al.
The warmstarts were run with different vertex-at-top rotations, specifically first, last, and no rotation, as discussed
in the previous section. A more in depth explanation is provided in Appendix C.
4.1
Aggregate Results
All trends discussed can be seen in in Figure 3. The following results are all referring to the average values and
standard deviations at 𝑝= 5.
We use the results of our experiment to better understand the performance of
• (1) GW2 based on vertex-at-top rotation choice.
• (2) QUBO-Relaxed based on the number of initializations.
• (3) GW2 Last rotation compared to that of QUBO-Relaxed.
(1) For both metrics, the vertex on top rotation choices ranked in order of decreasing performance (for all
problems except TSP) are last, first, and no rotation. The obtained optimal sampling probabilities/instance-specific
approximation ratios for the last and first vertex on top rotations are often within ±0.25 standard deviations,
whereas the obtained optimal sampling probabilities/instance-specific approximation ratios for the first vertex on
top rotation and no rotation are typically not within ±0.25.
These results provide further empirical support that when mapping QUBOs to Max-Cut problems, the ad-
ditional degree of freedom added has a fundamentally different structure than the other variables, while also
supporting the findings in [6] where it was shown that vertex-on-top rotations in general provide improved
warmstarts.
(2) In general, QUBO-Relaxed with 50 initializations slightly outperforms QUBO-Relaxed with 10 initializa-
tions. This is to be expected, because the performance of the non-QUBO-Relaxed optimization is strongly
dependent on the number of random initial conditions tested.
Note that Portfolio Optimization is a special case of this warmstart, because the matrix of QUBO coefficients
is itself negative semidefinite. As a result, solving the continous relaxation is a QUBO-Relaxed programming
problem and can be solved efficiently. Thus, the only difference in obtained optimal sampling probabilities or
instance-specific approximation ratios between different optimization runs is due to differences in the QAOA
parameter optimization, not the number of initializations.
At depth 𝑝= 5, both random QUBO problem types have average sampling probabilities within 0.25 for 50/10
random initializations. Interestingly, the difference in obtained optimal sampling probability between 50 and
10 initializations is largest for TSP and the MIS problems, both of which arise from constrained optimization
problems. This suggests that constrained optimization problems are intrinsically more difficult to solve, and this
structural difference is preserved when these problems are mapped to QAOA.
50 and 10 initializations are within 0.25 standard deviations of each other for all problems.
(3) In order give a fair comparison between the various GW2 vertex on-top rotation choices and different
initializations for QUBO-Relaxed, we categorize each vertex on top rotation choice in terms of how it relates to
the QUBO-Relaxed warmstart performance (in terms of average values):
(↑) better than both QUBO-Relaxed with 50 initializations.
(↔) between QUBO-Relaxed with 10 initializations and 50 initializations
ACM Trans. Quantum Comput., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2025.
