evaluated on-shell. This approximation includes resonant diagrams as well as non-factorizable
contributions that arise from soft gauge-boson exchange.
In order to describe non-resonant effects of a process, a full off-shell calculation is required.
In this case, the complete final state after the decay of the unstable particle must be considered,
including all contributions that may or may not include the resonant state. This however comes
at an additional cost in the complexity of the calculation (larger number of Feynman diagrams
with more complex expressions) that in turn reflects in an increase in computing time. The
current frontier calculations have achieved a multiplicity of 2 →8 scattering at NLO, while the
multiplicity frontier at NNLOQCD is currently at 2 →3 processes.
When reviewing the status of the calculations for the wishlist below, off-shell effects are
assumed to be included. For QCD corrections to processes featuring a purely EW decay, the
different treatments of the resonances does not give rise to additional complications. This is for
instance not the case for EW corrections and processes featuring top quarks. In the latter case
of top quarks, we explicitly indicate if off-shell effects are included in a calculation.
Jet algorithms, identified final states, and fragmentation
NNLO predictions are necessary to achieve the highest precision for 2 →2 (and 2 →3) processes
at the LHC. The presence of one or more jets in the final state requires the application of a
jet algorithm, almost universally the anti-kt algorithm as they give rise to geometrically regular
jets. However, there can be accidental cancellations that can result in artificially small scale
uncertainties, especially close to jet radii of R = 0.4. A more realistic estimate of the uncertainty
can be obtained by the use of a larger radius jet (R = 0.6–0.7), or by alternate estimates for
uncertainties from missing higher orders [340–342].
Increasingly, many of the precision LHC measurements involve the presence of heavy
quarks in the final state, e.g. V+c/b (see later discussion in the vector boson section). If the
heavy quark is treated as massless, any calculation at NNLO requires the application of an
IR-collinear safe jet algorithm, to reduce the sensitivity to log-enhanced terms (proportional
to αn
s logm(mq/pt), such as with the flavour-kt algorithm [343]. The experimental approach is
to first reconstruct the jet using the anti-kt jet algorithm, and then afterwards to look for the
presence of heavy flavour tag within that jet. The transverse momentum requirement for the
heavy flavour tag is typically much less than the transverse momentum of the jet itself. This
can lead to many jets being tagged as heavy-flavour due to gluon splittings into a (relatively
soft) quark–antiquark pair, an indication of the log-enhancement described above for the theory
calculation.
The mis-match between experimental and theoretical algorithms can result in an error
of the order of 10%, potentially larger than the other sources of uncertainty in the measure-
ment/prediction.
A computation based on massive heavy quarks (see e.g. Ref. [344] for a
comparison against flavour-kt in WH production), or with the inclusion of the fragmentation
contribution at NNLO (see e.g. Ref. [187] for NNLOQCD predictions for B-hadron production
in t¯t) can reduce the theory uncertainty. Alternatively, new jet-tagging algorithms compatible
with the anti-kt definition [345–349] can be used for the same purpose.
The flavour-tagging algorithms referenced above require a complete knowledge of the heavy
flavour content of the event, something that is difficult to obtain in any experimental measure-
ment, especially if it involves the tagging of charm quarks. It is currently not well known (1) the
efficiency with which LHC experiments can reconstruct gluon splitting into heavy quark pairs
and (2) how well the parton shower Monte Carlos estimate the rate of this splitting. The latter
was a well-known problem at the Fermilab Tevatron [350]. A recent workshop5 discussed these
5https://conference.ippp.dur.ac.uk/event/1301/
13
