Only electron quasiparticles with kBT around ∼kBTF are thermally excited and this represents only a small
fraction ∼
T
TF ≪1 of the electron quasiparticles. Hence, to very good approximation, we can assume the
metal is in the ground state of non-interacting electron quasiparticles, i.e. in an anti-symmetrized product
state of the N lowest quasiparticle modes of the metal.
For semiconductors and insulators, the typical
electronic band gaps are Egap ≳0.5−10eV [97] and so the thermal population in the conduction band above
the ground state is exponentially small and therefore carries a small fraction of the energy in the system.33
Hence, again to good approximation, the electrons are in the ground state.
The ionic vibrations, aka phonons, for most solids are well-described by the Debye model (Ch. 6 of [94]),
which, in short, states that phonons can be treated as non-interacting bosonic quasiparticles with a linear
dispersion up to a cutoff known as the Debye energy ℏωD. Typical Debye temperatures TD =
ℏωD
kB
are
between 102 −103K (Ch. 23 and front cover of [95]).34 Hence, for the ionic motion, we have that T ∼TD
and therefore a significant thermal population of (non-interacting) phonons exists. Therefore, we create a
truncated thermal state, i.e. a thermal state with suitable occupation cutoffs, over phonon modes which
have energies in the range of 1 −70meV for typical solids [98, 99]. A practical requirement is that we do
not have T ≫TD, since this would imply a very high truncation order and/or signal the breakdown of
the applicability of the Debye model itself, e.g. due to significant anharmonic phonon interactions. Exact
integral expressions for the energy and specific heat at constant volume for the Debye model are common
knowledge (Ch. 6 in [96]), but we show the results for T > TD (omitting the zero point energy) which is
often the typical situation,
Eph(T > TD) ≈3NkBT,
CV,ph(T > TD) ≈3NkB.
(155)
For metals, we see that the ratio of electronic and phononic thermal energies (ignoring energy of the electronic
ground state) and specific heats scales as ∼T/TF. Hence, the electrons contain negligible thermal energy
compared to the phonons and any amount of additional thermal energy will almost entirely appear in the
phonons. For semiconductors and insulators, due to the sizable band gap, the electronic thermal energy
is even more strongly negligible relative to the phonon thermal energy. Implicit in treating electrons and
phonons via a pair of non-interacting quasiparticle models is the underlying assumption that electrons and
phonons are, to good approximation, uncorrelated. This is consistent with the BO approximation since
the bare electron masses are replaced by electron quasiparticle effective masses which still continue to be
much smaller than the masses of the pseudoions,35 while pseudoion masses are still 103 −105 larger. These
facts reemphasize that taking a product state of electron quasiparticles in the ground state and a truncated
thermal state of phonons is an energetically reasonable approximation to the exact thermal state of the
solid at t = 0, before the reaction takes place. Our initial state construction for vibrations and electrons
can be unjustified when the model of electron quasiparticles breaks down and/or strong electron/phonon
correlations arise; these usually occur in exotic condensed matter phases that are not relevant to the present
scope, or at time t > 0 when the reaction occurs, which is consistent with our choice of evolving the initial
state under the full (beyond-BO) interacting Hamiltonian.
Molecules
Many small to medium-sized molecules have HOMO-LUMO gaps of Egap ≳5eV. For example, electronic
structure calculations yield gaps of CO2 :∼16−20eV and H2O : 14−18eV. Similarly, many small molecules
have a small discrete set vibrational modes of Evib ≳50meV. For example, we have the vibrational modes
CO2 : 83, 165, 291meV and H2O : 198, 453, 466meV [101]. We have again that for typical operating temper-
atures Evib ∼kBT ≪Egap, and so we keep the same product state form as before.
33One might comment that several useful properties of semiconductors come from thermally excited electronic carriers since
the bandgaps are smaller than insulators and molecules. However, the thermal energy of these carriers compared to the ground
state energy is still negligible at typical reaction temperatures and so our approximation should hold well for the initial state.
34For example, bulk copper has TD = 315K and TF = 81600K.
35Here, effective mass refers to either the interaction-renormalized mass in Fermi liquid theory or the band effective mass
for semiconductors/insulators. Typical effective masses for these quasiparticles, which informs their motional properties, are
between m∗∼0.01−10 (in units of the electron mass) (Table 2.3 in [95] for metals and Appendix F in [100] for semiconductors).
64
