Variational Quantum Machine Learning with Quantum Error Detection
Eromanga Adermann,1, ∗Hajime Suzuki,1 and Muhammad Usman2, 3
1Data61, CSIRO, 26 Pembroke Rd, Marsfield, NSW, 2122, Australia
2Data61, CSIRO, Research Way, Clayton, Vic, 3168, Australia
3School of Physics, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Vic, 3010, Australia
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
Quantum machine learning (QML) is an emerging field that promises advantages such as faster
training, improved reliability and superior feature extraction over classical counterparts. However,
its implementation on quantum hardware is challenging due to the noise inherent in these systems,
necessitating the use of quantum error correction (QEC) codes. Current QML research remains
primarily theoretical, often assuming noise-free environments and offering little insight into the
integration of QEC with QML implementations. To address this, we investigate the performance
of a simple, parity-classifying Variational Quantum Classifier (VQC) implemented with the [[4,2,2]]
error-detecting stabiliser code in a simulated noisy environment, marking the first study into the
implementation of a QML algorithm with a QEC code. We invoke ancilla qubits to logically encode
rotation gates, and classically simulate the logically-encoded VQC under two simple noise models
representing gate noise and environmental noise. We demonstrate that the stabiliser code improves
the training accuracy at convergence compared to noisy implementations without QEC. However,
we find that the effectiveness and reliability of error detection is contingent upon keeping the ancilla
qubit error rates below a specific threshold, due to the propagation of ancilla errors to the physical
qubits. Our results provide an important insight: for QML implementations with QEC codes that
both require ancilla qubits for logical rotations and cannot fully correct errors propagated between
ancilla and physical qubits, the maximum achievable accuracy of the QML model is limited. This
highlights the need for additional error correction or mitigation strategies to support the practical
implementation of QML algorithms with QEC on quantum devices.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The integration of quantum computing with machine
learning is predicted to address the increasing demand
for computational power and efficiency across a wide
range of complex tasks within the field of machine learn-
ing [1–5].
QML algorithms aim to exploit the funda-
mental quantum phenomena of superposition and entan-
glement that are unavailable to classical machine learn-
ing algorithms. By harnessing these unique properties of
quantum mechanics, QML offers the potential for com-
putational speed-ups, improved model performance com-
pared to their classical counterparts for certain classes of
problems [6–8], including enhanced pattern recognition
through the use of quantum feature maps that lead to
quantum speed-ups [9, 10], and greater robustness to ad-
versarial attacks exhibited by QML models [11–15].
Given that the vast majority of QML experiments have
thus far been conducted theoretically in ideal classical
simulation environments, it is unclear whether the ad-
vantages predicted so far will be retained when imple-
menting QML algorithms on realistic quantum hardware,
such as on Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum (NISQ) de-
vices [16, 17]. As for all quantum algorithms, one of the
biggest obstacles to the practical implementation of QML
on quantum devices is vulnerability to noise, which can
cause errors and distort computations, leading to mean-
ingless outputs.
∗eromanga.adermann@csiro.au
Numerous strategies have been developed to suppress
and mitigate noise with the goal of achieving quantum
advantage prior to the advent of fully fault-tolerant quan-
tum systems, including approximate algorithms such as
the Quantum Approximate Optimisation Algorithm [18],
heuristic approaches [1] and approximate amplitude en-
coding [13], all of which reduce circuit depths and min-
imise noise accumulation. Noise-induced errors can also
be reduced using virtual distillation [19, 20], which sup-
presses errors by combining multiple noisy copies of
a quantum state, and dynamical decoupling [21–23],
which preserves coherence during computation by apply-
ing carefully-timed pulses to qubits. While these meth-
ods may be applied to QML, and while some have al-
ready proven to be effective in implementations of QML
on a quantum device [13], achieving scalability and fault
tolerance for quantum algorithms ultimately requires the
adoption of Quantum Error Correction (QEC) codes [24].
Early QEC research focused on stabiliser codes [25–
27], and established the Threshold Theorem, which states
that fault-tolerant quantum computation is possible pro-
vided physical error rates in quantum hardware remain
below a finite threshold [28, 29]. Since then, QEC has
expanded to include diverse codes tailored for different
advantages and environments, such as surface codes [30],
Bacon-Shor codes [31] and 3D color codes [32].
Very
recently we have begun to see experimental verification
of the effectiveness of these codes, such as in the land-
mark demonstration of the surface code operating below
its critical threshold on superconducting processors [33].
However, the present challenge with QEC codes is their
high resource overhead, with practical implementations
arXiv:2504.06775v1  [quant-ph]  9 Apr 2025
