The radius R in (46) exactly matches ˆR in the collective field (35) upon converting from matrix
to spacetime units [2]. On the other hand, the action (45) is 14
5 times the action obtained from
the collective field in [3]. We believe that this mismatch is due to the fact that we have not
accounted for the dynamics that fixes p, which will contribute to the action.
We now discuss the regime of validity of the probe D5-brane. We will verify that the probe
brane and supergravity descriptions are complementary, as one might expect. The supergravity
solutions require a large D5-brane charge, so that p ≫1 [2]. The expression for p given above
then gives a new constraint for validity of the supergravity solution, N2/3 ≪Ω2N. This reduces
the lower end of the supergravity validity window in Table 1. Now consider the D5-brane probe.
In our limit, gsp ≪1, the dilaton in the transformed frame is
e
eϕ ≈2pq .
(47)
Remarkably, this expression is independent of gs. For the D5-brane description to be weakly
coupled, with an order one q, we therefore require1 p ≪1 and hence Ω2N ≪N2/3. The range of
validity of the collective field saddle (35), above we recalled that this is N1/4 ≪Ω2N ≪N3/2, is
therefore partitioned into a lower range where it describes a probe D5-brane and a higher range
where it describes a supergravity geometry. This partition has been illustrated in Fig. 1. Both
the D5-brane and the supergravity background match the radius of the collective field saddle.
The brane action (45), like the effective moduli action (9), is positive. It can therefore never
compete with the negative action (2) of the large representations (and corresponding D1-branes).
Just as we noted in §5 for the supergravity backgrounds of highly reducible representations,
the probe D5-brane configuration is also sub-dominant over its domain of validity. The phase
transition to these almost-trivial representations only occurs once the (p, q) fivebranes fragment
into well-separated D-instantons, whereby the large volume of the moduli integral is able to
compete with the negative action (2). We noted in §3 that the fragmentation onsets at Ω2N ≪1.
There is therefore a window 1 ≪Ω2N ≪N1/4 where the collective field is not dominated by
a saddle configuration, but the fragmentation has not yet occurred. It seems likely that this
intermediate regime is described by a fluctuating probe D5-brane.
7
Discussion
The polarised IKKT model exhibits a first order large N phase transition at Ω2N ∼1. The tran-
sition is an exchange of dominance between the maximally irreducible and maximally reducible
su(2) representations. These different representations correspond to different partitions of the N
units of D-instanton charge into D1- and NS5-branes. While each of these partitions has a corre-
sponding supergravity background, in no parameter regime is the dominant representation dual
to a weakly curved background with small dilaton. Above the transition, the spacetime descrip-
tion of the matrices is a single D1-brane that is either non-backreating or quantum fluctuating.
Below the transition the spacetime description is a gas of D-instantons. The D-instantons in
1The constant p need not be integer in the probe D5-brane description.
Clearly, when p ≪1 the probe
D5-brane is no longer related to a (p, q) fivebrane in the cavity by an SL(2, Z) transformation. In this regime
we should think of the probe D5-brane in the transformed cavity, which is a solution in its own right, as the
appropriate spacetime description of the matrix saddle, with the correct geometry and charges.
16
