A Scalable Automatic Model Generation Tool for Cyber-Physical Network Topologies and Data Flows for Large-Scale
Synthetic Power Grid Models
XXX:7
3.2
Modeling Utility Control Centers (UCCs) and Balancing Authorities (BAs)
In synthetic power networks, geographical data is typically associated with substations, whereas
information about UCCs or BAs is often considered administrative and not crucial for power
flow analyses. Nevertheless, the critical role of communication networks connecting substations,
UCCs, and BAs necessitates the inclusion of UCC and BA locations within the analytical model.
The methodology introduced in this paper initially establishes the positions of the UCC and BA.
Subsequently, it integrates the communication model details and allocates data flows to each UCC
and BA.
As the goal is to construct a realistic yet fictional network topology, the location of a UCC is
inferred from the latitude and longitude of the substations. This is achieved through 𝑘-means
clustering, which calculates the centroids of substations. The value of 𝑘, representing the number
of clusters, is determined by user input. For example, in the 500-bus grid model, the number of
UCCs is 4, that is 𝑘= 4. The position of the regulatory agency or BA also needs to be determined.
A BA’s role is to ensure the generated power meets the consumers’ load. A BA also controls the
power grid’s frequency, to keep it stable around the nominal frequency (e.g., 60 Hz in the US). The
model uses a user input for the number of BAs. The location of the BA is decided based on the
clustering of the UCCs. The BA is placed within the clusters by calculating the centroid of the UCC
locations.
The UCCs and BAs contain routers, firewalls, and ethernet switches. Since the UCC oversees its
substations, it employs a SCADA system to remotely monitor and control them. The hosts in the
UCC include an EMS, a Human Machine Interface (HMI), and a dedicated host to exchange data with
the BA. The UCC also has a firewall connected to the corporate network, but this communication
network has not been added to our model. The LAN for all UCCs and BAs is shown in Fig. 2,
irrespective of the choice of topology.
3.3
Modeling Substations
Information on substations is obtained from the power network data. The location is determined
by the latitude and longitude contained in the CSV file. On the communication side, the LAN inside
the substations is defined as indicated in Fig. 2, which is the same for all the substations in the
network. They differ in the number of relays and, hence, the connections of relays to the relay
controller. Each substation is connected to the UCC’s SCADA system or other substations (in the
case of radial/statistics-based topology) through a router and a firewall.
The assumption is that each substation has two LANs. In Fig. 2, considering the transmission or
generation substation, the network on the right of the firewall can be viewed as an administrative
network. It includes two hosts, a local database, and a local web server that stores power system
data. The network on the left of the firewall is the Operational Technology (OT) network with
an outstation host and several relays, depending on the number of buses in the substation. This
network also has a relay controller and one outstation host.
For simplicity, it is assumed that the relay controller combines the functions of a Remote Ter-
minal Unit (RTU) device. The choice of communication link connecting substations to other sites
depends on factors like latency, location, security, and cost. Various technologies, such as cellular
modems, microwave links, and fiber optics, can be employed. Each link connecting the cyber
elements has attributes such as link type, distance, bandwidth, and protocol to represent the diverse
communication methods used by utilities.
