are major: the surface warms approximately as much as under a doubling of the atmospheric CO2
concentration. The warming is not uniform: it is particularly strong in mid-latitudes, while the
tropics warm slightly less and the subtropics almost not at all. In addition, the spatial distribution
of precipitation changes dramatically, becoming more uniform over the globe, with a breakdown
of the maximum associated with the ITCZ and a strong increase in the subtropics.
To unravel the mechanisms connecting the circulation changes to these temperature and precip-
itation changes, we have utilized a forcing/feedback analysis using radiative kernels along with
decompositions of the energy and moisture transport changes into their various dynamical and
thermodynamical components. These analyses reveal that different regions of the planet respond
very differently to the dynamical forcing.
First, the response in the tropics and subtropics is
mostly governed by the moisture changes induced by the collapse of the MMC. This results in
large relative humidity changes (decreasing in the tropics and increasing in the subtropics), which
allow the atmosphere to compensate radiatively the changes in meridional energy transport related
to circulation changes (larger energy convergence in the tropics, smaller in the subtropics). In
other words, the radiative budget changes are dominated by the radiative forcing due to relative
humidity, and feedbacks are small. Hence, in these regions surface temperature changes are also
small. However, precipitation changes are large, and they could affect significantly the regional
water cycle and therefore the biosphere. On the other hand, in the mid- to high-latitudes, the
effects of moisture transport changes are too weak to compensate the energy transport changes,
and the whole atmospheric column as well as the surface must warm to equilibrate the increased
horizontal energy flux convergence. In other words, the temperature response is dominated by the
Planck feedback. On a more technical note, this work demonstrates how insight can be gained
into climate problems where the forcing is dynamic in origin, using various established conceptual
tools (radiative forcing/feedback framework, fixed relative humidity ansatz, dry and moist EBMs,
dynamic-thermodynamic decomposition of moisture transports).
Future work could investigate the robustness of the results presented here, for instance using
different climate models and less idealized setups. In particular, the role of clouds or limited mois-
ture availability at land surfaces are likely to influence the climate responses to forced circulation
changes. It also remains to be better understood under which circumstances the climate of the
Earth could spontaneously undergo such a transition, if at all, and how the two-way thermody-
31
