5 
 
maximum Q factor in the RB3 band is only 7, consistent with the experimentally reported value of 
5 in our previous study54. The significantly higher Q factors in RB2 compared to RB3 indicate a 
low loss of the SPhPs, consistent with a larger real-to-imaginary part ratio of () in RB2. The 
electric field distribution (Fig.1e) corresponding to the antisymmetric SPhPs at two characteristic 
frequencies in the RB2 and RB3 bands (obtained using finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) full-
field simulations) confirms the presence of surface confined modes and indicates a longer SPhP 
propagation length in RB2.  
 
Synthesis of high-quality suspended SrTiO₃ membranes  
For our experiments, we synthesize 30, 50, and 100 nm thick SrTiO3 membranes via atomic-scale 
thin film epitaxy. The epitaxial heterostructures of 30-100 nm SrTiO3 films with a 12 nm water-
soluble Sr3Al2O6 sacrificial layer are grown on single-crystalline (001)-oriented SrTiO3 substrates 
via reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED)-assisted pulsed-laser deposition (PLD) 
(Methods). The synthesis of both SrTiO3 and Sr3Al2O6 layers are controlled in a layer-by-layer 2D 
growth mode, monitored in situ by RHEED (Supplementary Fig.3a). X-ray theta-2theta scans are 
performed on the as-grown heterostructures, revealing that the films are crystalline and free of 
impurity phases (Supplementary Fig.3b). By selectively dissolving Sr3Al2O6 in deionized water, 
SrTiO3 membranes are released from the as-grown substrates and transferred onto a SiO2/Si 
substrate with arrays of 5 μm wide and 1 μm deep trenches, patterned via photolithography and 
reactive ion etching (RIE) (Methods and Fig.2a). The released membranes, which are crack-free 
on the millimeter lateral scale, are suspended across the gap of micro-trenches on SiO2/Si 
substrates (Fig.2b), therefore minimizing interaction of SPhPs with the substrate. Essentially for 
the SINS experiment, the membranes are aligned in such a way that a sharp and straight edge is 
oriented perpendicular to the direction of the trenches as revealed by the SEM imaging (Fig.2c). 
Moreover, atomic force microscopy (AFM) imaging reveals the presence of atomic step terraces, 
indicating that the membrane surface is atomically smooth (Fig.2d). The released membranes 
remain highly crystalline, as confirmed by the X-ray  ;- 2; scans and rocking curve measurements 
showing a full width at half maximum (FWHM) value of 0.15o (Supplementary Figs.3c,d). Notably, 
the lattice parameter extracted from the theta-2theta scans for the SrTiO3 membranes closely 
matches the bulk value, indicating the absence of residual strain and nonstoichiometry in the 
synthesized membranes (Supplementary Note 3). Atomic-resolution scanning transmission 
electron microscopy (STEM) imaging (Fig.2e) further confirms the cubic lattice and high 
crystalline quality of the synthesized membranes. 
 
SINS measurement of the SPhPs in the SrTiO3 membranes 
We then conduct SINS to probe the infrared SPhPs in the suspended SrTiO3 membranes62. In the 
SINS measurement, a broadband infrared synchrotron light source is directed onto a metal-coated 
AFM tip of a scattering-type scanning near-field optical microscopy (s-SNOM) setup, providing 
the necessary momentum for the optical excitation of the phonon polaritons. SINS enables the 
measurement of optical near-field spectra with nanometer resolution across a broad spectral range, 
