10
100
101
100.5
10-0.5
Diffusion Coefficient Temperature Dependence
10
15
20
25
30
40
50
Mean squared displacement
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
0
150
300
450
600
750
900
Time (ps)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
time-local solution
full solution
a)
b)
0.05
0.1
10-0.5
100.5
100
10-1
0.05
0.1
FIG. 7. Temperature dependence of diffusivity. Main figures:
mean square displacement for a mobile particle as a function
of time at different temperatures for U0 = 4 eV, λ = 1/2 ˚A.
In a), we used the time-local solution, while in b) we used the
full solution. In all cases, the initial growth is quadratic, and
later evolution is linear, allowing us to extract the slope 6D
from a fit. Insets: diffusivity D as a function of temperature
demonstrates Arrhenius behavior, where the slope of the fit
is −Ea, and the offset gives D0.
dow, as seen from Fig. 5, it is not computationally fea-
sible to have a sufficiently large system for a full simula-
tion. Therefore, while the particle’s trajectory is contin-
uous, we use periodic boundary conditions to calculate
the forces.
Based on an apparent linear relation between D and
1/ℏΩT on the logarithmic scale for both types of so-
lution, we fit the diffusivities using an Arrhenius form
D = D0e−Ea/ℏΩT and found, with 95% confidence, D0 =
9.8+2.4
−1.9 (23.0+4.4
−3.7) ˚A2/ps and Ea = 42±5 (40±5) meV for
time-local (full) solutions—the latter are close to the es-
timated barrier height of 42.3 meV. This barrier estimate
includes both the particle-framework interaction compo-
nent of 39.4 meV, as well as the framework deformation
energy of 2.9 meV.
VII.
DISCUSSION
A key approximation we made in order to obtain a
time-local expression was setting the maximum phonon
momentum to infinity in Eq. (15), turning the response
kernel into a Dirac delta function. In reality, of course,
the response kernel decays on time-scales similar to the
period of the fastest mode, as seen in Fig. 1(e). Fortu-
nately, because the decay is quite fast, if we want to bear
a greater computational cost in order to more faithfully
capture the finite decay time, we can replace the lower
limit of the integral in Eq. (11) by ∼t−2π/Ωmax. As long
as the framework deflection is small enough to warrant
the r →rH switch on the right-hand side of Eq. (11), we
can obtain a tractable quasi-time-local description.
For our calculations, we used a cubic lattice and
screened Coulomb interactions, for computational con-
venience. However, we chose system parameters to try
to yield insight into a variety of (more complicated) re-
alistic systems. In order to demonstrate diffusion in this
suboptimal lattice structure, we made the framework less
stiff so that its thermal fluctuations could push the mo-
bile particle out of local energy minima more frequently.
Although a softer lattice reduces the applicability of our
time-local approach, where a comparison was possible,
time-local results showed a good agreement with the full
simulations. We expect that stiffer bonds in real ionic
conductors will lead to a greater accuracy of the for-
malism for two main reasons.
First, the recoil kernel
will decay faster, making the Dirac delta function ap-
proximation more accurate. Second, the deflection of the
framework atoms will be suppressed, supporting replac-
ing r →rH on the right hand side of Eq. (11).
In a good ionic conductor, current carriers easily es-
cape energy minima and spend a long time delocalized
before getting trapped again [5]. The energy necessary
for a charge carrier to leave a minimum originates from
the framework’s thermal fluctuations. Unfortunately, be-
cause of the fluctuation-dissipation theorem, increased
thermal forces experienced by the mobile particles are
necessarily accompanied by an increase in drag. Our an-
alytical results indicate that the drag is inversely pro-
portional to the framework density and the cube of the
speed of sound (a measure of the lattice stiffness). For
an infinitely stiff material, the dissipation term vanishes.
Simultaneously, however, the amplitude of the thermal
fluctuations vanishes and the particle never acquires suf-
ficient energy to become delocalized. Conversely, for a
very soft material, both the fluctuations and the drag
forces are large, suppressing the particle’s motion. There-
fore, it is reasonable to assume that, all else being equal,
there is some optimal stiffness that balances the fluctua-
tion and dissipation components, leading to the greatest
diffusivity. Similar logic can be applied to the material
density.
We expect the improved efficiency of our ap-
proach to facilitate explorations of the parameter phase
space to build an intuitive understanding of the role that
these characteristics play in ionic conductivity.
