The third assumption involves the nuclear reaction rates from our stellar evolution code. This,
once again, has little to no impact on the seismic opacity proﬁle, given that the most crucial
parameter concerning energy production is the solar luminosity. To verify this, we use the
NACRE rates70 for Model 4, instead of the rates of Adelberger et al. (2011)69 used in all
other models. Supplementary Fig. 7 demonstrates that the impact on the determined opacity is
minimal.
While nuclear reaction rates do not impact the ﬁnal results, we have the means to assess the
properties of the core of the seismic models. Solar neutrino ﬂux measurements provide insight
into some limitations of our models. In practice, the properties of the solar core become de-
coupled from the opacity proﬁle in the upper radiative layers, as long as the correct luminosity
value is attained by the energy production. As a test case, we create a completely biased pa-
rameterization of the core’s chemical composition, causing the model to be in full disagreement
with measured neutrino ﬂuxes and signiﬁcantly differ in central chemical composition while
still achieving the correct luminosity value. This model lacks physical meaning, but as it re-
produces the correct luminosity value, Supplementary Fig. .9 illustrates that it still reaches the
same opacity value as a more realistic model, demonstrating the robustness of our approach
regarding neutrino ﬂux measurements. However, this simple experiment also underscores the
importance of neutrino ﬂux measurements in resolving degeneracies in modeling the solar core
(see e.g.,106;107;108 and references therein).
The last test we perform to fully determine the robustness of our technique is to use a different
dataset of acoustic oscillations for the full seismic reconstruction procedure. In all reconstruc-
tions so far, we used the dataset from Buldgen et al. (2020)51, namely a combination of Michel-
son Doppler Image (MDI) and Birmingham Solar Oscillation Network (BiSON) data109;110.
Another chosen dataset may alter the Ledoux discriminant inversion and thus the determined
34
