13
the calculated results of the HFF-P3 model in Ref. [44] are included for further comparison. The
work in Ref. [44] provides a comprehensive analysis of nearly all available data for the four possible
isospin channels of KΣ photoproduction using a covariant isobar model. It is highly representative;
according to Ref. [44], among the three models, “the model HFF-P3 shows the best agreement with
the experimental data (lowest χ2) from all but the γn →K0Σ0 channel.” Therefore, the calculated
results of the HFF-P3 model are particularly valuable for comparison with our results.
Overall, the experimental data for both the differential and total cross-sections of the two
reactions are well described. As shown in Table IV, the χ2/Ndata values of the differential cross-
sections are 1.055 for γp →K+Σ0 and 1.519 for γp →K0Σ+, indicating excellent agreement.
Considering the differences in the amount of experimental data for the two reactions, this is a
challenging yet satisfactory outcome, demonstrating the effectiveness of our theoretical model and
the settings of weights. Additionally, from Fig. 3 to Fig. 6, we can also see that contributions
from the s-channel molecule exchanges are essential, indicating that the effects of the molecules
are potentially significant in the γp →KΣ reactions.
Moreover, we will discuss several other
important features of the results below.
For the reaction γp →K+Σ0, contributions from the s-channel ∆∗resonance exchanges are
dominant, as illustrated in detail in Fig. 5(d). In fact, this is a reasonable expectation, which we
will analyze in detail later by comparing the cross-sections and isospin factors of the two reactions.
Regarding the background, as shown in Fig. 5(e), s-channel proton exchange, t-channel K exchange,
u-channel Σ exchange and the interaction current have little contributions. The ground state ∆
exchange has a relatively significant contribution, similar to other ∆∗resonances. And the t-channel
K∗(892) and K1(1270) exchanges provide considerable contributions of differential cross-sections
at the forward angles in the high energy regions, as shown in Fig. 3.
As for the s-channel molecule exchanges, as shown in Fig. 5(b), the N(1875)3/2−exchange pro-
vides the largest contributions among molecules. Alongside N(1535)1/2−, exchanges of these two
molecules contribute across a wide energy range due to their relatively large widths. Together with
contributions from s-channel general resonance exchanges, they help construct the overall structure
of the cross-sections, particularly the peak at W ≈1900 MeV. In addition, N(2080)1/2−& 3/2−
and N(2270)1/2−, 3/2−& 5/2−exchanges are mainly responsible for the peak structures around W
= 2080 and 2270 MeV, respectively, observable at both the backward and forward angular regions
of the differential cross-sections in Fig. 3, as well as in the total cross-section shown in Fig. 5. The
contributions from these molecules with different spins are roughly comparable, as illustrated in
Fig. 5(b), showing no obvious preference for any particular spin.
