Tupd ∼nel1.3, achieving an approximate speedup pro-
portional to nel.
A similar improvement can be applied to the evaluation
of the kinetic energy, which requires the Laplacian of
Ψ, which in turn requires Jacobians of all intermediates
of the neural network, including the orbitals Φ. In ex-
isting neural wave functions, every entry of Φ depends
on every electron, and therefore the Jacobian ∇rΦ is
dense, containing O(nel3) entries. Propagating this Ja-
cobian forward requires O(nel4) operations as detailed
in Sec. 4.4. In contrast, FiRE’s Jacobian is sparse as
depicted in Fig. 1b, yielding an O(nel) speedup, which
we again can see in empirical runtimes in Fig. 2b.
By combining these techniques, all crucial operations
for VMC training are accelerated by O(nel) as sketched
in Fig. 1c and measured in Fig. 2c. Our empirical mea-
surements show that our total runtime per step Ttot
grows only Ttot ∼nel2.3 up to 500 valence electrons,
instead of Ttot ∼nel3.0 for existing neural wavefunc-
tions. When comparing absolute runtimes for a 200 va-
lence electron system, our approach yields 12× to 16×
speedups over existing neural wave functions (Fig. 2d)
and even larger speedups for larger molecules. Notably,
these speedups are on top of the speedups obtained by
the forward Laplacian [13], a recent efficient method to
evaluate the Laplacian of Ψ. Thus, speedups are even
greater compared to the original FermiNet [3, 27] and
Psiformer [10] implementation.
2.2
Accurate relative energies
In the following,
we demonstrate that FiRE not
only accelerates NN-VMC but maintains high accu-
racy in various settings, such as non-covalent binding,
singlet-triplet gaps, or ionization potentials. We test
these tasks on diverse systems, including biochemical
compounds, hydrocarbons, and organometallic com-
pounds.
Non-covalent interactions
When restricting the
range of electron embeddings, a natural question is how
this affects the model’s ability to capture long-range
non-covalent interactions. We investigate this behavior
by comparing FiRE, LapNet [13], and CCSD(T)/CBS
interaction energies for 11 non-covalent interactions
from the S22 dataset [20, 21].
The systems include
hydrogen bonds, dispersion energies, and mixed inter-
actions.
For FiRE, we set the cutoff to c = 5a0 as
determined by our ablation study in App. A. This is
larger than the shortest distance between the interact-
ing molecules but substantially smaller than the size
of each entire complex.
Like Li et al. [13], we com-
pare the energy of the bound system with the energy
of the molecules separated by 10 ˚A.
The errors rel-
ative to CCSD(T) are plotted in Fig. 3a.
It is ap-
parent that FiRE accurately reconstructs the interac-
tion energies, yielding a mean absolute error (MAE) of
0.5 mEh when using energy extrapolation (see App. H)
and 2.3 mEh without any extrapolation, compared to
LapNet’s 2.3 mEh. Thus, even small cutoffs are suffi-
cient for capturing complex long-range interactions.
Among the previous systems, the T-shaped benzene
dimer is a particularly well-studied system where a va-
riety of NN-VMC methods [10, 13, 28] attempted to
reconstruct the experimental results by Grover et al.
[29] and Krause et al. [30]. We compare all NN-VMC
methods to the zero-point vibrational energy (ZPVE)
corrected experimental results and CCSD(T)/CBS [21]
in Fig. 3b. Furthermore, we study the cutoff effect by
evaluating FiRE with c ∈{3a0, 5a0, 7a0}. While previ-
ous works like Ren et al. [28] overestimate the energy
gap significantly, von Glehn et al. [10]’s calculations are
inconsistent in that the generally more accurate Psi-
former significantly underestimates the gap compared
to FermiNet. For FiRE, results with all tested cutoffs
are within the experimental uncertainty. At c = 3a0
and c = 5a0 FiRE probably slightly underestimates the
true interaction energy, yielding 2.9 mEh and 3.6 mEh
respectively. At c = 7a0 FiRE yields 4.6 mEh, which
is in almost perfect agreement with both CCSD(T)
(4.3 mEh) and the ZPVE corrected experimental value
of 4.4 mEh by Grover et al., which is considered to be
the more accurate experiment [28, 31].
Singlet-triplet gaps
Beyond interaction energies,
we investigate the singlet-triplet gaps on a series of in-
creasingly larger n-acenes from naphthalene (C10H8)
to hexacene (C26H16).
Previous work found accu-
rate methods such as CCSD(T)/FPA [32], ACI-DSRG-
MRPT2 [33], and AFQMC [34] to be in disagreement
with experimental results [22–26].
We demonstrate
that larger cutoffs are unnecessary for covalently bound
organic compounds, and c = 3a0 suffices to obtain ac-
curate energies. We obtain the respective states by set-
ting the magnetic spin number sz = N↑−N↓to 0 for
singlet and 2 for triplet states and enforce state purity
with the S+ loss from Li et al. [19]. For naphthalene
and anthracene, energies converged well within 50k
steps, and the remaining molecules were optimized for
100k steps. The resulting state gaps of FiRE, AFQMC,
CCSD(T), and ACI-DSRG-MRPT2, depending on the
system size, are visualized in Fig. 3c whereas Fig. 3d
shows the error relative to the ZPVE corrected exper-
imental results. Notably, CCSD(T) and AFQMC con-
sistently overestimate the energy gap, whereas ACI-
DSRG-MRPT2 underestimates it. Despite the shrink-
ing energy gaps in n, the reference methods’ errors
increase with system size. On the other hand, FiRE
remains closest to the experimental results, exhibit-
ing minimal deviations across all systems.
On aver-
age, FiRE’s MAE to the experimental gap is 1.7 mEh,
whereas CCSD(T), ACI-DSRG-MRPT2, and AFQMC
deviate by 4.6 mEh, 4.1 mEh, and 4.4 mEh, respec-
tively. Interestingly, as seen in our ablations in App. C,
our attention-based Jastrow factor, which introduces
global-ranged correlation without affecting the overall
scaling of FiRE (see 4.2), contributes substantially to
this accuracy.
4
