would the consequences be if it indeed existed. The obvious questions would be what would
be its tension; since by assumption the brane is well-described by a G2 gauge theory at low
energies, the tension should not be large in Planck units. As mentioned above, there is also a
small instanton transition, where 5 M5 branes together can “puff up” to become a G2 gauge
instanton.
We expect that such a transition must be physically possible, since otherwise
the G2 instanton number would be a conserved charge, and therefore, a global symmetry (a
similar argument predicts the transitions recently constructed in [50]). If so, at the small
instanton point one would expect a non-supersymmetric G2 version of the E8 string [49],
which would be very interesting to understand. Also, M2 branes should be able to end on the
brane; the string at the intersection should have chiral degrees of freedom charged under G2.
We can figure out what these should be by compactifying on an inter to get a string whose
global symmetry group would be G2 × G2. At low energies, where the string is described by
a CFT, we therefore expect two copies of a G2 Kac-Moody algebra at some level κ. Using
anomaly inflow [51], we get
κ = 5,
(3.22)
and the corresponding current algebra central charge is
cG2×G2 = 2 · κ dim(G2)
κ + 2
= 20.
(3.23)
The left-moving central charge of the internal CFT is therefore at least 20. Together with the
left and right-moving center of mass degrees of freedom of the string, the central charge is at
least (30,10). Since perturbative ten-dimensional heterotic strings have an central charge of
(26, 15), the G2 string, if it exists, would be non-perturbative. This agrees with our arguments
in the introduction and explains why it was not seen in the classification in [7].
We notice in passing that it is perhaps surprising that (3.23) is integer. For a general
level κ, the current algebra central charge is not an integer; in fact, the central charge is
integer only for
κ = 2, 5 or 12,
(3.24)
and for no other value of κ. Integrability of the central charge is important for things like
modular invariance, or for the CFT to be well defined as a Spin or oriented CFT. If the G2
string was not corresponding to an actual string, there would be no reason to expect that the
central charge is integer-valued. Of course, a fractional central charge might also be fixed by
combining with another internal CFT, such as a minimal model; this is what happens, for
instance, for the CHL string [52]. Nevertheless, the fact that the central charge is integral,
and therefore one does not need to work hard to find an integer central charge, might be
taken as circumstancial evidence for the existence of the string.
Another question is whether the interval compactification with G2×G2 gauge group could
have global anomalies. In [53], it was show that the relevant spin bordism group vanishes;
however, the relevant structure here is a twisted form of string bordism [8, 22], so a global
anomaly might remain. This is an interesting check that could be carried out in the future. At
– 13 –
