Using the Auger resonant Raman variant[17] of the core hole clock technique[18, 19],
we monitor, with sub-femtosecond temporal resolution, the delocalization of a pho-
toexcited Ar 4s electron (Ar 2p3/2 →4s) for Ar@C60 molecules adsorbed as a bulk
film or as a monolayer on a Ag(111) surface. For the latter, we complement the
resonant Auger analysis with normal incidence X-ray standing wave (NIXSW) [20]
measurements, enabling, in parallel, an accurate determination of the position of the
Ar atom above the substrate – the first time, to the best of our knowledge, that the
NIXSW technique has been combined with core hole clock analysis to enable a direct
correlation of charge transfer rate with adsorbate geometry.
We find that the na¨ıve picture of decoupled Ar and fullerene orbitals outlined
above entirely fails to explain the electron delocalization dynamics that occur in the
endofullerene system. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations combined with
the maximum overlap method (MOM)[21, 22] reveal that the photoexcited state is
exceptionally diffuse, with ∼80 % of its density delocalised outside the cage. The
hydrogenic superatom orbital (SAMO) states of fullerenes, first proposed by Feng et
al. [23, 24], are a compelling candidate for the origin of the extensive delocalisation.
Conceptually similar to, but distinct from, Rydberg orbitals, superatomic orbitals[23–
25] are not bound to the carbon atoms of the fullerene cage (unlike the traditional
HOMO, LUMO etc...). Instead, SAMO states arise from the central potential of the
core of the buckyball and are unique to hollow molecules; just as for the hydrogen
atom, SAMO wavefunctions correspond to different orbital angular momentum states
(s, p, d...) Of particular relevance to the interpretation of our core hole clock results,
SAMO wavefunctions extend far beyond the carbon-atom-derived σ and π orbitals, to
the extent that hybridization into metal-like nearly-free-electron bands occurs, with a
substantial bandwidth (∼600 meV) in the bulk fullerite crystal[25]. In the context of
electron transfer, this represents a new and fascinating addition to Hoffmann’s schema:
interaction and delocalization via a coupling of atomic and superatomic orbitals.
Results and Discussion
The core-hole clock (CHC) technique[19, 26–28], first introduced in the early
nineties[18, 29], is an energy-domain alternative to ultrafast pump-probe spectroscopy
that is capable of measuring the rate of electron transfer on time scales ranging from
tens of attoseconds[30] to ∼100 femtoseconds (depending on the lifetime, τCH, of
the particular core hole that is used as the clock[31]). CHC spectroscopy also has
the key advantage of being chemically specific, with all of the attendant spectral
“fingerprinting” advantages; this aspect is pivotal for the work described herein.
A schematic of the CHC protocol used to determine the rate of delocalization of the
photoexcited Ar 4s state in Ar@C60 is shown in Fig. 1(b). Resonant X-ray excitation
from the Ar 2p3/2 level produces an initial core-excited Ar 2p54s1 configuration.
There are then two primary channels for the subsequent decay of that excited state:
(i) a spectator Auger-Meitner process, where the 4s electron does not delocalize before
3
