the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No 833925,
project STAREX). Funding for the Stellar Astrophysics Centre was provided by The Danish National
Research Foundation (Grant DNRF106). JC, CJF, PH and DPK were supported by the U.S. Department
of Energy through the Los Alamos National Laboratory, which is operated by Triad National Security,
LLC, for the National Nuclear Security Administration of U.S. Department of Energy (Contract No.
89233218CNA000001). We acknowledge support by the ISSI team “Probing the core of the Sun and the
stars” (ID 423) led by Thierry Appourchaux.
Author Contributions
G.B. led the project, developed the inversion technique and carried out the analysis. J.C.P. and F.G.
provided the SCO-RCG data and the associated description of the software. P.C. and C.B. provided
the OPAS data and provided the associated description of the software. A.P. provided the OP data and
provided the associated discussions of the various element contributions as well as discussion of the
seismic opacity. C.J.F., J.C., P.H. and D.P.K provided the OPLIB data and the associated description
of the software. A.N. and R.S. provided help with improvements of the Li`ege Stellar Evolution Code
(CLES). J.C.D. provided help with the interpretation of the helioseismic results and the context of the
study. M.D. and Y.L. veriﬁed the claims regarding radiative accelerations with the CESAM2k20 evolu-
tion code. S.V.A., V.A.B. and A.V.O provided the SAHA-S equations of state tables used in CLES and
helped interpret the helioseismic results. C.P. provided help regarding the transport by internal gravity
waves and the related issues with the determination of chemical composition proﬁles. T.C. provided
help with the interpretation of the helioseismic results. P.E. provided help with the transport by the mag-
netic Tayler instability. All authors have contributed to the interpretation of the results and in providing
comments on the papers.
Competing Interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
References
[1] J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, Solar structure and evolution , Living Reviews in Solar Physics 18, 2
(2021).
[2] J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, D. O. Gough, M. J. Thompson, The Depth of the Solar Convection Zone
, ApJ 378, 413 (1991).
[3] S. Basu, H. M. Antia, Seismic measurement of the depth of the solar convection zone , MNRAS
287, 189 (1997).
[4] S. Couvidat, et al., The Rotation of the Deep Solar Layers , ApJ 597, L77 (2003).
[5] R. Howe, Solar Interior Rotation and its Variation , Living Reviews in Solar Physics 6, 1 (2009).
47
