Hybrid machine learning models based on physical
patterns to accelerate CFD simulations: a short guide
on autoregressive models
A. Sengupta1,*, R. Abadía-Heredia1, A. Hetherington1, J. Miguel Pérez1,
and S. Le Clainche1
1ETSI Aeronautica y del Espacio, Universidad Politecnica de Madrid, Plaza Cardenal Cisneros,
3, Madrid, 28040, Spain
*Corresponding author: a.sengupta@upm.es(Arindam Sengupta)
Abstract
Accurate modeling of the complex dynamics of fluid flows is a fundamental chal-
lenge in computational physics and engineering. This study presents an innovative
integration of High-Order Singular Value Decomposition (HOSVD) with Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) architectures to address the complexities of reduced-order
modeling (ROM) in fluid dynamics. HOSVD improves the dimensionality reduction
process by preserving multidimensional structures, surpassing the limitations of Sin-
gular Value Decomposition (SVD). The methodology is tested across numerical and
experimental data sets, including two- and three-dimensional (2D and 3D) cylinder
wake flows, spanning both laminar and turbulent regimes.
The emphasis is also on exploring how the depth and complexity of LSTM ar-
chitectures contribute to improving predictive performance. Simpler architectures
with a single dense layer effectively capture the periodic dynamics, demonstrating
the network’s ability to model non-linearities and chaotic dynamics. The addition
of extra layers provides higher accuracy at minimal computational cost. These addi-
tional layers enable the network to expand its representational capacity, improving
the prediction accuracy and reliability.
The results demonstrate that HOSVD outperforms SVD in all tested scenarios,
as evidenced by using different error metrics. Efficient mode truncation by HOSVD-
based models enables the capture of complex temporal patterns, offering reliable
predictions even in challenging, noise-influenced data sets. The findings underscore
the adaptability and robustness of HOSVD-LSTM architectures, offering a scalable
framework for modeling fluid dynamics.
Keywords: Modal decomposition, deep learning, predictive modeling, forecasting,
reduced order modeling, fluid dynamics.
1
arXiv:2504.06774v1  [physics.flu-dyn]  9 Apr 2025
