10 
 
widespread failure to acknowledge internal dependencies and constraints within the XPS spectrum represents a 
largely unexplored field with significant potential for analytical surface science and implications for many domains of 
applied research. It is quite conceivable that software with reasonably initialized parameters – possibly by means of 
artificial intelligence[40] – will someday automate self-consistent reconstruction of the entire spectrum by combining 
background analysis with a multiple-energies approach, which may alleviate the legacy of decades of erroneous 
scientific literature.  
5. Conclusion 
We have introduced a new depth profiling model for ARXPS based on the self-consistent fitting of all emission peaks. 
This approach increases the reliability of chemical state depth profiling on the one hand and enables the elucidation 
of previously unexplored peak regions by exploiting internal dependencies on the other. The method was 
demonstrated using the example of a natively oxidized thin film of the topological crystalline insulator SnTe. Modeling 
of the ARXPS data resulted in a nominal thickness of the SnO oxide layer of about 2 nm with a broad interface spanning 
over more than 4 nm. The consideration of the entire spectrum enables a richer utilization of available data and a 
more holistic understanding of the surface chemistry, possibly even paving the way towards the complete 
deconvolution of the XPS spectrum. 
Acknowledgement 
The authors would like to thank Prof. Dr. Günter Reiss from Bielefeld University for providing access to his laboratory. 
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme under 
the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No 860060 “Magnetism and the effect of Electric Field” (MagnEFi). G.S. 
gratefully acknowledges funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation program grant agreement No. 863823 MATTER. Further, parts of this project have received 
funding by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) in Project-ID SCHI 1010/12-1. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have 
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 
Author contributions 
B.B., K.V., and M.W. derived and implemented the models; I.E., J.S., M.W., M.G., N.F., and O.K. performed 
measurements; N.B.N. prepared the samples; B.B. and M.W. did the data analysis; A.H., G.J., G.S., J.W., M.W., and T.K. 
planned and supervised the experimental work; M.W. wrote the manuscript with the assistance of all co-authors; B.B., 
A.H., G.J., G.S., J.W., M.W., and T.K. revised the manuscript. 
Data availability statement 
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. 
