Entropy 2024, 26, 612
79 of 84
The solution (231)–(235) (and its c2 < 0 counterpart) corresponds to an expand-
ing/contracting space–time of a circle with N bodies at equal time-varying proper separa-
tions from one another around the circle. The solution for the spatial metric is equivalent to
that of single-particle solution [127] upon rescaling L →L/N and M →M/N. However,
this rescaling equivalence does not hold for the remaining functions. For Λe = 0, the space–
time expands but perpetually decelerates due to the presence of the point masses. If Λe < 0,
the proper circumference of the circle expands from zero to some maximal size and then
recontracts. The most interesting behaviour occurs if Λe > 0. In this case, the cosmological
expansion opposes the decelerating effects due to the point masses and the space–time
can expand from zero size to some ﬁnite value, evolve from some minimal/maximal
circumference to a maximal/minimal size, or undergo perpetual oscillation.
A generalization of this solution to one in which there are an even number of bodies
with a charge alternating in sign but equal in magnitude has also been obtained [129].
This solution, and its neutral counterpart in (231)–(235), almost certainly describes an
unstable equilibrium, since the masses are all equal and the particles are evenly separated.
Perturbations from equilibrium would be interesting to investigate, as they would form
model inhomogeneous self-gravitating cosmological systems. This remains an interesting
avenue for further study.
10. Conclusions
Relativistic one-dimensional self-gravitating systems provide an interesting (and in
the view of this author) undervalued theoretical laboratory for studying a number of
physical effects of which rather little is known. These include exact two-body motion, static
N-body equilibrium, relativistic thermodynamics and statistical mechanics, relativistic
chaos, and the interplay between gravity, electromagnetism, and cosmological evolution.
I shall close this review with a brief overview of seven different research avenues that
warrant further study.
1.
Relativistic Chaos at High Energy
All studies of relativistic three-body chaos have been at energies below the cross-
sectional maximum of the potential VR in (177). The regions of chaos in the R system
are distortions of their N system counterparts, but do not increase. It would be of
great interest to know what the chaotic behaviour is for energies larger than the
cross-sectional maximum, where very strong relativistic effects are present. Will the
chaotic regions in the Poincaré plots grow or shrink? Such studies would provide
further insights into the effects of strong gravity on chaotic systems.
2.
Four-Body Chaos
The largest value of N in the N-body problem for which equipotential surfaces can be
visualized is N = 4. As noted in Section 7, only the N system has been investigated for
its motions and chaotic behaviour. The R system has yet to be investigated along these
lines. It is conceivable that qualitatively new features will be observed in this case.
3.
Fully Relativistic Statistical Mechanics
The scope for exploration here is very broad. Only the statistical properties of the neu-
tral pN system have been studied. The effects of charge and cosmological expansion
are not known, and a full study of the statistical properties of the R system remain
to be carried out. This latter problem will be quite technically challenging, since the
distribution functions cannot be analytically integrated. Some novel blend of analytic
and numerical methods will need to be employed.
4.
Circular N-Body Dynamics
A novel feature of the N-body ROGS is that it admits two distinct spatial topologies:
linear and circular. In the latter case, there are no dynamical solutions for N ≥2.
These will likely need to be found numerically. It would be particularly interesting to
investigate three-body chaos in this setting to see what effects circular topology has
on chaotic phenomena.
5.
The two-dimensional N-body problem
