4
speciﬁed unit cell. The synthesis problem is formed as the
minimization of the cost function:
F =
X
n

|Eff(θn)|
max
n {|Eff(θn)|} −
|Eff
des(θn)|
max
n {|Eff
des(θn)|}

2
,
(8)
where |Eff
des| is the desired ﬁeld pattern. The expression in (8)
quantiﬁes the difference in the normalized ﬁeld pattern values
over all angles, and its minimization guarantees good matching
between the obtained radiation pattern and the desired one.
Two types of constraints are included in the optimization
problem. First, the imaginary part of the surface impedances
are constrained within a range of realizable values Xn ∈
[Xmin, Xmax], as obtained from the unit cell simulation for
the respective range of the varactor’s capacitance. Secondly,
supplementing the losses of the unit cell into the surface
impedance through the real part Rn allows to predict the total
reﬂected power Prad. Thus, a constraint is included with regard
to the minimum power efﬁciency ηmin:
ηp = Prad
Pmin
> ηmin,
(9)
where Pinc is the total normal incident power to the RIS. As
expected, if the value ηmin is selected to be unrealistically
high, the radiation pattern matching of the optimized solution
degrades. Thus, the value ηmin is modiﬁed gradually until
a good compromise between power efﬁciency and pattern
matching is achieved for each presented case. In general,
the beneﬁt of incorporating losses in the framework and
constraining them through Eq (9) is to avoid convergence to
any solutions that exhibit unnecessarily high losses.
The optimization consists of two steps. In the ﬁrst one, the
built-in genetic algorithm optimization in MATLAB is utilized
to arrive at a quasi-random starting point. Subsequently, this
starting point is provided to a gradient-descent optimization
that converges to the ﬁnal solution. Due to the randomness of
the ﬁrst step, the process is repeated 10 times and the solution
with the lowest value for the cost function is selected. For
simple beamsteering cases, a starting point could have been
deﬁned analytically based on a phase gradient. On the other
hand, for beamforming cases that an intuitive selection of a
good starting point may not be possible, the genetic algorithm
could have been used as the sole optimization method at the
expense of higher computational time. The latter is the reason
for utilizing the genetic algorithm with only few generations
and the sole purpose of getting initial points for the faster
gradient-descent optimization.
Solving for the induced currents at every optimization
iteration is greatly accelerated by eliminating the unknowns
¯Jg and ¯Jv from Eq. (3) and formulating a linear system of size
Nw × Nw that calculates solely the currents ¯Jw. This method
was described in [23], and it is usually referred to as Kron’s
reduction (or node elimination) in power systems analysis [33].
Additionally, providing a semi-analytical gradient for the cost
function, as also suggested in [23], speeds up the gradient-
descent optimization, compared to using ﬁnite differences. A
single repetition of the two-stage optimization for an RIS
comprising 30 meta-wires segmented into 5 basis functions
Fig. 2. Tunable unit cell: (a) Top view. (b) Perspective view. A varactor is
incorporated at each cell and it is reverse biased through a voltage line at the
bottom layer and vias that connect to the voltage line and the ground plane.
each (Nw = 150) takes on average around 48 seconds in a
standard desktop computer.
III. UNIT CELL DESIGN AND CHARACTERIZATION
The unit cell of the RIS is depicted in Fig. 2 on top and
perspective views. The top layer takes the form of a tapered
copper wire that is loaded with a varactor at its center and with
a static capacitance at the edges (formed between the adjacent
cells in the x-direction). The center frequency of operation
is 5GHz, and the unit cell dimensions (in terms of center
wavelength λ) are λ/4 × λ/4.6. The subwavelength spacing
in the y-direction is selected on purpose in order to be able
to excite surface waves with high spectral ky components,
that are necessary for beamshaping, as will become evident
in the next section. A sparser design degrades the metrics
of the achievable radiation patterns for some beamshaping
examples. Similarly, a sparser periodicity in the x-direction
compromises the accuracy of the homogenization of the loaded
wires into impedance sheets, and decreases the tunability of
the cell’s surface impedance for a given range of the varactor’s
capacitance. The above aspects, together with the prototype’s
cost that increases with a higher density of cells, were con-
sidered to arrive at the unit cell’s dimensions. The gallium
arsenide MACOM MAVR-000120 varactor is employed in the
design, providing a tunable capacitance from around 0.18pF
(for a reverse bias voltage of 14V) to 1.2pF (for zero bias
voltage). The lumped resistance is selected to be 3Ωbased on
a previous fabricated RIS design. This approximate value will
be validated experimentally in Sec. V-B.
The RIS stack-up comprises two Rogers TMM4 substrates
(εr = 4.7, tan(δ) = 0.002) of thickness h = 1.9mm that are
bonded together with the use of Panasonic R1650V prepreg
of thickness 0.1mm. Therefore, the total RIS thickness is
approximately htot ≈3.9mm (≈0.065λ). The top impedance
layer includes the varactor-loaded cells, the middle layer serves
as a ground plane, whereas the bottom layer hosts the bias
lines that carry the DC bias voltage. The biasing is achieved
with vias that connect alternately at the ground plane and the
bias line through an oversize hole in the ground plane. The
polarity of the varactors in a single meta-wire also alternates so
that all varactors are reverse-biased through the corresponding
bias line in the bottom layer. Lastly, two 100kΩresistors are
included to dissipate any RF currents induced on the bias lines.
