Symmetry breaking in chaotic many-body quantum systems at finite temperature
Angelo Russotto,1, 2 Filiberto Ares,1, 2 and Pasquale Calabrese1, 2, 3
1SISSA, via Bonomea 265, 34136 Trieste, Italy
2INFN Sezione di Trieste, via Bonomea 265, 34136 Trieste, Italy
3The Abdus Salam International Center for Theoretical Physics, Strada Costiera 11, 34151 Trieste, Italy
(Dated: April 9, 2025)
Recent work has shown that the entanglement of finite-temperature eigenstates in chaotic quantum
many-body local Hamiltonians can be accurately described by an ensemble of random states with an
internal U(1) symmetry. We build upon this result to investigate the universal symmetry-breaking
properties of such eigenstates. As a probe of symmetry breaking, we employ the entanglement asym-
metry, a quantum information observable that quantifies the extent to which symmetry is broken
in a subsystem. This measure enables us to explore the finer structure of finite-temperature eigen-
states in terms of the U(1)-symmetric random state ensemble; in particular, the relation between
the Hamiltonian and the effective conserved charge in the ensemble. Our analysis is supported by
analytical calculations for the symmetric random states, as well as exact numerical results for the
Mixed-Field Ising spin-1/2 chain, a paradigmatic model of quantum chaoticity.
Introduction.— Over the past few years, there has been
a growing interest in characterizing typical eigenstates of
generic many-body quantum Hamiltonians. This interest
is motivated by various long-standing puzzles in statisti-
cal quantum mechanics, such as the emergence of chaos
and the thermalization of isolated many-body quantum
systems [1–6]. At the heart of these questions lies ran-
dom matrix theory, as in the Eigenstate Thermalization
Hypothesis (ETH) [3, 7].
The statistical properties of
the eigenstates of chaotic many-body Hamiltonians are
usually well described by ensembles of random matrices,
regardless of the model’s microscopic details. For exam-
ple, a defining feature of quantum chaos is the emergence
of the Wigner-Dyson statistics for the energy level spac-
ings [8–10]. The entanglement entropy [11–23] and the
spectral form factor [24–27] also follow the universal ran-
dom matrix predictions.
However, the application of random matrix theory is
generally limited to mid-spectrum eigenstates — those
with maximal entropy that correspond to infinite tem-
perature in the thermodynamic limit.
The identifi-
cation of random matrix ensembles that account for
finite-temperature eigenstates is an open active prob-
lem. Different works have studied the structure of finite-
temperature eigenstates [28–30]. In the novel paper [31]
(see also [32–34]), it is shown that the entanglement en-
tropy statistics of the finite-temperature eigenstates of
local chaotic spin chains can be accurately described by
pure random states that are endowed with a U(1) lo-
cal conserved charge. The crucial point is that energy
conservation combined with the locality of interactions
induces an approximate conserved charge in the eigen-
states. In this case, the charge density of the random
state ensemble is related to the energy density in the
spin chain.
In the present work, using the setup of Ref. [32], we
show that the same U(1)-symmetric random state en-
semble further describes the symmetry-breaking proper-
ties of finite-temperature eigenstates.
To this end, we
employ the entanglement asymmetry, a new observable
based on entanglement entropy that measures how much
a symmetry is broken in a subsystem. The entanglement
asymmetry is a very useful tool to monitor the time evo-
lution of (broken) symmetries after quantum quenches
and observing the quantum Mpemba effect [35–47], in-
cluding random circuits [48–53] and experiments [54]. It
has also been studied in field theories [55–62], Haar ran-
dom states [63–65], and, from a different perspective, in
quantum information resource theory [66–68].
The entanglement asymmetry neatly detects the effec-
tive conserved U(1) charge induced in the energy eigen-
states by the locality of interactions. This allows us to
determine the charge that generates the U(1) symme-
try of the ensemble. Moreover, we study the symmetry-
breaking for other U(1) local charges and compare with
the prediction of the symmetric random states. Fig. 1
summarizes our main results. The symbols are the entan-
glement asymmetry of all the eigenstates of the chaotic
Mixed-Field Ising spin-1/2 chain for a non-conserved
charge orthogonal (in the sense we will later specify) to
the one that is effectively conserved. Their asymmetry is
calculated numerically in a chain of L = 16 spins for two
different subsystems of ℓA = 4 and 11 contiguous spins.
The average of this asymmetry in the U(1)-symmetric
random state ensemble can be calculated analytically and
its prediction is represented by the continuous curves in
Fig. 1. We find a remarkable agreement. In contrast, the
prediction (dashed lines) using the standard Haar ran-
dom state ensemble, which does not have any symmetry,
captures only the behavior of mid-spectrum eigenstates.
In the rest of the paper, we first briefly review the
main ideas and setup of Ref. [32], then introduce the en-
tanglement asymmetry, and finally study it in both the
U(1)-symmetric random state ensemble and the Hamil-
tonian system, comparing the two.
Locality in quantum chaotic systems and relation
to U(1)-Haar ensemble.—
Let
us
consider
a
one-
dimensional many-body quantum system that can be di-
vided into two spatial regions A and B. We suppose that
this system is described by a locally interacting Hamilto-
arXiv:2504.06146v1  [quant-ph]  8 Apr 2025
