6
Discussion
We investigated the entanglement features of a massless fermionic field outside a Schwarzschild black hole in various states,
namely the Hartle-Hawking-Israel (HHI), Unruh, and Boulware states. The entanglement observed by an observer using
a detector depends on several parameters and in order to understand what an observer measures., we employed the
entanglement harvesting protocol to study the correlations present in a massless fermionic field, the results of which are
summarized below.
As a preliminary to entanglement harvesting, we first analyzed the transition rate of the detector. Specifically, for
a static Unruh–DeWitt (UDW) detector coupled to the scalar density of a massless fermionic field in the HHI state,
the transition rate is found to follow a Planckian distribution as expected.
A similar analysis for the Unruh state
yields the Helmholtz free energy of a thermal bath of fermionic or bosonic fields, depending on whether the 2-bein of
the chosen interaction Hamiltonian represents 2-velocity of the local Lorentz frame preserving conformal symmetry or
is selected based on the requirement that its 2-velocity match the UDW detector’s velocity respectively. Presence of
the anti-Hawking effect is found to be dependent on the choice of the interaction Hamiltonian through the 2-bein. If
conformal symmetry is broken by the choice of the 2-bein of the interaction Hamiltonian to move with the detector,
the anti-Hawking effect arises, reaching its maximum for the HHI state. In particular, for static detectors, the weak
anti-Hawking effect intensifies as one approaches the horizon, while for freely falling UDW detectors, the anti-Hawking
effect occurs away from the horizon and vanishes near it. In contrast, we found that a static detector with conformal
preserving 2-bein doesn’t experience any anti-Hawking effect.
Using the resolvent technique, we demonstrated that for two sufficiently separated disjoint regions, the mutual in-
formation is minimized in the HHI state and maximized in the Boulware state, provided that the separation between
the intervals satisfies specific conditions stated in Appendix E. The mutual information between two disjoint regions is
known to be invariant under an arbitrary Weyl transformation. If we vary the proper distance between two disjoint
intervals at a fixed Painleve-Gulstrand time slice, d(rA, rB), outside the horizon, then we get two peaks in the mutual
information calculated using the resolvent technique. The two peaks correspond to the position where both regions are
almost null-separated. The distance between two peaks decreases as one keeps one of the two intervals closer and closer
to the horizon (Fig. 2). One can also control the distance between peaks by varying δ and δ1, which determine the
temporal extent of the spatially pointlike intervals chosen in the resolvent technique calculation. To these two disjoint
intervals, when we couple two UDWs and perform entanglement harvesting, we get a single broad peak in the mutual
information. This can be interpreted as, although the detector is spatially point-like, it is switched on with a Gaussian
switching and hence the temporal extent in the case of UDW and resolvent technique intervals are not the same. The
width of the peaks in all three states is larger when detector A is far from the horizon compared to when it is near the
horizon. This can be interpreted as the effects of vacuum polarization and gravitational redshift being large near the
horizon and as a result, the peak dies down quickly. The relative ordering of observed correlations in the UDWs for
the three vacua, which matches with those in resolvent technique calculations, suggest that Hawking radiation diminishs
entanglement.
Next, we fixed the distance between two detectors and varied the proper distance from the horizon of the detector
closest to the horizon at a fixed Painleve Gulstrand time slice. The relative ordering of correlation measures for different
states for the case of 2-bein moving with the static or freely falling UDW is also found to be the reverse of that
of the conformal symmetry-preserving case. These observations can be interpreted as the anti-Hawking effect enhances
entanglement, since anti-Hawking effect is absent in the conformal symmetry-preserving case. While the relative ordering
of the correlation measures for the case of 2-bein moving with the static or freely falling UDW suggests that the Hawking
radiation diminishes the entanglement. More interestingly, for static detectors with static 2-bein, although some decay
of entanglement measures is found near the horizon for all states, we do not get a complete death of entanglement near
the horizon. However, the decay is larger, with the conformal symmetry obeying two-point function W State
ψ,c
, and the
system of UDWs, in this case, harvests no entanglement near the horizon in HHI and Unruh states. We further confirm
that the freely falling detectors don’t suffer the phenomenon of entanglement decay near the horizon. In contrast, the
harvested entanglement monotonically increases as one moves towards the horizon in the case of freely falling detectors.
This behavior is shown to match with the resolvent technique calculation.
This suggests that another cause of the
entanglement decay for the static detectors near the horizon is the local gravitational acceleration felt by detectors.
We further showed that the near-horizon entanglement features of the HHI vacuum for a static observer, using both
the resolvent technique in QFT as well as t since the DW numerical calculations, are identical to those for a uniformly
accelerating observer in Minkowski vacuum in 1+1 dimensions. Entanglement features beyond the event horizon shall
remain a topic for future investigation. Here, we restricted our analysis to 1+1 dimensions throughout this manuscript.
However, it would be interesting to extend our study to higher dimensions and explore spacetimes beyond Schwarzschild.
29
