1
Introduction
The study of non-local boxes arose from the study of quantum entanglement
and from the question: “why isn’t entanglement more non-local?”. Corre-
lations stronger than quantum entanglement, but that still do not allow for
instantaneous transmission of information have been known to exist [18].
1.1
Preliminaries
The concept of non-local boxes is inspired by that of quantum systems. They
are closely related as a quantum system can be viewed as a non-local box,
where the choice of measurement is the input and the outcome of the measure-
ment is the output, and a non-local box can be viewed as a super-quantum
system. Of course, not all boxes as deﬁned under are non-local: they can be
local, quantum, or super-quantum.
Deﬁnition 1. A bipartite correlated box (or box) is a device with two ends,
one of which is held by Alice, the other one by Bob. Each end has the follow-
ing input-output behaviour: given input x on Alice’s side (respectively y on
Bob’s side), the box will output a (respectively b) according to some probability
distribution P(a, b|x, y) where x, y, a, b ∈{0, 1}.
Throughout this paper, we will refer to boxes by their probability dis-
tributions.
For convenience, we will also write P(ab|xy) and P(a, b|x, y)
interchangeably.
It is important to note that boxes are atemporal, meaning that the output
comes out on one side as soon as an input is given. Was this not the case
(if, for example, the box waits for both inputs before giving outputs), then
one could transmit information to the other party by deliberately delaying
it’s input.
Quantum entanglement does not allow for faster-than-light communica-
tion. This property is called non-signalling. Likewise, we are only interested
in studying boxes that are non-signalling, which means Alice cannot learn
anything from Bob’s input by looking at her output.
Deﬁnition 2. A box P is non-signalling if the sum over Bob’s inputs of the
joint probability distribution is equal to Alice’s marginal distribution and vice
3
