Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Human Activity Recognition using RGB-Event based Sensors
5
lower computational complexity, higher performance, and better physical
interpretability compared with existing models.
• We establish a benchmark on the HARDVS 2.0 dataset, offering a
robust platform for future works to compare. Extensive experiments con-
ducted on HARDVS 2.0, along with other widely used benchmark datasets,
comprehensively demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed model.
A preliminary version of this work was published at the international con-
ference, i.e., Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI)
2024. Compared with the conference version [33], we make the following
extensions: 1). A Novel Large-Scale Multi-Modal HAR Dataset: The
previous conference version focused on human action recognition using pure
event streams. In this paper, we extend this work to multi-modal scenarios and
release the entire multi-modal dataset to further support research in this area.
2). New Multi-modal Heat Conduction-based Visual Framework: In
the previous conference version, we proposed a Transformer-based approach for
spatio-temporal modeling of event streams. In this paper, we introduce a novel
multi-modal HAR backbone network inspired by physical heat conduction,
which achieves higher recognition accuracy, lower computational complexity,
and enhanced physical interpretability. 3). A Policy Routing Based Fusion
Method: We propose a novel policy network and routing mechanism based
fusion method, which alleviates the unbalanced multi-modal issue. 4). More
Extensive Experiments: We have conducted more comprehensive experi-
ments to validate the effectiveness of our proposed method. Our approach has
seen substantial improvements compared to its initial version.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In section 2, we review the
related works based on event based HAR, RGB-Event based HAR, Biology
and Physics Inspired Models, and Benchmark Datasets for HAR. In section 3,
we introduce our proposed HAR framework using RGB-Event sequences based
on physical heat conduction. In section 4, we describe the collection protocols
and statistical analysis of the HARDVS 2.0 dataset. After that, in section 5,
we conduct experiments to evaluate our proposed HAR framework from both
quantitative and qualitative analysis perspectives. Finally, we conclude this
paper and propose possible research directions as our future works in section 6.
2 Related Work
In this section, we give a brief review of the event Camera-based Human
Activity Recognition Methods, RGB-Event based HAR, Biology and Physics
Inspired Models, and event benchmark datasets for HAR. More works about
HAR and event cameras can be found in the following surveys [4, 5, 34].
2.1 Event based HAR
Human activity recognition tasks typically rely on traditional RGB cameras
to achieve high-performance classification. However, the effect often decreases
