issues, and will lead to experimental studies which hopefully provide a better understanding of
the situation, such that the NNLO predictions can be used to their fullest extent.
A similar issue with a mismatch between experiment and theory arises in the case of
identified photons that require an isolation procedure to distinguish the prompt production
from the overwhelming background. Differences in a fixed-cone isolation versus a smooth-cone
isolation [351, 352] have been the subject of many studies which assessed the impact to be at
the few-percent level [203,353–356]. Precision phenomenology based on processes with external
photons thus demands for an extension of the fragmentation contribution to NNLO that has
been achieved recently [151,152].
Polarised predictions for gauge-boson production
The increased experimental precision not only enables a detailed study of the gauge-boson
production processes through cross sections and differential distributions, but also the access
to the polarization states of the gauge bosons. To this end, the longitudinal polarization is of
particular interest due to its intimate connection to the mechanism of electroweak symmetry
breaking and how weak gauge bosons acquire their masses. As such, the study of the longitudinal
component of massive gauge bosons not only allows to scrutinize the Standard Model at a deeper
level, but also may reveal hints for new physics that lies beyond.
In this context, the past few years has seen great progresses in polarized predictions for a
plethora of LHC processes. While most work has focused on NLOQCD corrections for di-boson
production [357,358], significant progress on the respective NLOEW corrections have been made
recently [359–363]. Electroweak corrections entail significant complications due to the need for
a consistent isolation of the resonant (on-shell) parts only for which polarizations are properly
defined. Such calculations thus rely on pole approximations with power corrections that can
e.g. be induced by the details of the mappings to project onto on-shell states. These efforts
at NLO accuracy recently culminated with the NLOQCD +NLOEW corrections to vector-boson
scattering in the same-sign WW channel [364]. NNLOQCD corrections are so far limited to a
handful of processes: diboson production [365] and W + j [366]. More recently, also NLOQCD
corrections matched to a parton shower have became available for all di-boson processes [367].
Finally, while these calculations have been exclusively obtained with private Monte Carlo
codes, there have been efforts in enabling such calculations within general-purpose Monte Carlo
programs.
Progress was made at LO including parton-shower corrections within the Mad-
Graph5_aMC@NLO framework [368] as well as within the Sherpa framework, where also
approximate NLOQCD corrections can be incorporated consistently with the shower [369].
3.1
Higgs boson associated processes
An overview of the status of Higgs boson associated processes is given in Table 2.
In the
following, the acronym Heavy Top limit (HTL) is used to denote the effective field theory in
the mt →∞limit. In this limit, the Higgs bosons couple directly to gluons via the following
effective Lagrangian
Leff = −1
4Ga
µνGµν
a
 
CH
H
v −CHH
H2
2v2 + CHHH
H3
3v3 + . . .
!
,
(3)
whose matching coefficients known up to fourth order in αs [370–377]. The HTL results are often
used to correct complete QCD results available at a lower perturbative order. We will generically
indicate this combination of HTL and QCD results using the notation NxLOHTL ⊗NyLOQCD.
One strategy used for this combination is to compute a multiplicative K-factor in the HTL that
is then applied to the complete QCD result. Alternatively, the HTL K-factor can be used to
14
