r fixed) causes Ry to decrease, as a result of both the LFC increasing and the pCAPE
decreasing. Similarly, Ry increases with r (assuming bsurf and RHsurf remain fixed),
as a result of both the LFC decreasing and the pCAPE increasing with increasing
radiative cooling. Figure 6 shows how the moisture in the basic state changes under
climate change, characterised by precipitation term (P, defined in Section 2.3) and
the LCL (zs) of the basic state: P increases in response to increases in all of the
climate parameters (r, bsurf & RHsurf), however zs decreases with increasing r and
RHsurf, but increases with increasing bsurf. Considering both Figures 5 & 6 together,
it follows that the r is the most important parameter (for fixed Ra) in affecting the
degree of stability in the model (characterised by Ry), however bsurf and RHsurf are
key parameters for affecting the amount of moisture is in the system, since changes
in r does not affect the value of P or zs nearly as much as changes in RHsurf or bsurf.
The response of the moist instability in the system to different climate change
scenarios can be considered by examining the response of Ry to an increase in both
the radiative cooling rate and the surface temperature, together. Recall that the
typical climate change scenario involves increasing both r from 1 × 10−5 to 2 × 10−5
and bsurf from 0.0 to 0.1, assuming that RHsurf remains constant. In Figures 5 and 6,
the typical climate change scenario therefore involves going from the black solid line
to the red dashed line, keeping the surface relative humidity fixed. Under the typical
climate change scenario, Figure 5 shows that Ry increases, and Figure 6 shows P and
zs also increase (for the basic state). both P and zs increase indicating that climate
change causes increased levels of moist instability (in the basic state). Under the
typical climate change scenario, the increased moist instability is dominated by effect
of r on Ry, whereas the increased levels of moisture are primarily associated with the
effect of bsurf on P. The basic state analysis therefore indicates that there will be more
intense moist convection under climate change, due to increased moist instability and
precipitation (over a smaller vertical region) in the basic state environment.
4.
Linear Stability Analysis
Analysis of linear stability can been used to provide initial insight into numerical
(non-linear) simulations. In the textbook Chandrasekhar (1961), linear stability is
analysed for dry classical Rayleigh-B´enard convection, to find the critical Rayleigh
number and the corresponding wavenumber. For Rayleigh numbers greater than
the critical Rayleigh number, convection sets in. Vallis et al. (2019) found that for
Rayleigh numbers that are just slightly greater than critical Rayleigh number, a
series of steady convective updraughts are produced in the non-linear simulations.
For dry Rayleigh-B´enard convection, as the Rayleigh number is increased the regime
of convection shifts from conductive (Ra < Rac) to steady (for Ra > Rac), to
periodic, before becoming turbulent (see Waleffe et al. (2015)). Finding the critical
Rayleigh number (which varies with the parameters) allows one to compare non-linear
simulations for different parameter values by running these simulations at the same
supercriticality (e.g. 5 × Rac). The critical wavenumber also provides an initial
indication of how the width of the plumes may respond to change in the parame-
ters. Therefore, we perform a linear stability analysis for the Rainy-B´enard model here.
We set up the eigenvalue problem by perturbing the basic state, b = ¯b + b′,
and assuming the linear wave ansatz, b′ = ˆb(z)ei(kxx+kyy−σt). The model equations
17
