A&A proofs: manuscript no. main
4.75
5.00
5.25
5.50
5.75
6.00
6.25
6.5
log (L / L⊙)
–9
–8
–7
–6
–5
log ( ˙M / (M⊙yr–1))
↓UV wind lines very weak ↓
typical error
OB-stars with log g ≥3.8
O-stars with log g < 3.8
B-stars with log g < 3.8
partially stripped stars
WR binaries
–1.00
–0.75
–0.50
–0.25
0.00
log Γe
–9
–8
–7
–6
–5
log ( ˙M / (M⊙yr–1))
↓UV wind lines very weak ↓
typical error
OB-stars with log g ≥3.8
O-stars with log g < 3.8
B-stars with log g < 3.8
partially stripped stars
WR binaries
Fig. 2. Mass-loss rates of SMC stars as a function of luminosity (left) and Eddington parameter (right). Blue squares are OB-type stars with
surface gravity values log(g/(cm s−2)) ≥3.8 (i.e., main-sequence stars), light-blue circles are O-type stars with log(g/(cm s−2)) < 3.8 (i.e.,
O-giants and O-supergiants), red circles are B-type stars with log(g/(cm s−2)) < 3.8 (i.e., B-supergiants), yellow plus symbols are the post-
interaction binaries recently discovered in the SMC, and cyan star symbols the Wolf-Rayet binaries. Note that for stars with mass-loss rates below
log( ˙M/( M⊙yr−1)) ≲−8.5 the wind features in the UV get very weak, introducing larger uncertainties in their mass-loss rate estimates.
3.2. Mass-loss rates of radiation-driven stellar winds
To further quantify the mass-loss rates of hot stars, we consider
a sample of OB and WR stars of the Galaxy, LMC, and SMC
(see Sect.2.2). We find that the mass-loss rates of hot massive
stars in all three galaxies also follow a power law when plotted
against the Eddington parameter Γe (see Fig. 3). While there is a
considerable scatter in the sample, which we discuss below, the
slope in log( ˙M) ∝log(Γe) can be treated as universal for all three
galaxies.
The uncertainties on the measured stellar and wind param-
eters are not provided for some spectral analyses considered in
this work. However, since the uncertainties in the measurements
of the stellar and wind parameters are comparable among dif-
ferent spectroscopic analyses (Sander et al. 2024), we decided
to apply a uniform error estimate for the stars in our sample
based on the typical error margins reported in the various lit-
erature studies included in our sample. For metallicity, we as-
sume a precision of 10 %, accounting for potential chemical gra-
dients within the galaxies. By performing a χ2-fit to the complete
dataset that considers the uncertainties in ˙M, Γe, and ZFe-group, we
derived a universal relation for the mass-loss rates of hot stars as
log( ˙M/( M⊙yr−1)) = + 4.27(±0.13) log(Γe)
+ 0.86(±0.09) log(ZFe-group/Z⊙, Fe-group)
−3.92(±0.08).
(5)
The lower panels of Fig. 3 present the residuals between
the empirically derived mass-loss rates and our fitted scal-
ing relation (Eq. (5)), along with histograms showing 1σ.
The relations root-mean-square value of the residuals is
∆log( ˙M/( M⊙yr−1)) = ±0.43, implying that the mass-loss rates
according to Eq. (5) in most cases are as accurate within a factor
of 2.7.
The scatter around the scaling relation can be attributed to
three factors. Firstly, the empiric mass-loss rates of our sample
stars were compiled from the literature. These measurements
have some inherent scatter due to different fitting methods and
the use of different stellar atmosphere codes. Secondly, we do not
account for factors that are expected to affect the mass-loss rate
according to theoretical studies, such as Teff (e.g., Castor et al.
1975; Lucy & Abbott 1993), rotational velocities (e.g., Friend &
Abbott 1986; Müller & Vink 2014), or CNO abundances (e.g.,
Abbott 1982; Sander et al. 2020). Thirdly, using different em-
piric mass-loss diagnostics in the UV or optical can lead to an
additional scatter in the derived mass-loss rates. Additionally,
stellar winds are not stationary. Although we excluded stars that
are known to have strong wind variability, cases, where only a
single epoch spectrum is available, are retained in our sample, in-
troducing an intrinsic scatter. Recently Massa et al. (2024) have
demonstrated that any single mass-loss rate determination can
differ from the mean by a factor of 2 or more due to wind vari-
ability. Thus the derived scaling relation in Eq. (5) represents an
average over these intrinsic uncertainties.
Our sample includes stars that deviate significantly, with
mass-loss rates up to a factor of 10 different from the scaling
relation. These outliers include the Galactic stars with the lowest
Γe which are associated with the “weak wind” problem, where
the majority of the wind material might be in higher ionization
stages observable mainly in the X-ray regime rather than the op-
tical or the UV (Lucy 2012; Huenemoerder et al. 2012; Lagae
et al. 2021; Law et al. 2024).
Furthermore, some WR binaries exceed the 1σ threshold or
have Eddington parameters larger than Γe > 1. These systems
have to be treated with care. For some WR binaries in the LMC,
we adopted solutions where the orbital inclinations were de-
rived by matching the spectroscopic and orbital masses of the
secondary stars (for more details see Shenar et al. 2019). This
approach may introduce additional uncertainties in the derived
masses and thus Γe, contributing to the observed scatter. The
WR binaries in the SMC have orbital solutions with roughly con-
strained inclinations, leading to large uncertainties in the derived
orbital masses which might be underestimated, and hence might
have overestimated Eddington parameters. Additionally, the WR
binary SMC AB 5 (HD 5980) is known for its complexity and
variability, includes a luminous blue variable (LBV) companion
that has recently undergone an eruptive phase (Koenigsberger
2004; Kohler et al. 2014). Caution is required when interpreting
Article number, page 4 of 18
