Architecture
HOSVD (%)
SVD (%)
LSTM 1 Dense
11
16.3
LSTM 2 Dense
6.8
15.4
LSTM Time-Distributed
7.2
10.3
Table 12: RRMSE values for HOSVD and SVD across LSTM architectures for the normal
velocity component of the 3D cylinder flow.
Architecture
HOSVD (%)
SVD (%)
LSTM 1 Dense
42.8
54.1
LSTM 2 Dense
39.4
51
LSTM Time-Distributed
39.6
47.2
Table 13: RRMSE values for HOSVD and SVD across LSTM architectures for the span-
wise velocity component of the 3D cylinder flow.
Figure 19 captures the temporal evolution of predicted streamwise velocity components
for both HOSVD (left column) and SVD (right column) across LSTM architectures for
3D cylinder flow. HOSVD-based models consistently align more closely with the ground
truth, effectively replicating the periodic patterns of the velocity components across time
steps. Although minor deviations occur at certain time steps, particularly for the LSTM
1 dense architecture near peaks and troughs, these are minimal and do not significantly
affect the overall alignment. In contrast, SVD-based models show less consistency, with
deviations from the ground truth, particularly near the peaks of the velocity component.
However, both models perform well in predicting the temporal evolution in the spanwise
direction. The same can be said for the plots of normal velocity, where both HOSVD
and SVD-based models exhibit a consistent match with the ground truth across the time
steps.
The spanwise velocity component presents an interesting case, as shown in Figure 21.
The point has been selected at a region comprising near zero velocities to compare the
performance between HOSVD and SVD in very low-velocity values. The HOSVD-based
models excel in capturing the oscillatory behavior of the velocity components, maintaining
consistent alignment with ground truth across all LSTM architectures. However, it does
not accurately predict the peak and trough values of this velocity component but does
approach the peak values more efficiently than the SVD counterparts. SVD-based models
struggle in this scenario.
While the general trend is followed, the predictions do not
reach the maximum and minimum velocity values observed in the ground truth. HOSVD
performs better in this regard.
Building on the above observations, the analysis extends to uncertainty quantification
(UQ), providing deeper insights into predictive reliability. For HOSVD (left column),
the error distributions are tightly centered around zero for all architectures, with a nar-
row spread. This indicates a high level of reliability and consistency in the predictions,
regardless of the velocity component or the LSTM architecture used. The SVD-based
models (right column) demonstrate broader and less consistent error distributions across
34
