It is important to mention that Starobinsky worked in the Jordan frame, i.e. directly with
the action R + R2.
He showed that the corresponding field equations admit a quasi de Sit-
ter solution, through which the accelerated primordial expansion can be successfully explained.
During this initial phase the scale-invariant term c0R2 dominates over M2
pR, thus explain-
ing the nearly scale-invariant power spectrum. Another feature that makes Starobinsky infla-
tion unique is that it can also describe the reheating phase at the end of inflation through
particle production induced by oscillations of the scalaron and hence of the scale factor, i.e.
a(t) ∝t2/3[1 + 2/(3m0t) sin(m0t)] [118, 119]. The reheating temperature compatible with the
number of SM degrees of freedom was found to be of the order of Treh ∼O(109) GeV [118,128,129],
but the details of the (p)reheating are still under investigation [128–132]. Furthermore, at later
times Starobinsky’s model predicts the behavior a(t) ∝t1/2 [118], which nicely connects to the
radiation-dominated era during which the GR term MpR becomes dominant and, if supplemented
with some baryogenesis mechanism, can explain the subsequent standard cosmological evolution.
The surprising aspect we want to emphasize is that the QFT framework and the strict renor-
malizability paradigm give for free (without us asking) an additional scalar degree of freedom
whose dynamics can provide a successful description of the early universe evolution. Moreover,
inflation, or rather the accelerated primordial expansion, is not just an hypothesis but a conse-
quence of strict renormalizability. It should be appreciated that Nature is guiding us toward the
selection of a new theory that extends GR in the high-energy and high-curvature regimes. The
steps (i) and (ii) above appear to be compatible with the strict renormalizability paradigm.
Starobinsky inflation is usually considered just a model, mainly because it is non-renormali-
zable. However, we now know that strict renormalizability can be achieved by adding the Weyl-
squared term. Indeed, quadratic gravity can be seen as an UV completion of Starobinsky’s model.
Let us now discuss some of the physical implications of the Weyl-squared term.
3.2
Inflationary implications of the Weyl-squared term
Since the Weyl tensor vanishes for conformally flat metrics, it does not affect the homogeneous
and isotropic background solutions found in R+R2. However, it does influence the metric pertur-
bations. At the lowest order in the slow-roll approximation, the scalar and tensor fluctuations are
decoupled, meaning that the power spectrum of the primordial scalar fluctuations is still given
by that of Starobinsky’s model. However, the Weyl-squared term modifies the power spectrum
of the tensor perturbations in a non-trivial way, giving potentially different predictions.
A relevant measurable quantity is the tensor-to-scalar ratio defined as the ratio of the tensor
to the scalar power spectrum.
Its leading-order expression in the slow-roll approximation is
independent of the type of quantization used for the spin-two ghost and reads [133–138]
r = 24
N2e
m2
2
m2
0 + 2m2
2
= 24
N2e
c0
c2 + 2c0
.
(17)
In the limit m2/m0 →∞we recover Starobinsky’s expression, i.e. rStarob = 12/N2
e [123]. If
15
