6 
 
represent the zero-field version of this effect for the first time, highlighting the 
similarity between the first moiré Chern band of 3.83° tMoTe2 and the lowest Landau 
level.  
 
It is worth noting that the observed RIQAH effects are distinct from topological charge 
density waves [50,51] or generalized anomalous Hall crystals [52,53]. These states have 
been observed in various moiré Chern bands, also characterized by integer quantized 
anomalous Hall signals at fractional filling factors. However, these states occur 
exclusively at commensurate moiré fillings, which can be understood in terms of 
interaction-induced enlarging of the moiré unit cell. In contrast, the RIQAH state does 
not necessary occurs at commensurate moiré fillings. The RIQAH state also differs 
from the recent observed extended quantum anomalous Hall (EQAH) effect in 
rhombohedral graphene moiré systems [10], where integer quantized anomalous Hall 
conductance persists over a broad moiré filling factor range. Moreover, the EQAH state 
even suppresses some FQAH states at sufficiently low temperatures and bias voltages. 
The exact mechanism underlying the EQAH effect is still unknow. 
 
Signatures of unconventional superconductivity  
Next, we focus on an oval-shaped region in the νh -D map, as highlighted by the black 
dashed lines in Fig. 2a and 2b. Remarkably, this region exhibits both vanishing ρxx and 
vanishing ρxy, which is substantially different from the IQAH, FQAH and RIQAH 
states with vanishing ρxx and quantized anomalous ρxy. As shown in Fig. 3a-3c, between 
the νh = 1 IQAH state and the νh = 2/3 FQAH state, most fillings at D = 0 exhibit non-
quantized but finite anomalous Hall signals, accompanied by weak temperature 
dependence in ρxx, corresponding to an anomalous Hall (AH) metal phase as reported 
previously [3,4]. Notably, ρxy shows a sudden drop between νh around 0.71 to 0.76, 
reaching zero below approximately 300 mK (Fig. 3c). At higher temperatures, the 
anomalous Hall signal gradually recovered in this region. Correspondingly, ρxx in the 
same filling range also drops rapidly with decreasing temperature. Under B = ±0.1 T, 
ρxx saturates at approximately 300 Ω at low temperatures (Fig. 3a), while at B = 0 T, it 
reaches zero within the measurement noise floor below approximately 300 mK (Fig. 
3d). Figure 3e shows the map of ρxx versus T and νh, revealing a superconducting dome-
like feature. 
 
The ρxx-νh-B maps shown in Fig. 2i and 2j provide further evidences for the existence 
of superconductivity in the moiré Chern band of tMoTe2. Unlike the IQAH, FQAH and 
RIQAH states, which exhibits a dispersion with B in νh as mentioned above, the state 
between νh around 0.71 to 0.76 does not disperse with B, and can be suppressed by a 
moderate magnetic field. At higher magnetic fields (B > ~2 T), another reentrant Chern 
