Figure 1: Hyper Suprime-Cam (HSC) imaging data. Left: A cutout of size 1000 × 1000 pixels from an HSC exposure,
where each pixel y(t)
i
is normalized by its standard deviation σ(t)
i
. The exposures contain useful information such as sources
(e.g. stars, galaxies), which are obfuscated by noise, atmospheric blur and other artifacts, such as occlusions caused by chip gaps
and their borders (i.e., the large gray bands with dark gray borders). Middle: The masks are applied to each pixel, in order to
disregard problematic pixels such as those corresponding to chip gaps and their borders (colored in black). Right: The PSF f(t)
for this exposure produced by the HSC software pipeline, of size 25 × 25 pixels (not to scale).
stars in the exposures, which are identified from a
catalog of sources.
We display a concrete example of such imaging
data in Figure 1, which is sourced from the Hy-
per Suprime-Cam (HSC) survey. This dataset con-
sists of n = 33 calibrated i-band exposures taken
by the HSC telescope, together with their associ-
ated masks and PSFs. For more information on the
pre-processing of this imaging data, see [19, 20, 1].
To model the exposures, we follow the approach
proposed in the ImageMM framework [21]. Specifi-
cally, we model each observed exposure y(t) as the
result of convolving the true, background-subtracted,
noise-free latent image of the night sky, denoted as
x, with the corresponding PSF f (t), plus an additive
noise term η(t). The observed pixel values in each
exposure are thus represented by:
y(t)
i
= (f (t)∗x)i + η(t)
i .
(1)
The noise terms η(t)
i
are assumed to be indepen-
dently drawn from a probability distribution with
a mean of zero and variance v(t)
i . For instance, one
may model the noise terms as independent, mean
zero Gaussian random variables whose variances are
given by v(t)
i
.= (σ(t)
i )2, as detailed in [21]. One can
also consider noise terms drawn from distributions
with heavier tails in order to account for outlier
pixel values, as we will explain in the next section.
Moreover, we highlight that in model (1), the
PSFs and noise terms may vary between exposures,
whereas the underlying latent image of the sky re-
mains common to all exposures.
3. The AstroClearNet framework
To perform multi-frame astronomical image
restoration, our goal is to recover the unknown la-
tent image x from model (1) using the exposures
and PSFs at hand.
3.1. MLE and MAP estimation
A classical approach for doing so involves solving
for the latent image x as a maximum likelihood esti-
mate (MLE) of model (1). To do so, one estimates a
latent image bx which is most likely to have generated
the exposures y and PSFs f, by maximizing the joint
likelihood p(x | y, f) of the pixel values of x given
the data, i.e., the exposures y and PSFs f. Equiva-
lently, the MLE problem entails minimizing the joint
negative log-likelihood L(x | y, f) .= −ln p(x | y, f)
of the latent image’s pixel values:
bx = argmin
x∈X
L (x | y, f) .
(2)
This minimization problem is defined over the set
of images with non-negative pixel values, denoted
as X .= {x ∈Rd+d′−1
+
}. Following [21], we enforce
this non-negativity constraint to obtain physically
meaningful maximum likelihood estimates, where
sky pixels are zero and source pixels (e.g., stars,
galaxies) have positive values.
Additionally, the
restored image bx is padded with d′−1 extra pixels to
account for flux contributions from sources beyond
the telescope’s field of view during the restoration
process.
3
