Time-local stochastic equation of motion for solid ionic electrolytes
A. Rodin,1, 2 B. A. Olsen,3 A. Ustyuzhanin,4, 5 and A. Maevskiy5
1Yale-NUS College, 16 College Avenue West, 138527, Singapore
2Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
National University of Singapore, 117575, Singapore
3Department of Physics, Lewis & Clark College, Portland, Oregon, 97219, USA
4Constructor University, Bremen, Campus Ring 1, 28759, Germany
5Institute for Functional Intelligent Materials, National University of Singapore, 4 Science Drive 2, Singapore 117544, Singapore
Numerical studies of ionic motion through solid electrolytes commonly involve static nudged-
elastic band (NEB) methods or costly ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD). Building on a time-
local model of current carrier-electrolyte interaction and incorporating thermal motion, we introduce
an approach that is intermediate between the two well-established methodologies by treating the
electrolyte as an effective medium that interacts with the mobile particle. Through this coupling,
the thermally vibrating electrolyte imparts energy to the charge carriers while also absorbing en-
ergy from them due to its own finite elasticity.
Using a simple model system, we validate our
approach through a series of numerical simulations. Our methodology reproduces both dissipative
and diffusive behavior, and helps link microscopic system parameters to measurable macroscopic
properties.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Ionic transport through solids [1, 2] is a fundamen-
tal physics problem at the root of solid-state batter-
ies [3–5], hydrogen fuel cells [6], electrolysis cells [7],
and electrochemical synapses [8].
This transport con-
sists of current-carrying mobile ions traveling through
an electrolyte whose constituent atoms remain close to
their equilibrium positions, retaining the structural in-
tegrity of the material. Compared to their liquid coun-
terparts, solid electrolytes can enhance device robustness
by suppressing dendrite formation [5] and operate over a
larger temperature range [3, 4]. Microscopically, the mo-
bile conducting ions intermittently become trapped in,
and escape from, local potential energy minima within
the electrolyte, leading to macroscopic limits on con-
ductivity.
Despite solid-state electrolytes’ advantages,
their conductivity is currently smaller then traditional
liquid electrolyte technology [3], so substantial effort is
being dedicated to finding materials with better trans-
port properties. One avenue in this effort is to find ma-
terials that minimize the amount of “trapped” time the
mobile ions spend in potential wells.
In recent years, the search for better electrolyte ma-
terials has been dominated by various ab initio meth-
ods, which provide a glimpse into the microscopic pro-
cesses of ionic conduction. While some efforts have fo-
cused on which material properties facilitate escape from
potential minima [9–12], others have explored conduc-
tion mechanisms that reduce the chance of ions becom-
ing trapped [13–20]. The most common computational
approaches—nudged elastic band (NEB) calculations
and ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations—
have somewhat complementary strengths and shortcom-
ings.
In NEB calculations, the mobile ion location varies
from one energy minimum to another in a series of
steps—at each location, the ion is held fixed along the
transport direction while the rest of the system relaxes.
The total energy is calculated along the ion’s path, and
the maximum is the activation energy Ea.
This qua-
sistatic NEB approach to estimate Ea can help efficiently
suggest material classification. A common technique uses
Ea to predict charge carrier number (and, by exten-
sion, conductivity) scaling with temperature using the
Arrhenius form: e−Ea/kBT . However, recent work [21]
has shown that this Arrhenius dependence can break
down even when the “electrolyte” consists of a single one-
dimensional oscillator. Moreover, since NEB calculations
are quasistatic, they do not capture the dynamical effects
that determine the prefactor for the Arrhenius term.
AIMD computes the trajectories of each of the frame-
work atoms and the mobile ions in the presence of an
externally-induced thermal motion.
These simulations
make it possible to estimate mobility either using the
Nernst-Einstein relation and numerically-determined dif-
fusivity, or directly using an applied bias voltage [19].
While the evolution in these trajectories is governed by
realistic forces calculated from first principles with den-
sity functional theory (DFT), this approach is very com-
putationally costly.
To keep computational resources
manageable, a typical calculation evolves the system at
extremely high temperatures for only several nanosec-
onds, and is limited to a few unit cells. For similar rea-
sons, direct computations of the mobility require extreme
electric field strengths (e.g., Ref. [19] used 0.075 V/˚A =
7.5 × 108 V/m, about 250 times higher than the break-
down voltage of air).
In this paper, we use microscopic theory to construct
a stochastic single-particle equation to describe the mo-
tion of a mobile ion.
This formalism incorporates dy-
namical effects, which do not arise in NEB calculations,
and can evolve under more realistic system parameters
than are feasible with AIMD computations. At the cost
of using less realistic potentials, this tool can comple-
ment the other methods as part of a multi-pronged ap-
arXiv:2504.06595v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  9 Apr 2025
