hyperdeterminant locus of the coupling tensor. In previously studied examples related to quadrics,
the geometry of the Calabi-Yau in such a phase could be deduced from the properties of the mass
matrix of the hybrid theory in the given phase. We expect that the coupling tensor will take the
role of the mass matrix in these interacting theories, but a full analysis goes beyond the scope of
the present work.
As ζ →−∞an additional Coulomb branch emerges. A Coulomb branch indicates the presence of
extra massless degrees of freedom. The associated CFT is expected to be singular and the gauge
theory degrees of freedom to not decouple. While such phenomena are fairly well-understood for
Coulomb branches at phase boundaries, having such a configuration at a point at infinity in the
moduli space is a feature specific to non-abelian GLSMs. It raises the immediate question whether
the Coulomb branch and the hybrid model interact at some level. Since the methods to analyse
strongly coupled phases do not apply to non-regular GLSMs, we have not been able to answer
this question. One possible approach would be to compute the Witten index for the combined
hybrid/Coulomb branch system. We hope to address this in future work. Whether or not the
Coulomb branch decouples also has consequences for D-branes and categorical equivalences. We
give some further comments at the end of the article.
While we have not succeeded in giving a complete description of the low-energy physics of the
theory in the ζ < 0-phase and we have not been able to pinpoint a smooth geometry from the
GLSM analysis, mirror symmetry implies that we should find some sort of geometry in this phase.
Both phases are mirror to a Calabi-Yau threefold whose Picard-Fuchs operator has two points of
maximally unipotent monodromy, one of which we can relate to the geometry Y (1.1) and the other
corresponding to our problematic phase. The properties of the phase suggest that we should not
expect there to be a smooth manifold but there could be something that can be interpreted as a
non-commutative resolution of a singular geometry. Identifying a candidate for such a geometry
will be the focus of the next section.
As a final comment, we also would like to draw some parallels between the “mixed branch” at
ζ →−∞and phases of GLSMs which are not Calabi-Yau. There, the typical setting is that one
phase is geometric and the other phases have a Higgs branch corresponding to a geometry plus
additional massive vacua. The key difference here is that in the Calabi-Yau case, the additional
vacua are massless.
2.5.
GLSM B-branes and hemisphere partition function for Y
The GLSM hemisphere partition [45, 54, 55] function computes the central charge of a B-type
D-brane and thus provides a means to compute topological data of a Calabi-Yau. Identifying a
GLSM-brane associated to the structure sheaf of Y , we give an independent calculation of the
topological characteristics of Y .
We briefly recall the definition of GLSM B-branes and the hemisphere partition function. Consider
a B-brane B = (M, Q, ρ, r∗) of a GLSM, where M is a Z2-graded Chan-Paton module, Q is a
G-invariant matrix factorisation of R-charge 1, ρ is the representation of G on M and r∗is the
representation of the vector R-symmetry on M. We refer to [45, 54, 55] and later references for
16
