3
FIG. 1. A conventional s-wave superconductor can feature emergent “subsystem” topological phenomena due to various spatial
structures of the pairing phase: (a) A continuous U(1) Abrikosov vortex with a Z2 nontrivial vortex-line topology. 0D MZMs
will be trapped at the ends of the vortex line (marked in red). (b) Deforming an U(1) vortex to a discrete Z4 vortex described by
Eq. (2), which further manifests as a superposition of two perpendicular π-phase Josephson junctions. (c) A single π-junction of
a conventional superconductor can feature a Z2 nontrivial Josephson topology with helical Majorana edge states. (d) Schematic
of a second-order Josephson topology with corner-localized Majorana Kramers pairs.
proach. Sec. III focuses on classifying and understand-
ing JT transitions, based on which we analytically de-
rive a set of criticality mapping relations between π-
junctions and vortices. A series of effective model stud-
ies aiming at benchmarking JVC are provided and dis-
cussed in Sec. IV, which include superconducting TI,
Dirac semimetal, iron-based system, and the Dirac octet
model. We present both ab-initio junction modeling and
JVC analysis for 2M-WS2 and Sr3SnO in Sec. V, where
we predict concrete experimental consequences. We con-
clude our results in Sec. VI, as well as an outlook of
possible future directions.
II.
JOSEPHSON-VORTEX CORRESPONDENCE
A.
From vortex to π-junction
Our system of interest is a 1D field-induced vortex line
along ˆz in a 3D superconductor with an isotropic s-wave
spin-singlet pairing.
We use a Bogoliubov-de Gennes
(BdG) Hamiltonian to describe the vortex-line system,
H(r, kz) =
h0(r, kz) −µ
−i∆(r)sy
i∆(r)sy
µ −hT
0 (r, −kz)

.
(1)
Here, h0(r) describes the normal state for electrons,
where r = (r, θ) denotes the in-plane polar coordi-
nates.
µ is the chemical potential and sx,y,z are the
Pauli matrices for electron spins.
The vortex geome-
try is encoded in the spatially varying pairing function
∆(r) ≡∆0 tanh (r/ξ)eiθ, where ξ controls the size of the
vortex core. We set ξ = 0 in this work for simplicity.
While the bulk SC ground state is topology-free [48], the
vortex line can be topologically or trivially gapped [32],
or gapless [40, 41], as determined by both symmetry and
topological properties of the in-gap CdGM modes.
The key inspiration behind our work is the Euler for-
mula, allows us to express the vortex-dressed pairing
function as real and imaginary parts, ∆R = ∆0 cos θ and
∆I = ∆0 sin θ. Giving the sign structures of cos θ and
sin θ, we consider a geometric approximation of ∆(r)
∆(r) ≈∆0[sgn(x) + isgn(y)],
(2)
which, as shown in Figs. 1 (a) and (b), discretizes the
original U(1) vortex into a Z4 vortex while respecting
the topological phase winding structure. We show in the
Appendix B that the bound-state spectrum of a Z4 vor-
tex quantitatively matches that of a U(1) vortex, which
numerically proves the efficiency of this simplification.
Physically, Eq. 2 implies that a vortex is topologically
equivalent to the superposition of two perpendicular pair-
ing domain walls, with each domain forming a π-phase
Josephson junction. This raises the question: does a π-
junction in the same superconductor exhibit similar topo-
logical physics?
Without loss of generality, we consider a time-reversal-
invariant π-junction along ˆx direction by setting ∆(r) =
∆0sgn(x), which consists of three parts: left domain,
right domain, and the domain wall. Notably, electrons
living around the domain wall will experience an effective
odd-parity pairing order since ∆(−r) = −∆(r), which lo-
cally goes around the no-go theorem of s-wave systems
in Ref. [48]. Although each domain itself is topologically
trivial, Andreev-bound states trapped by the π-junction
can, in principle, develop 2D emergent interfacial topo-
logical physics.
We dub this phenomenon Josephson
topology (JT).
This new notion naturally raises a series of interest-
ing conceptual questions: (1) What are possible types of
JT? (2) Is JT related to VLT? In the following, we will
address the above key questions by classifying JT phases
in different symmetry classes. Further exploiting a di-
mensional reduction strategy inspired by Eq. 2, we will
establish mapping relations between VLT and its “par-
ent” JT, which are generally dubbed Josephson-vortex
correspondence (JVC).
