12
MZIs and 86.5% for the coupling [7]), the optimal
chip size for doing performing boson sampling on 2304
modes would be k = 19. The regime in which a single
non-coupled
interferometer
maximises
transmission
shrinks with the number of modes, such that for boson
sampling in the no-collision regime it is likely that a
small chip size will be optimal.
The red lines in Fig 10 correspond to the points of
the plane of equal total transmission η = 0.85.
We
observe that they correspond to piecewise exponential
functions where the switches happen when the value
of the optimal chip size changes.
The dashed blue
lines are the constant transmission lines for a single
non-coupled interferometer. Provided that the coupling
loss is small enough, our scheme reduces the hardware
requirements on the MZI efficiency, up to an order
of magnitude in the case of 2304 modes.
To reach
0.85 transmission efficiency in a 48-photon 2304-mode
experiment, if the coupling loss is sufficiently small (for
instance around 10−3) then we can use MZIs that are
10 times lossier than in a single 2304-mode chip.
More generally we can only trade MZI efficiency for
coupling efficiency up to a point. We observe the two
asymptotic behaviors when either the MZI or coupling
loss tends to 0. In both cases, there is an intrinsic limit
where the decrease of one loss cannot compensate the
increase of the other loss. In Fig 10 we have highlighted
the three values of the MZI loss above which the target
transmissions cannot be achieved.
Overall, these results highlight the fact that to build
an efficient Boson sampler, improving the transmission
of individual MZIs is essential, but can be augmented
with the development of low-loss fibre-chip coupling.
VIII.
CONCLUSION
We proposed an alternative framework for the design
of linear optical circuits.
Our framework, based on
recent results on CNOT circuits synthesis, consists of
sorting labels in a network of conditional swaps while
satisfying nearest neighbor architectural constraints.
We managed to recover the best results of the litera-
ture in a simple framework that exhibits interesting
theoretical properties: optimality in depth and count
for MZI-based circuit, extension to partial synthesis
for boson sampling, generalization to the coupling of
multiple chips for designing larger circuits.
We also proposed a new design for boson sampling
experiments based on coupling multiple smaller inter-
ferometers.
Whilst our scheme does not remove the
need for advances in component losses, it enables some
trade-off between MZI efficiency and coupling efficiency.
As future work, it would be interesting to test other
extensions of this framework. We think notably of the
case of beam-splitter based linear optical circuit instead
of MZI [10]. It would be also interesting to extend the
framework to take into account other kind of connectiv-
ities between the modes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Boris Bourdoncle for insightful
discussions and comments and Andreas Fyrillas and Si-
mone Piacentini for their help on the hardware side.
This work has been financed by the French government
as part of France 2030 in the framework of UFOQO
project.
[1] S. Aaronson and A. Arkhipov, The computational com-
plexity of linear optics, in Proceedings of the forty-
third annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing
(2011) pp. 333–342.
[2] E. Knill, R. Laflamme, and G. J. Milburn, A scheme
for efficient quantum computation with linear optics,
nature 409, 46 (2001).
[3] S. Bartolucci,
P. Birchall,
H. Bombin,
H. Cable,
C. Dawson, M. Gimeno-Segovia, E. Johnston, K. Kiel-
ing, N. Nickerson, M. Pant, et al., Fusion-based quan-
tum computation, Nature Communications 14, 912
(2023).
[4] N. Somaschi, V. Giesz, L. De Santis, J. Loredo, M. P.
Almeida, G. Hornecker, S. L. Portalupi, T. Grange,
C. Anton, J. Demory, et al., Near-optimal single-photon
sources in the solid state, Nature Photonics 10, 340
(2016).
[5] C. Taballione, R. van der Meer, H. J. Snijders, P. Hooi-
jschuur, J. P. Epping, M. de Goede, B. Kassenberg,
P. Venderbosch, C. Toebes, H. van den Vlekkert, et al.,
A universal fully reconfigurable 12-mode quantum pho-
tonic processor, Materials for Quantum Technology 1,
035002 (2021).
[6] A. Fyrillas, B. Bourdoncle, A. Ma¨ınos, P.-E. Eme-
riau, K. Start, N. Margaria, M. Morassi, A. Lemaˆıtre,
I. Sagnes, P. Stepanov, et al., Certified randomness in
tight space, arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.03536 (2023).
[7] N. Maring, A. Fyrillas, M. Pont, E. Ivanov, P. Stepanov,
N. Margaria, W. Hease, A. Pishchagin, A. Lemaˆıtre,
I. Sagnes, et al., A versatile single-photon-based quan-
tum computing platform, Nature Photonics 18, 603
(2024).
[8] M. Reck, A. Zeilinger, H. J. Bernstein, and P. Bertani,
Experimental realization of any discrete unitary opera-
tor, Physical review letters 73, 58 (1994).
[9] W. R. Clements, P. C. Humphreys, B. J. Metcalf,
W. S. Kolthammer, and I. A. Walmsley, Optimal de-
sign for universal multiport interferometers, Optica 3,
1460 (2016).
