10 
 
is occupied with excess electrons. In contrast, regions II and III with larger work 
function correspond to ABCB stackings (Fig. 1e & Fig. S1) where the largest charge 
imbalance occurs in the middle two layers (polarization upward) and the topmost layer 
is occupied with excess holes. We have systematically measured three extra devices 
(devices 2 to 4) by gate-dependent SNOM and KPFM, and similar behaviors are 
observed. The data for devices 2-4 are presented through Figs. S10- S18. 
We propose a possible explanation for the main features observed in the evolution 
of optical contrast between two adjacent polar stackings shown in Fig. 2. We assume 
that the detected near-field signal underneath the tip is predominantly contributed from 
the free carriers residing at the topmost graphene layer that is in the closest vicinity to 
the tip. From our DFT calculations, the carriers of the topmost graphene layer are 
respective electrons and holes for ABAC (polarization downward) and ABCB 
(polarization upward) stackings, leading to band bending downward and upward, 
respectively, prior to any doping (schematically illustrated in top panel in Fig. 2j) [23, 
43]. The equal number of induced electrons and holes at topmost graphene layer makes 
the near-field optical responses in ABAC and ABCB identical (top panel in Fig. 2j). 
This explains the almost identical optical contrast observed in two polar stackings at Vg 
= 0 V (close to charge neutrality) in Figs. 2a and 2e. When Vg > 0 (electron doping), for 
ABAC stacking, doped electrons are mainly filled in the fourth layer (L4), and virtually 
no electrons are filled in the first layer (L1) according to the calculated layer-projected 
DOS plot by our DFT (Fig. 2k). Therefore, the carrier concentration of the topmost 
layer basically remains unchanged (middle panel of Fig. 2j) in ABAC. In contrast, for 
ABCB stacking, most of the electrons are filled in the first layer (L1) with Vg > 0 as can 
be seen from the DFT result shown in Fig. 2l. Since the dominant carriers in the topmost 
graphene layer are holes for ABCB stacking due to the intrinsic charge distribution (top 
panel in Fig. 2j), electron filling decreases the carrier concentration in the topmost layer 
(middle panel of Fig. 2j). As a result, the ABCB stacking appears to be darker and darker 
relative to ABAC stacking with increased electron doping. This explains the observed 
trend in SNOM with electron doping in Figs. 2a to 2d and Fig. 2i. On the other hand, 
when the Vg < 0 (hole doping), for ABAC stacking, doped holes are mainly filled in the 
second layer (L2), and virtually no holes are filled in the first layer (L1) (Fig. 2k). The 
carrier concentration of the topmost layer is nearly unchanged (bottom panel of Fig. 2j). 
For ABCB stacking, more holes are filled in the third layer (L3), but there are also 
