7
to clarify that Type IL GRB discussed in our paper is
not the same as these traditional “long” short bursts.
Except for the existence of precursor, the difference
between Type IL GRB and “long” short bursts mainly
lies in the main emission, rather than extended emis-
sion. We study the ratio of photon fluence between ex-
tended emission and main emission (SEE/Smain). As de-
picted in Fig. 7a, Type IL GRBs have SEE/Smain close
to unity, which means that the photon fluence of the
extended emission is comparable to that of the main
emission, while SEE/Smain of these “long” short GRBs
are relatively large. This indicates that the long dura-
tion of Type IL GRBs is not primarily contributed by
the soft long extended emission but by the hard long
main emission, which is the most significant difference
from the case in “long” short bursts.
Therefore, the
ratio of SEE/Smain significantly distinguishes Type IL
GRBs from classical “long” short GRBs.
Additionally, we further investigate the photon flu-
ence ratio between of the precursor (Spre) and extended
emission for Type IL GRBs and “long” short GRBs re-
spectively. Since there is no precursor detection in typ-
ical “long” short GRB, we calculate the 3 sigma upper
limits of the precursor fluence and then determine the
Spre/SEE for them. As depicted in Fig. 7b, Spre/SEE of
Type IL GRB is much larger that of typical “long” short
GRB, indicating that the relative brightness of precusor
is another difference between Type IL GRB and typical
“long” short GRB.
5. DISCUSSIONS
In this section, we discuss the physical implications of
Type IL GRB. First, we search for the thermal compo-
nent in the precursor of Type IL GRBs since there are
reported thermal component in the precursor of some
Type I GRBs (Wang et al. 2020). Furthermore, based
on properties of the main emission and extended emis-
sion of Type IL GRBs, we discuss several prevalent the-
oretical models for progenitor, central engine and ex-
tended emission of Type IL GRBs. Our intention is not
to definitively confirm or exclude any specific model,
as such an endeavor is beyond the scope of this paper;
rather, we are merely discussing the models to which
Type IL GRBs are more favored.
The first property of Type IL GRB is the long dura-
tion of the main emission, which generally lasts about
10 s. Therefore, it is necessary to consider what is the
progenitor of this Type of GRB and how the central en-
gine produced by the merger can remain active for such
a long time, along with the related question: How should
the energy of the main emission and extended emission
be distributed?
The second property is that, for typical “long” short
bursts, the range of variation in the ratio of photon flu-
ence between the main burst and extended emission is
large (Norris & Bonnell 2006), indicating that the com-
ponents are physically decoupled or that the physical
model must explain the reasons for this wide range. In
contrast, this ratio for Type IL GRBs is almost constant
(∼0.7, with small scattering), suggesting that these two
components are closely related to each other, which has
a strong implication on the mechanism of Type IL burst.
The third property is that most extended emissions
of merger bursts (short GRB) appear platform-like or
hump-shaped, while the extended emission of several
Type IL GRB in this paper feature both platform-like
structures and power-law decay (Fig. 9a).
Hence, for
those models which can produce power-law decaying ex-
tended emission would be more preferred for Type IL
GRB.
5.1. Precursor
Since the thermal and non-thermal component of
GRB 230307A and GRB 211211A have been determined
inWang et al. (2024); Xiao et al. (2024) respectively, we
focus on the remaining three Type IL GRBs found in
this work. We use the cutoff power-law (CPL) model,
blackbody (BB) model and CPL+BB model to fit the
precursor spectrum, and use the Bayesian information
criterion (BIC) to evaluate the goodness of fit of these
models, where 2 ≤∆BIC <6 gives positive evidence,
and ∆BIC ≥6 gives strong positive evidence in favor of
the model with a lower BIC (Kass & Raftery 1995).
We find that for the GRB 170228A and GRB 200311A,
the precursor is relatively hard and, therefore, exhibits a
broad spectrum. Therefore, the CPL model can be well
constrained and has the lowest BIC. However, for GRB
200914A, the precursor has a soft and narrow spectrum,
hence the BB model has slightly lower BIC than that of
CPL. Combined with the photon index, which is close to
the death line of synchrotron radiation, it is reasonable
to consider that there is a thermal component in the
precursor of GRB 200914A (Fig. 8) (see Table 2). It
should be noted that the thermal component does not
necessarily have to be present in the observational data:
as discussed in (Wang et al. 2024), when the brightness
is sufficiently low, the thermal component may not be
significant in the energy spectrum.
5.2. Progenitor and central engine
The central engine of GRB 230307A and GRB
211211A is proposed to be magnetar (Sun et al. 2025;
Yang et al. 2022). The extended emission in the gamma-
ray energy range of GRB 230307A can be explained
