arXiv:2504.06224v1  [gr-qc]  8 Apr 2025
Nonlinear Tails of Gravitational Waves in Schwarzschild Black Hole Ringdown
Alex Kehagias
1, 2 and Antonio Riotto
3
1Physics Division, National Technical University of Athens, Athens, 15780, Greece
2CERN, Theoretical Physics Department, Geneva, Switzerland
3Department of Theoretical Physics and Gravitational Wave Science Center,
24 quai E. Ansermet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland
Schwarzschild black holes evolve toward their static conﬁguration by emitting gravitational waves,
which decay over time following a power law at ﬁxed spatial positions.
We derive this power
law analytically for the second-order even gravitational perturbations, demonstrating that it is
determined by the fact that the second-order source decays as the inverse square of the distance.
Quadratic gravitational modes with multipole ℓdecay according to a law ∼t−2ℓ−1, in contrast to
the linear Price law scaling ∼t−2ℓ−3. Consequently, nonlinear tails may persist longer than their
linear counterparts.
Introduction – The advent of gravitational wave
(GW) astronomy has ushered in a new era for conduct-
ing precise tests of strong-ﬁeld gravity [1–4]. Ground-
based detectors, such as LIGO, VIRGO, and KAGRA,
alongside the upcoming space-based mission LISA, are
achieving sensitivities that enable detailed studies of
black hole (BH) merger ringdowns [5–9]. A critical as-
pect of this exploration involves understanding the late-
time behavior of perturbations around BHs, where both
linear and nonlinear eﬀects leave distinctive imprints on
the emitted GWs.
For years, linear BH perturbation theory has pro-
vided the foundation for modeling BH ringdowns, yield-
ing the well-established result that, at late times, BHs
relax through a sequence of exponentially damped os-
cillations, known as quasinormal modes (QNMs), fol-
lowed by an inverse power-law decay with time. This is
famously represented by Price’s scaling: massless ﬁelds
in a non-spinning BH background decay at ﬁxed spatial
locations as ∼t−2ℓ−3 at very late times, where ℓis the
corresponding multipole number [10–19].
To accurately model the ringdown waveforms of BHs,
signiﬁcant eﬀorts have been dedicated to reﬁning our
understanding of the QNM spectra and Price tails [20–
31]. Linear predictions have been rigorously validated
by numerical relativity simulations and increasingly
precise GW observations. Recently, there has been a
surge of interest in the nonlinear evolution of BH per-
turbations [32–63], uncovering phenomena absent in
linear treatments, such as quadratic QNMs and non-
linear power-law tails.
These nonlinear tails are of particular interest, as
they naturally emerge from the outgoing QNM pro-
ﬁles present in the ringdown dynamics [64, 65], with
their origins closely tied to the nonlinear nature of grav-
ity. Recent numerical advancements have identiﬁed the
power-law behaviors associated with these nonlinear
tails for the Weyl scalar, which are distinct from Price
tails [66].
For instance, it has been shown that the
power-law of the ℓ= 4 mode generated at second order
from two ℓ= 2 modes decays at large times as ∼t−10,
suggesting a more general law of the form ∼t−2ℓ−2.
Moreover, recent 3+1-dimensional numerical relativity
simulations of BH mergers have provided evidence for
power-law tails that diverge from the Price tail [67, 68].
These developments provide insight into the rich phe-
nomenology of nonlinear eﬀects in BH perturbation the-
ory and highlight the necessity for new experimental
eﬀorts, such as GW waveform modeling, to detect their
corresponding signatures.
The aim of this letter is to oﬀer a simple analyti-
cal understanding of the nonlinear tails of GWs emit-
ted during the Schwarzschild BH ringdown. As we will
demonstrate, the power law is fully governed by the fact
that the second-order source decays as ∼1/r2 at large
distances from the BH and, as a consequence, the corre-
sponding Green function must be solved in (a slightly)
curved spacetime.
Spectroscopy for a Schwarzschild BH – Our start-
ing point is a Schwarzschild BH with mass M whose
spacetime is described by the metric (setting GN = 1)
ds2 = −f(r)dt2+ dr2
f(r) +r2dΩ2
2, f(r) = 1−2M/r, (1)
Adopting the Regge-Wheeler-Zerilli formalism [69,
70] for the ﬁrst-order metric perturbations in the
Schwarzschild spacetime and separating angular vari-
ables with tensor harmonics of indices (ℓ, m), the equa-
tions are divided into the even and odd parity parts.
In this paper we limit ourselves to the the even par-
ity mode, corresponding to the Zerilli equation at ﬁrst-
order. Even though there are seven equations for the
even parity part of the metric perturbation, at ﬁrst-
order one can reduce the dynamics to a single Zerilli
equation for a function ψ(1)
ℓm(r, t) in the so-called Regge-
Wheeler (RW) gauge

−∂2
∂t2 + ∂2
∂r2∗
−V (r)

ψ(1)
ℓm(r, t) = 0,
V (r) = f(r)2λ2(λ + 1)r3 + 6λ2Mr2 + 18λM 2r + 18M 3
r3(λr + 3M)2
,
(2)
where
