bulk gel (Fig. 4c). For testing, the whole gel was divided into nine parts with 13 mm × 17 mm 
cutter, among which the embedded part (marked region) between two paired electrodes had the 
highest modulus compared with two areas adjacent to the focus of the electric field. 
With this scenario, we determined the storage modulus distribution of the thiol-ene gel along with 
the perpendicular direction of applied electric fields (Fig. 4d). The obtained modulus in each part 
that experienced a programmed voltage are consistent with the electric field distribution from the 
model. This experiment indicates that stiffness modulation locally controlled within sections of a 
material, providing flexibility and efficiency to a wide variety of applications.  
Electro-adhesive based on thiol-ene crosslinking  
In the real-time electrorheology testing, we noted that the detachable plates remained adhered after 
polymerization from the thiol-ene crosslinking reaction. These adhesions were enhanced at shorter 
gap distance, higher voltage and the longer time (0.1 mm, 2 Vrms, 15 min) (Supplementary Fig. 
20). Thiol-enes and many radical based reactions are used as commercial and industrial adhesives.  
We hypothesized that this electric field-induced adhesion between dielectric material and 
conductive plate were related to rheology behavior triggered by electric voltages. To date, there is 
only one known electro-adhesive, which used remarkable diazrine chemistry36. However, this 
method has limited compatibility with current adhesives including both thiol-ene and radical 
mediated adhesives. To test our adhesive system properly, we placed a thin layer of the same 
composition of thiol-ene reactant solution (0.025 mL) between two pieces of ITO (indium tin 
oxide) coated glass plates (Fig. 5a). After applying the AC (500 Hz, 8 Vrms) for 5 min, we used lap 
shear testing to assess shear strength as a measure of the adhesion performance of the electro-
adhesive. The dimensions of the adhesive layer were 25 mm × 25 mm × 0.03mm. After 24 h, the 
adhesive sustained 260 N of shear force from 25 oC to 60 oC before loss of integrity (Fig. 5b).  The 
adhesion strength of control samples without electric field or ZnO nanoparticles was also evaluated. 
As depicted in Fig. 5c, the lap shear strength of electro-adhesive surpasses that of control samples 
lacking either ZnO or electric field, indicating strong adhesion occurred by the formation of 
electric field-triggered thiol-ene crosslinking reaction via ZnO nanoparticles.  With the presence 
of both ZnO and E-field, the strength reaches 389.8 ± 42.0 kPa, which is comparable with 
commercial cyanoacrylate and epoxy adhesives (Supplementary Fig. 21) and higher than previous 
electro-adhesive (25 to 82 kPa) based on diazrine chemistry36–38. The adhesive strength is 
consistent with the adhesive strength of these monomers cured via traditional means39. We note 
that this is only a demonstration experiment with no optimization of properties, yet it is already 
comparable to some commercial products. When no voltage was applied between the electrodes, 
the ITO layers freely slid past one another, and the shear strength was dictated by the surface 
tension. Upon realizing that the thin film afforded very high uniform electric fields, we considered 
that perhaps even modest DC fields might work for this specific application (Supplementary Video 
2). The ITO glass electrodes were connected to an AA battery (3 V, DC) as the electric energy 
source. After 5 minutes of 3 V bias, the reaction yielded an adhesive that bound the two ITO glass 
plates together. In contrast, the plates easily separated suggesting that there was no adhesion in the 
absence of electric trigger (Supplementary Video 1). 
In summary, we demonstrated what is, to our knowledge, one of the first methods to remotely 
induce a chemical reaction via an electric field. Using an electric field, in contrast to other methods 
of external control, allowed polymerization inside materials with individual segments that could 
be remotely tailored, programmed, and reconfigured. The electric field-driven reaction, in contrast 
