7
FIG. 4: χ2/DoF for the OmniFold result as a function
of number of iterations of the procedure, for each of the
differential cross sections under consideration. The 0th
iteration is the prior, which begins outside the y-axis
limits for (pµ, cos θµ). As with any iterative procedure,
using a larger number of iterations reduces the
dependence on the prior and reduces the amount of bias
in the result. The point at which the χ2 appears to
converge depends on the observable and binning under
inspection.
FIG. 5: The average weight change that each event has
received over the previous 5 iterations of the OmniFold
procedure, after 5, 10, and 45 total iterations. After 5
and 10 iterations, one can see the distributions of
weight changes are still obviously skewed, indicating
that there are significant reweightings still occurring
across the whole dataset. After 45 iterations, we see the
distribution is centered around 0 with not much of a
tail. This suggests the unfolding procedure is mostly
done at this point, which is also consistent with the
behavior of the χ2 curves shown in Fig. 4.
FIG. 6: OmniFold χ2 performance for each differential
cross section of interest as a function of number of
iterations, using different efficiency treatments.
Including efficiency effects during unfolding (solid lines)
means including non-reconstructed events in step 2 of
the OmniFold procedure, where truth-level event
reweighting is done. Applying efficiency corrections
after unfolding (dashed lines) means excluding
non-reconstructed events from step 2 but applying
reweighting factors to them when they are brought in
for the final unfolded result, which we see yields faster
and better convergence.
the OmniFold procedure, and this is equivalent to apply-
ing an unbinned efficiency correction after the unfolding
procedure. A comparison of the performance of these ap-
proaches for our setup is shown in Fig. 6. We expect little
difference in results between the two approaches when ef-
ficiencies are generally high for all bins, but this is not
the case for efficiencies in our analysis. We observe that
including efficiency effects during unfolding considerably
slows the rate of χ2 convergence, since this increases the
bias towards the prior in regions of low efficiency. Cor-
respondingly, the rest of the results in this paper are all
obtained using the approach of an efficiency correction
after unfolding.
B.
Results
The resulting χ2 values comparing the unfolded truth-
level differential cross sections against those underlying
the data are shown in Tab. III for each of the observ-
ables of interest and for each of the multiple unfolding
approaches described in Sec. IV. Since the χ2 metric does
not clearly distinguish between results with large bias and
large uncertainty and results with small bias and small
uncertainty, we also consider the triangular discrimina-
tor ∆(P, Q) = P
i |pi −qi|2/(pi + qi) [66], where pi is the
unfolded content of bin i, qi is the true content of bin
