Hadronic molecules and multiquark states
9
Fig. 5 The scatteringlength-effective range plane: Shown is for which pairs of values what kind of pole emerges. The area left white
and the hatched one are forbidden from causality—the former because the related poles are located in the complex plane of the first
sheet, the latter because of the Wigner bound. The dotted line (r = −a) refers to a pole with a real part exactly at the threshold. The red
star (blue square) shows a typical location of the pole of a bound state with a molecular structure (compact structure). The respective
arrows show the characteristic trajectory of the poles as the interaction gets changed slightly. The figure is adapted from Ref. [66].
In Fig. 5 the red star and the blue square show the pole locations for bound states with a molecular and compact structure in a plane
defined by scattering length and effective range, respectively. The figure also assigns regions in the (r −a) plane to the types of poles,
namely bound states, real valued poles on the first sheet of the complex energy plane, virtual states, real values poles on the second sheet,
and resonances, complex valued poles in the complex plane of the second sheet. The probabilistic interpretation of λ2 was derived from the
normalisation condition of the bound state. Clearly it cannot be copied straightforwardly to virtual states and resonances, since their wave
functions cannot be normalised. However, it is instructive to ask what happens, if the interaction strength that lead to the pertinent pole gets
slightly weakened (e.g. by changing the quark mass). Since the effective range is controlled by the type of the binding interaction it will
change little, however, the scattering length will change its sign (see, e.g., Refs. [67, 68] and [69] for detailed studies of light and singly
heavy systems; the situation is potentially more complicated for doubly heavy systems as described below): For molecular structures it is
the inverse scattering length that changes smoothly (a molecular bound state exactly at threshold is characterised by an infinite scattering
length), while for compact structures it is the scattering length itself. As indicated in Fig. 5, the weakening of the interaction thus transforms
a molecular bound state into a virtual state, but a compact state into a resonance. One thus needs to conclude that a virtual pole necessarily
is generated from non-perturbative two-hadron interactions and cannot be generated from a compact state. There are a large number of
works available in the literature that discuss generalizations of Weinberg’s criterion also to resonances [59, 66, 70–79], which, however, we
cannot discuss in detail here.
The derivation provided so far was based on single channel scattering with zero range interactions only, however, crucial information
is encoded in the effective range. In fact, it appears that a positive effective range is an unambiguous signature of a purely molecular
state [58, 80–83], fully in line with the general theorem that potential scattering in a single channel with purely attractive interactions
necessarily has a positive effective range [84]. Unfortunately reversing this statement does not work: In general not even a sizeable negative
effective range provides a unique signature of a compact structure, since coupled channel effects also induce a negative contribution to the
effective range. For illustration we may start from generalising Eq. (19) to two channels to find [81]5
T (i j)
NR =
g(i)
0 g( j)
0
E + EB + g(1) 2
0
µ1/(2π)(ip1 + γ1) + g(2) 2
0
µ2/(2π)(ip2 + γ2)
,
(23)
where the on-shell momenta of the particles in channel i are
pi(E) =
p
2µi(E −δi)Θ(E −δi) + i
p
2µi(δi −E)Θ(δi −E)
using the channel specific reduced masses µi and as before γi = pi(−EB). If the total energy is measured relative to the lowest threshold,
which we assign to channel 1, one gets δ1 = 0 and δ2 = m(2)
1 + m(2)
2 −m(1)
1 −m(1)
2 . In principle the denominator of Eq. (23) could also contain
additional inelasticities that we neglect here, for simplicity. Clearly, the higher channel provides a contribution to the effective range, which
5In Ref. [85] an analogous formula was proposed, however, without the subtraction terms γi. Then, however, EB is not the binding energy and in fitting data potentially
huge correlations between the parameters appear.
