 
2 
the combinatorial parametric space, highlighting QA as a powerful and practical solver11-14. The 
ability to efficiently explore high-dimensional combinational spaces makes QA capable of 
handling a wide range of optimization tasks4,5,10,15,16. 
 
The potential merit of QA motivates the systematic comparison with classical counterparts (e.g., 
simulated annealing, integer programming, steepest descent method, tabu search, and parallel 
tempering with isoenergetic cluster moves), focusing on the solution quality and the time 
complexity. While previous benchmarking studies showed some advantages of QA, most used 
low-dimensional or the sparse configuration of QUBO matrices due to the lack of available qubits 
in the QA hardware and poor topology to connect qubits17-19. For example, O’Malley et al. 17 
compared the performance of QA with classical methods (mathematical programming), but they 
limited the number of binary variables to 35 due to the QA hardware limitation. Similarly, Tasseff 
et al. 18 highlighted the potential advantages of QA compared to classical methods (such as 
simulated annealing, integer programming, and Markov chain Monte Carlo) for sparse 
optimization problems containing up to 5,000 decision variables and 40,000 quadratic terms. Haba 
et al. 19 demonstrated that a classical solver (integer programming) could be faster than QA for 
small problems, e.g., ~100 decision variables. Consequently, these benchmarking studies show 
that QA methods and their classical counterparts can exhibit similar solution quality and time 
complexity. However, such low-dimensional or sparse QUBOs considered in the previous 
benchmarking studies are challenging to map to a wide range of practical problems, which usually 
require high-dimensional and dense configuration of QUBO matrices4,5,10,20. For example, in our 
previous QA optimization of one-dimensional and two-dimensional optical metamaterials, the 
QUBO matrices exhibit these properties (Fig. S1) 4,5,16,20. 
 
The state-of-the-art QA hardware (D-Wave Advantage System) features more than 5,000 qubits, 
advanced topology to connect qubits, and efficient hybrid algorithms (e.g., Leap Hybrid sampler). 
For example, the recent development (e.g., Pegasus topology) has increased qubit connectivity 
from 6 to 1521-23. Improved qubit connectivity reduces the need for complex embedding processes, 
which map problem variables to physical qubits on the hardware. With better connectivity, such 
as in D-Wave's Pegasus topology, the embedding process becomes more efficient and can better 
preserve the structure of dense optimization problems. This enhancement allows the quantum 
annealer to increase the potential for finding high-quality solutions24,25. In addition, a QUBO 
decomposition algorithm (i.e., QBSolv) splits a large QUBO matrix into small pieces of sub-
QUBO matrices, allowing us to handle a QUBO matrix with dimensions higher than the maximum 
number of qubits in the QA hardware26,27. Given these advancements, it is imperative to study the 
performance of the state-of-the-art QA system for high-dimensional and dense configuration of 
QUBO matrices, and systemically compare solution quality and the time complexity with the 
classical counterparts.  
 
In this work, we benchmark the performance of quantum solvers against classical algorithms in 
solving QUBO problems with large and dense configurations to represent real-world optimization 
problems. We analyze the solution quality and the required time to solve these benchmark 
problems using several quantum and classical solvers. This benchmarking study provides 
important insights into employing QA in practical problem-solving scenarios. 
 
 
