10
σ!
η!"
0
1
FIG. 4.
Example of QUBO encoding for energy-
constrained Ising models. Left: Symbolic representation
of QUBO binary variables associated to up/down physical
spins (σi) and parallel/antiparallel spin pairs (ηij).
Right:
The represented state is one of the possible ground state solu-
tions of the QUBO Hamiltonian of eq. 14 formulated for a 4×4
periodic Ising system with Hs parameters set to ¯nq = 8 and
m = 0. The ground state solutions correspond to Ising spin
configurations with 16 pairs of parallel neighbouring spins,
including those wrapping across the periodic boundary con-
ditions (dotted).
Thus, by minimizing the total Hamiltonian of Eq. 14
the sampling can be targeted at specific intervals of nq,
as needed for reconstructing the density of states W(nq).
Comparison of exact and reconstructed Ws
We considered the 12 × 12 Ising system (L = 12) with
periodic boundary conditions. The argument nq can take
on L2 −1 distinct values, corresponding to all integers
between 0 and 144, except for 1 and L2 −1 = 143. The
peak value of W is ∼2 × 1042, thus indicating that the
”dynamic range” of the density of states spans across
more than 40 orders of magnitude.
For the QUBO-based reconstruction, we used multiple
intervalled samplings with unit increments in ¯nq.
We
considered intervals of width 2, 4, and 8, corresponding
to m = 1, 2 and 3 slack variables, respectively.
We covered each of the ∼150 intervals with a sampling
depth of d ∼5, 000 independent states. The latter were
obtained using a classical parallel tempering scheme to
minimize the QUBO Hamiltonian (Supporting Informa-
tion Section S2).
The reconstructed Ws are compared with the normal-
ized exact one [54] in the semi-log plot of Fig. 5a, which
shows a remarkably consistent agreement throughout the
40 orders of magnitude spanned by W.
The reconstructed profiles are visually indistinguish-
able from the exact one at all ms, although there are dif-
ferences. While W(nq) can be accurately reconstructed
across the entire range of the argument using m = 2 and
m = 3, this is not the case for m = 1, where W is not
resolved close to boundaries nq = 0 and nq = L2. This is
(b)
(a)
(c)
FIG. 5. Density of states of the 12 × 12 Ising model.
(a) Exact and reconstructed density of states, W(nq) for a
12 × 12 Ising model as a function of the number of parallel
neighbouring spins. The data in this and the following pan-
els are color-coded according to the number of slack variables
and distinguished by different marker shapes. (b) Normal-
ized reconstruction error, ∆W(nq = 50)/Wexact(nq = 50), for
different sampling depths, d. The solid lines connect the av-
erage values of ∆W(nq = 50) computed from independent
reconstructions. The data points include jitter along the x-
axis for visual clarity. Non-overlapping blocks of d samples
were used from a population of 5000 independent samples per
interval. The shaded bands indicate the standard error of the
mean.
(c) Statistical error of the reconstructed density of
states, W, as a function of sampling depth, d, for nq = 50.
because m = 1 intervals are too short to bridge the gaps
at nq = 1, L2 −1.
