CAMulator
Figure 2: Column-integrated heat content in CAMulator to different SST forcing scenarios. (Top panel) A 12-member
CAMulator ensemble (teal) is compared to the CAM6 simulation (purple) using observed SSTs from 1979–2014.
CAMulator successfully captures the long-term warming trend and interannual variability. To isolate the trend, the
seasonal cycle has been removed by regressing out the six leading harmonics, and a 90-day rolling mean has been
applied. The ensemble spread arises from stochastic kinetic energy backscatter (SKEBS) perturbations applied during
the first 15 days of simulation. (Bottom panel) CAMulator forced with fixed year-2000 climatological SSTs produces
a stable long-term simulation with no discernible trend, demonstrating that the model does not introduce artificial
warming in the absence of an external forcing mechanism.
long-term warming trend of total column-integrated heat content. Even though the emulator is initialized from weather
states that then evolve dynamically at 6 hour time steps, it is still able to capture major modes of low-frequency internal
variability while remaining on the correct trend trajectory. Thus, this serves as a semi-independent test of the emulator’s
ability to reproduce climate-scale variability in a changing climate, despite the presence of the trend in the training
data. To isolate this trend, the seasonal cycle was removed by regressing out the six leading harmonics, and a 90-day
rolling mean was applied to the time series (Fig. 2a). The CAM6 simulation remains well within the ensemble spread
of CAMulator, highlighting the ability of CAMulator to reproduce observed interannual variability. The CAMulator
ensemble spread arises from the introduction of stochastic kinetic energy backscatter [SKEBS, e.g., Berner et al.,
2009], which perturbs initial conditions over the first 15 days before allowing the system to evolve freely. We see an
underestimation of total heat capacity in the period from 2003 to 2010 in CAMulator, however, CAM6 still largely sits
within the ensemble spread. This discrepancy, is discussed further in “Model Deficiencies and Future Improvements".
Figure 2b demonstrates the model’s behavior when forced with fixed year-2000 climatological SSTs. In this scenario,
CAMulator maintains an indefinite stable rollout with no emergent trend, as the absence of external forcing in SSTs
prevents any sustained warming signal. This suggests that while the model responds effectively to imposed SST trends,
it does not generate spurious warming in the absence of a forcing mechanism, and is capable of indefinite fixed climate
rollouts. We show an identical figure to Figure 2 in the supplemental material, but for total water path (Fig. S1) and find
similar results.
Notably, across all SST forcing scenarios—including cases where the simulations were forced with SSTs outside of the
training distribution—CAMulator has exhibited no signs of numerical instability. To date, no model crashes with our
final model configuration have been observed, highlighting its robustness in handling a range of climate conditions.
7
