22 
55. F. M. Della Rocca et al., “Field programmable gate array compression for large array 
multispeckle diffuse correlation spectroscopy,” J. Biomed. Opt. 28(05) (2023) 
[doi:10.1117/1.JBO.28.5.057001]. 
56. S. A. Carp et al., “Recovery of brain blood flow changes from diffuse correlation 
spectroscopy data using a layered Monte Carlo forward model,” in Biomedical Optics 2014, 
p. BM3A.20, OSA, Miami, Florida (2014) [doi:10.1364/BIOMED.2014.BM3A.20]. 
 
Mingliang Pan holds a bachelor’s degree in telecommunications engineering from Anhui 
University, Hefei, China. He further pursued and obtained his master’s degree in optical 
engineering from the University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, Shanghai, China. 
Currently, he is a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Biomedical Engineering at the University 
of Strathclyde, Glasgow, United Kingdom. His research interests include diffuse correlation 
spectroscopy, and Raman spectroscopy. 
Chenxu Li received his master’s degree in control engineering from Northeastern University, 
Shenyang, China. He is currently pursuing his PhD in the Department of Biomedical Engineering 
at the University of Strathclyde. His research focuses on the application of diffuse correlation 
spectroscopy (DCS) for measuring cerebral blood flow. He is also interested in advancing speckle 
contrast optical spectroscopy (SCOS) to improve accuracy and broaden the applications of optical 
monitoring techniques. 
Yuanzhe Zhang holds a bachelor's degree in Light Source and Lighting from Taiyuan University 
of Technology, Taiyuan, China. He is currently pursuing a Ph.D. at the University of Strathclyde, 
Glasgow, United Kingdom, with a research focus on the development of medical imaging 
equipment. His academic interests center on FPGA-based imaging systems and the advancement 
of novel medical imaging technologies. 
Alan Mollins is a final year BEng (Hons) Biomedical Engineering Student at the University of 
Strathclyde, Glasgow. His honours dissertation explores the application of deep learning for 
processing diffuse correlation spectroscopy outputs. 
Quan Wang earned his master’s degree in optics from Xi’an Technological University, Shaanxi, 
China, in 2018. He then worked as a production technician at Electro Scientific Industries (MKS) 
Pte Ltd and as an optical engineer at KLA-Tencor Pte Ltd in Singapore from 2018 to 2020. After 
completing his Ph.D. in 2024, he joined the Department of Biomedical Engineering at the 
University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK, where he is currently a postdoctoral researcher. His 
research focuses on fluorescence lifetime imaging systems, flow cytometry, and diffuse correlation 
spectroscopy. 
Ahmet T. Erdogan received the B.Sc. degree in electronics engineering from Dokuz Eylul 
University, Izmir, Turkey, in 1990, and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in electronics engineering 
from Cardiff University, Cardiff, U.K., in 1995 and 1999, respectively. Since 1999, he has been 
working on several research projects at The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, U.K., where he 
is currently a Research Associate with the CMOS Sensors and Systems Group, School of 
