3
dynamics. Our analytical model is derived from first principles, including explicitly both
toroidal fluid flow and the mechanics of the cupula. By exploiting the slenderness of the
semicircular canals, and applying a detailed asymptotic analysis, we obtain a reduced model
that allows to incorporate both arbitrary geometry and arbitrary forcing, combining the
best of previous approaches. We complement this with numerical computations, specifically
including fluid-solid couplings. Our combined numerical and analytical approach enables
us to validate the reduced analytical model, uncover qualitative features, characterize flow
regimes, and investigate detailed features of the flow and cupula deformation.
One of the key motivating issues underlying our study concerns the mechanical properties
of the cupula. Although the anatomy of the vestibular system is well understood, the
architecture itself is incredibly delicate and fragile, which prohibits the possibility of direct
mechanical testing. For this reason, the stiffness of the cupula has only ever been obtained
through indirect measurement, a procedure that has produced both some uncertainty and
surprisingly low values; for example, a Young’s modulus of around 5 Pa has been reported
(Selva et al. 2009), which is well below values typically associated with soft biological tissues
(see Budday et al. 2015, where they estimate the Young’s modulus of brain matter to be 1
kPa). Nevertheless, the stiffness of the cupula is a key mechanical parameter, as it dictates
the degree of deformation under a given flow and therefore the potential for and degree of
stimulus. In fact, as we will show, this parameter plays an even stronger role, impacting not
just the degree of deformation but the qualitative nature of the flow induced by motion as
well. By examining the behaviour of our model as the relative stiffness of the cupula varies,
we will demonstrate the presence of two distinct regimes: for “soft” cupulas the deformation
follows the angular velocity of the imposed motion, while for “stiff” cupulas the deformation
instead tracks the angular acceleration.
Moreover, we will explain how the second of these regimes is connected to a symmetry
breaking of the flow in the endolymph. As we shall demonstrate in our numerical simulations,
presented in Section 2.2, the flow in the endolymph is only axisymmetric (relative to the
duct’s center-line or axis) under particular conditions. Despite this observation, many existing
models have implicitly assumed a symmetric flow. Examination of our analytical solution
enables us to explain exactly when and how symmetry breaking occurs. This feature is
interesting in the context of the broader literature on flow through curved pipes. Although
the effect of curvature on pipe flow was first discussed by Dean (1928), the plethora of
subsequent studies have focused mostly on steady flows (Chupin & Stepanov 2008; Pedley
1980; Siggers & Waters 2005) — there have been many fewer investigations into unsteady
fluid phenomena (though see Siggers & Waters 2008, for an example). We shall show that
the essential coupling between the Euler force and the (a priori) unknown pressure gradient
can lead to the annihilation of the symmetric leading order velocity — a situation that
distinguishes this problem from classical studies of flow in curved pipes. We conclude our
study with an investigation of the emergence of vortical flow in the utricle. This feature has
been reported previously, but only in numerical simulations (Boselli et al. 2013); our model
provides both an analytical understanding and an explicit characterization for when vortical
flow will emerge.
2. Governing equations
We consider a single semicircular canal, as portrayed schematically in Figure 2(a): the
endolymph fills a toroidal structure whose centreline forms a circle of radius 𝑅and whose
radius is small and spatially-varying, denoted ˆ𝑎(ˆ𝑠) ≪𝑅, where ˆ𝑠is an arc length parameter
along the centreline. The canal is subjected to a rotation defined by angular velocity ˆΩ(ˆ𝑡)
around the centre of the toroid with rotation axis normal to the plane of the centreline. The
