dimensional grounds, the emission rate for the process χχ →hij is given by Γχχh ∼(1+2fh)nχ/M 2
pl,
where nχ is the number density of χ. Here, fh is the phase space distribution function of gravitons,
acting as the Bose factor. In a vacuum state, nχ vanishes, and graviton production is negligible. In
a thermal state, the number density scales as nχ ∝β−3, where β is the inverse temperature. Thus,
a higher temperature leads to increased graviton emissions. While β is a free parameter in thermal
field theory in a flat background, it cannot be arbitrarily small. In an extreme scenario where the
temperature is high enough to drive spacetime evolution, the universe is radiation-dominated. The
Friedmann equation then gives β−1 ∼
p
MplH, where H is the Hubble parameter. This leads to
Γχχh/H ∼
p
H/Mpl, which is generally small and decreases with time. Thus, one might naively
expect no significant graviton emission from a thermal background.
The above argument implicitly assumes that gravitons are in a mixed state expanded in terms of
Hamiltonian eigenstates, thereby allowing the Heisenberg equation to be reduced to a Boltzmann
equation for the phase space distribution. This method, sometimes referred to as the quantum
Boltzmann equation, was developed in the study of neutrino mixing [9, 10] and has also been
applied to the polarization of the cosmic microwave background [11] (for recent developments, see
also [12–20]). Such an ansatz for a quantum state permits counting graviton numbers classically
and applying a kinematic description. In such a framework, the phase space distributions of each
polarization mode fully characterize statistical graviton states. However, this is not necessarily the
case for general quantum states of gravitons. For instance, the distribution of primordial gravitons
generated during inflation reside in a two-mode squeezed vacuum state [21], which is not solely
determined by graviton number, as the coherence of different number eigenstates is nonvanishing. In
Ref. [22], it was suggested that squeezed vacuum states of gravitons could stimulate further graviton
emission, potentially enhancing the initial graviton population 1. This setup is incompatible to the
usual assumptions in the kinetic theory
This effect, termed cosmological stimulated emission, presents two key challenges. First, the
emission rate is proportional not to the number density but to the radiation pressure. As a result,
the usual Planck suppression of the emission rate is canceled, potentially causing a breakdown
of perturbative analysis. Second, the additional mass dimension introduced by radiation pressure
is compensated by graviton momentum, implying that infrared (IR) gravitons are more sensitive
to the process. Such an IR sensitivity is common for the stimulated emission for photons [26].
In lasers, the finite gap of atomic electron eigenstates limits the maximum possible IR photon
wavelength . However, in a cosmological situation, there is no such constraint since the radiation
momenta can form arbitrary squeezed triangle configurations in momentum space, which results in
a secular growth of the IR graviton power spectrum [27], that has also been confirmed by [28].
In this paper, we derive the evolution equations governing both the number density and internal
quantum phase of squeezed-state gravitons using the Heisenberg equation (Similar methods have
also been applied to the study of particle production [29, 30] and neutrino kinematics [31–35]). The
derivation follows an approach similar to the quantum-mechanical formulation of the Boltzmann
equation, with the primary difference being the ansatz for quantum states.
The sensitivity to
IR gravitons is subtle in an expanding universe, as the physical interpretation of gravitons on
superhorizon scales remains unclear. To address this, we begin with a careful analysis in a flat
background where the issue is absent.
Then, we will show that the back reaction of radiation
to the background spacetime is essential when discussing the sizable stimulated emission. As an
alternative approach, we analyze cosmological stimulated emission in an expanding universe under
a reasonable parameter space, where the initial graviton wavelength is not significantly larger than
the Hubble horizon size, ensuring that uncertainties from large gauge symmetry do not arise. We
1As another interesting direction is graviton production in the thermal background in hydrodynamical scale [23–
25], while we focus on the quantum effect on IR relic gravitons in this paper.
– 2 –
