Abstract
In real-life complex systems, individuals often encounter multiple social dilemmas that cannot
be effectively captured using a single-game model. Furthermore, the environment and limited re-
sources both play a crucial role in shaping individuals’ decision-making behaviors. In this study, we
employ an adaptive control mechanism by which agents may benefit from their environment, thus
redefining their individual fitness. Under this setting, a detailed examination of the co-evolution of
individual strategies and resource allocation is carried. Through extensive simulations, we find that
the advantageous environment mechanism not only significantly increases the proportion of coop-
erators in the system but also influences the resource distribution among individuals. Additionally,
limited resources reinforce cooperative behaviors within the system while shaping the evolutionary
dynamics and strategic interactions across different dilemmas. Once the system reaches equilib-
rium, resource distribution becomes highly imbalanced. To promote fairer resource allocation, we
introduce a minimum resource guarantee mechanism. Our results show that this mechanism not
only reduces disparities in resource distribution across the entire system and among individuals in
different dilemmas but also significantly enhances cooperative behavior in higher resource intervals.
Finally, to assess the robustness of our model, we further examine the influence of the advantageous
environment on system-wide cooperation in small-world and random graph network models.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Cooperation is a widespread phenomenon in nature, observed across various species, from
the collective hunting strategies of lions and wolves to the intricate social behaviors of human
societies. However, the prevalence of cooperation appears paradoxical when viewed through
the lens of natural selection, which favors individual fitness [1–3]. This suggests that the
inherent self-interest of individuals poses a fundamental challenge to the evolution of co-
operation. Understanding the emergence and persistence of cooperative behavior among
self-interested agents remains a central question in diverse fields, including biology [4], so-
cial sciences [5], and behavioral sciences [6]. Evolutionary game theory provides a powerful
framework for addressing this issue [7–9], with various game-theoretic models widely em-
∗Contact author: sunchengbin94@163.com
† Contact author: hxxia@dlut.edu.cn
2
