Can gravity mediate the transmission of quantum information?
Andrea Mari,1 Stefano Zippilli,1 and David Vitali1
1Physics Division, School of Science and Technology, Università di Camerino, 62032 Camerino, Italy
We propose an experiment to test the non-classicality of the gravitational interaction. We consider two op-
tomechanical systems that are perfectly isolated, except for a weak gravitational coupling. If a suitable resonance
condition is satisfied, an optical signal can be transmitted from one system to the other over a narrow frequency
band, a phenomenon that we call gravitationally induced transparency. In this framework, the challenging
problem of testing the quantum nature of gravity is mapped to the easier task of determining the non-classicality
of the gravitationally-induced optical channel: If the optical channel is not entanglement-breaking, then gravity
must have a quantum nature. This approach is applicable without making any assumption on the, currently
unknown, correct model of gravity in the quantum regime. In the second part of this work, we model gravity as
a quadratic Hamiltonian interaction (e.g. a weak Newtonian force), resulting in a Gaussian thermal attenuator
channel between the two systems. Depending on the strength of thermal noise, the system presents a sharp tran-
sition from an entanglement-breaking to a non-classical channel capable not only of entanglement preservation
but also of asymptotically perfect quantum communication.
One of the main open problems in physics is merging quan-
tum mechanics and gravity into a unified and consistent the-
ory [1, 2]. Today, despite many interesting attempts in this
direction [3, 4], the problem is unsolved and it is even de-
bated whether gravity requires a quantum description in the
first place [5–7]. In fact, theoretical models have been pro-
posed in which gravity behaves as a fundamentally classical
entity, even in the presence of quantum source masses [7–12].
In this work, we use a quantum communication theory
[13] approach and propose an experimental protocol to test
whether gravity is a classical or a quantum phenomenon.
Specifically, the experiment is designed to falsify the hypoth-
esis that gravity can be described as a classical process act-
ing on the quantum dynamics of test masses. The appara-
tus, schematically represented in Fig. 1, is based on two opto-
mechanical systems [14–16] laser-driven in their steady-state
regime and isolated from each other, apart from a weak grav-
itational interaction between their mechanical resonators. A
suitable resonance condition can be tuned such that gravity
induces an effective optical communication channel between
the two systems. We call this phenomenon gravitationally-
induced transparency (GIT). In this setting, the general ques-
tion of whether gravity is classical or quantum is mapped to
the well-defined problem of determining the non-classical na-
ture of an optical channel.
Once the problem is reduced to the characterization of a
quantum optical channel, we can use standard tools from
quantum information theory to distinguish intrinsically quan-
tum processes from classical processes. A well-established
criterion is the notion of entanglement-breaking channels
[17, 18], i.e., channels that always yield a separable state when
applied to a subsystem of a composite system prepared in any
entangled state. Crucially, the non-classicality of an optical
channel can be experimentally certified even without having
full tomographic knowledge of the process and, in particular,
without assuming any specific model for the description of
the gravitational interaction. Explicit experimental tests are
described later.
Even if our proposal is model-independent, it is neverthe-
less useful to focus on a specific model of the dynamics. For
this purpose, we explicitly evaluate the quantum steady-state
a1
b1
a2
b2
ain1
aout2
Optomech. system S1
g
Optomech. system S2
g
Quantum optical channel Φ
Gravity
λ
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
ω [Hz]
×10−5
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Transmissivity: η
Output noise: N(1 −η)
Non-classical region
ω = ±γ(eﬀ)
opt /2
FIG. 1. (Top) The apparatus required to observe the gravitationally-
induced transparency (GIT) phenomenon is based on two opto-
mechanical systems, S 1 and S 2. Each system is composed of an
optical cavity mode a j that is coupled with a mechanical resonator
b j, where j = 1, 2. By tuning the mode frequencies and the optome-
chanical coupling g, gravity can induce an effective quantum channel
Φ from the optical input of S 1 to the optical output of S 2. Any quan-
tum optics experiment demonstrating that Φ is not entanglement-
breaking would imply that gravity is a non-classical phenomenon.
(Bottom) Effective transmissivity and output noise as a function of
the input probe frequency ω (relative to the cavity frequency). When
the transmissivity is higher than the output noise, the channel Φ is
non-classical. This plot is based on the quadratic gravitational inter-
action defined in Eq. (9) and on the following physical parameters:
ωB = 2π × 0.03 Hz, γ = 10−14ωB, κ = 0.1ωB, λ = 3.58 × 10−6 Hz,
g = 1.84 × 10−4 Hz, and T = 1 mK. For more details, see Fig. S.1 in
Supplemental Material S.I.
of the system assuming that gravity can be approximated by
a quadratic Hamiltonian interaction (e.g. a linearized Newto-
nian force) between the mechanical degrees of freedom of the
two optomechanical systems. In this setting and within the
rotating-wave approximation, we show that gravity induces a
quantum thermal attenuator channel [13, 19] between inde-
pendent optical frequency modes of the two subsystems. The
arXiv:2504.05998v1  [quant-ph]  8 Apr 2025
