Entropy 2024, 26, 612
80 of 84
Since there is no gravitational radiation in two spatial dimensions, the N-body prob-
lem in this setting is of considerable interest, all the more so since general relativity
will provide the foundation for the ﬁeld equations. This problem has been considered
from a topological perspective [131], from which an implicit solution for the metric
and the motion of N particles was obtained [132]. The solution becomes explicit for
N = 2. However, the relationship between this approach and the canonical approach
has only been explored to a limited extent [133,134]. A thorough analysis should be
carried out, particularly since particle collisions can form black holes [135] and quite
possibly lead to other interesting space–time effects.
6.
Extensions to dilaton gravity
The R = T theory (10) has provided the context for exploring the relativistic N-body
problem since it is the D →2 limit of general relativity [28]. However, a broad class of
two-dimensional theories of gravity exist [72] and are of physical interest for a variety
of reasons. Exploring the N-body problem in this broader context could lead to new
physical insights into chaos, relativity, and quantum gravity.
7.
The Quantum N-body Problem
The Hamiltonian (76) is the exact energy functional of all degrees of freedom in
the relativistic charged two-body system. Consequently, its quantization will be
tantamount to the full quantization of gravity coupled to charged matter in one
spatial dimension. The N system can be fully quantized, with energy eigenfunctions
given in terms of airy functions, and the associated eigenvalues in terms of their
zeroes. Perturbative solutions to the quantum pN system were obtained [136], but a
full analysis of the quantum R system has yet to be carried out. This problem is of
considerable interest, since there is experimental evidence that the energy states of
neutrons are given by the eigenstates of the N system [137], conﬁrming the test-mass
limit of the quantum N-system. A better understanding of the quantum R-system
could conceivably lead to the experimental tests of relativistic quantum gravity.
Funding: This work was supported in part by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council
of Canada.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study. Data sharing is
not applicable.
Acknowledgments: I am grateful to the students and collaborators that have contributed to the work
presented in this review: Sven Bachmann, Fiona Burnell, Philip Chak, Pierre Farrugia, Peter Gustainis,
Ryan Kerner, Michael Koop, Andrew Lauritzen, Justin Malecki, Geoff Potvin, Daniel Robbins, Simon
Ross, Marco Raiteri, Mina Rohanazadegan, Tony Scott, Mike Trott, Alex Yale, and Matt Young. And I
am especially grateful to Tadayuki Ohta (now deceased) for introducing me to the N-body problem
and the canonical methods that allowed us to explore this interesting aspect of gravitational physics.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂicts of interest
References
1.
Barrow-Green, J. The Princeton Companion to Mathematics; Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ, USA, 2010; pp. 726–728.
[CrossRef]
2.
Šuvakov, M.; Dmitrašinovi´c, V. Three Classes of Newtonian Three-Body Planar Periodic Orbits. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2013, 110, 114301.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Lehtihet, H.; Miller, B. Numerical study of a billiard in a gravitational ﬁeld. Phys. D Nonlinear Phenom. 1986, 21, 93–104. [CrossRef]
4.
Rybicki, G.B. Exact Statistical Mechanics of a One-Dimensional Self-Gravitating System. Astrophys. Space Sci. 1971, 14, 56–72.
[CrossRef]
5.
Yawn, K.R.; Miller, B.N. Equipartition and Mass Segregation in a One-Dimensional Self-Gravitating System. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1997,
79, 3561–3564. [CrossRef]
6.
Wright, H.L.; Miller, B.N.; Stein, W.E. The Relaxation Time of a One-Dimensional Self-Gravitating System. Astrophys. Space Sci.
1982, 84, 421–429. [CrossRef]
7.
Rouet, J.; Feix, M.; Navet, M. One-dimensional numerical simulation and homogeneity of the expanding universe. Vistas Astron.
1990, 33, 357–370. [CrossRef]
