2.4.
Moist Stability
To understand the moist stability of the atmosphere, it is typical in atmospheric
science and meteorology to use a parcel argument (Vallis 2017). Consider a moist
parcel of air. In the absence of diffusion and radiative cooling, the moist static energy
of the parcel is conserved (Dm/Dt = 0). If the parcel of air is unsaturated (q < qs),
we rise the parcel along the dry adiabat (b is conserved, so dT/dz = −Γd = −g/cp)
also conserving the humidity of the parcel (equation (11) for q < qs and no diffusion),
until the parcel becomes saturated at the (parcel) lifting condensation level (LCL),
where q = qs. We then rise the now saturated parcel along the moist pseudoadiabat,
where m is conserved and q = qs(T). The moist psuedoadiabatic buoyancy and
temperature profiles of the atmospheric parcel (and the moist adiabatic lapse rate,
Γm = −dTm/dz) can be determined by solving the equation m = b(T)+γq(T) = m(0)
as a function of height.
We define the buoyancy and temperature of parcel using bp and Tp respectively, and
that of the environment with bE and TE. An environmental profile can be defined
as absolutely unstable, if the parcel satisfies Tp ≥TE ⇒bp ≥bE at each height, z.
In this case, the air parcel would be more buoyant (warmer) than its environment
everywhere, and so would rise (or convect) freely. If instead the parcel is less buoyant
(cooler) than its environment up to a height z = LFC < H, and more buoyant
(warmer) than its environment for LFC ≤z ≤LNB, we can describe the atmosphere
as conditionally unstable: for the parcel to convect freely (up to z = LNB, the level of
neutral buoyancy), the parcel must be lifted (through turbulent or mechanical lifting)
to the level of free convection (LFC). If the parcel is less buoyant (cooler) than its
environment (Tp ≤TE ⇒bp ≤bE) at all heights z, the environment is absolutely
stable. Note that conditional stability of a profile is no longer a local measure, because
finite amplitude displacements may be needed to rise a parcel above it’s LFC in order
to release energy1. An example of a conditionally unstable (basic state) environment
is shown in Figure 1.
To quantify the conditional instability of the environment, we use Convective
Available Potential Energy (CAPE). Figure 1 shows a schematic of how CAPE is cal-
culated. The area of the orange region in Figure 1 is the convective inhibition (CIN),
where the parcel is less buoyant than its environment. Above the LFC, the area of the
blue region is the positive CAPE (pCAPE), where the parcel is more buoyant than its
environment. We additionally define (net) CAPE =
R H
0 (bp −bBS)dz = pCAPE−CIN.
The positive CAPE can be thought of as the total amount of energy that can be
released (by convection) in the system, and according to the parcel argument, positive
CAPE is a necessary condition for the system to be able to release energy. However
it does not tell us about convective onset in the system, i.e. when the system will
overcome diffusion, which is determined by a linear stability analysis.
1Different definition of conditional instability in the American Meteorological Society Glossary: “The state
of a layer of unsaturated air when its lapse rate of temperature is less than the dry-adiabatic lapse rate but
greater than the moist-adiabatic lapse rate”. For saturated upper profiles, the two definitions of conditional
instability are equivalent, but not generally (American Meteorological Society 2023)
8
