CHI ’25, April 26-May 1, 2025, Yokohama, Japan
Jian Zhang, Wafa Johal, and Jarrod Knibbe
Vertical axis:
How illusion spaces change 
with physical sizes
Back surface:
Angle upscaling thresholds
Right surface:
Size upscaling thresholds
Front Surface:
Angle downscaling thresholds
Left surface:
Size downscaling thresholds
Colours:
How illusion spaces change 
with physical angles
Figure 9: Illusion spaces (including different physical sizes and angles)
that an interplay between properties and incongruences of physical
and virtual objects exists. By examining the slope of the lines, in all
these cases altering virtual sizes changes the angle perception
thresholds more than angle changes impact size perception.
These results suggest a new method to expand the ability for phys-
ical objects to represent virtual ones, by changing other virtual
properties instead of changing the physical objects.
6.2
Implications for VR Haptics
This multi-dimensional illusion space model offers valuable knowl-
edge for haptics designers in VR. When designing haptic devices
with similar properties to our settings, given the physical size and
angle, we can immediately obtain the range of virtual objects with
various sizes and angles this physical object can represent.
For haptic controllers and physical passive proxies, smaller de-
signs have the advantage of rendering a virtual object with a larger
range of sizes (proportional to the controller sizes), according to our
findings. For angle perception, devices with larger physical angles
are likely to be perceived as showing less tilted angles in VR.
Our model also offers brand-new options in haptic feedback
designs by showing how virtual factors can interplay with each
other and influence perception. For instance, with increases of
virtual sizes, the perceived angle of the haptic feedback increases.
On the other hand, with the increase of virtual angles, the perceived
size becomes smaller. The model demonstrates that a user’s haptic
perception can be altered by changing another interplaying virtual
factor. In turn, this can serve to expand the feedback range of an
active controller, without any changes to its hardware design.
For more complex or different haptic devices, we have provided
insights into how size and angle perception may influence each
other. For example, in the controller design of Kelesbekov et al.
[33], the shape of virtual objects can be dynamically and precisely
displayed by the controller within its mechanical limits, but our
illusion space models show how the range of feedback can be largely
increased through illusions. Similar benefits can be found for hand-
mounted devices, too, such as Wolverine [10] and Claw [11].
Through these interplay effects, we have revealed a greater
haptic coverage for passive proxy objects (in terms of illusions
of similarity [40]). Where prior work has explored spatial hap-
tic coverage[14], we begin to contribute deeper insights into the
broader opportunities of geometric haptic coverage.
Our tool for identifying illusion spaces for passive objects further
improves designers’ and users’ ability to represent more virtual
objects with the same, or even less, physical props. Building on
the concepts of Substitutional Reality [46], for example, our results
increase the potential use of objects around the home within VR
and may serve to further reduce design constraints when producing
physical props [57].
6.3
Limitations and Future Work
To control variants in the experiment, the same 2AFC questions
were presented to the participants in every task. Although we’ve
analysed data from most tasks, the resultant proportions of 6cm-0°
