3
A.
Bases mismatch
Bases
mismatch
describes
any
of
the
following
six
basis
choices
of
the
users
A,
B1
and
B2:
{XXY, YYX, XYX, YXY, YXX, XYY}.
Furthermore
one can pair the triplets which coincide if X ↔Y, e.g.,
{XXY, YYX}, since both options output coherent states
of the same amplitude. For the first pair, assuming that
the amplitude of the input states is √µ, in Table I we pro-
vide the amplitudes of the coherent states reaching the
detectors for all possible choices of encoding. The Table I
illustrates that each output state provides a probability
for each detector to either fire or remain inactive. Thus
we are obliged to ‘enforce’ to each scenario a detection
type keeping though in mind not only that a detection
might not occur but more importantly that a misdetec-
tion can happen as well.
For instance, an input state
characterized on Table I as Type 0 can lead with some
probability to detection Type 1 and vice versa.
Bases
mismatch
refers
to
any
of
the
following
six possible basis choices for users A, B1, and B2:
{XXY, YYX, XYX, YXY, YXX, XYY}. These can be
paired by swapping X ↔Y (e.g., {XXY, YYX}), as both
options yield coherent states with the same amplitude.
For the first pair, assuming the amplitude of the input
states is √µ, Table I shows the amplitudes of the coher-
ent states reaching the detectors for all encoding choices.
The table illustrates that each output state results in a
probability for each detector to either fire or remain in-
active. We must therefore ‘enforce’ a detection type for
each scenario, keeping in mind not only that a detection
might not occur, but also that misdetections can happen
(contrary to [6]). In Appendix we provide the tables for
the rest of the triplets.
In Fig. 3 we present the average success probability of
correct detection over all six bases triplets and phase en-
codings, assuming perfect detectors. The average error
is presented in the same graph. This concerns an honest
implementation of the protocol, and for this reason we re-
fer to it as systematic error to differentiate it from errors
due to eavesdropping or imperfection on devices/links.
B.
Bases match
In the event that all users encode the information on
the same basis, e.g., XXX, we identify four different pat-
terns of detection, presented in Table II. As for Bases
mismatch, in Table II we relate the inputs to the outputs,
the detection types and the required actions so that each
pair adds a bit on its pairwise key – bit-string.
We calculate the probability of systematic errors for an
honest implementation, as shown in Table II. In calcu-
lations not presented here, we observe a significant sys-
tematic error of about 20% for µ ≈0.4, primarily due to
the overlap between detection outcomes of types 3 and
4 with type 0.
This high systematic error leads to a
Bit Error Rate (BER) of approximately 40%, rendering
the Bases match case of the protocol impractical.
To
address this, we exclude detection types 3 and 4, as do-
ing so, significantly reduces the systematic error without
compromising the probability of a successful implemen-
tation, making the BER more tolerable. In Fig. 4, we
plot the probability of a successful detection for Types
0 and 1, along with the corresponding systematic error
introduced by other detection types. Finally, Table III
summarizes the admissible detection types for each basis
triplet.
It is important to note that a Bases Match (excluding
detection types 3 and 4) occurs with a probability of 1/8
across all cases. This probability is further adjusted by
the probability of successful implementation, as shown
in Fig. 4. The low overall probability of success, coupled
with the additional systematic error, makes the current
protocol unsuitable for implementing QCKA. For a more
effective approach, we refer interested readers to more
sophisticated protocols, such as the one in [8].
IV.
THE STEPS OF THE PROTOCOL
The analysis in the previous section prepares us to
present the steps of the protocol for distributing keys.
In the case of a Bases mismatch, the protocol distributes
keys to a single pair of users.
In the case of a Bases
match, keys are distributed to all three pairs, with only
Types 0 and 1 of detection being considered.
1. Each user randomly selects a bit value (b := 0, 1)
and a basis (B := X, Y ). They create and send
a reference pulse followed by a coherent pulse with
intensity µ, whose phase ϕ is modulated according
to the chosen bit value and basis as follows:
• (b = 0, B = X) →ϕ = 0
Average Error
Average Success
Success of Original
0.5
1.0
1.5
μ
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Probability
Basis Mismatch: Error and Success Probabilities
FIG. 3: Bases mismatch between the three users, where a
bit is distributed to the pair of users with matching bases.
Dashed red line: Average probability of a successful
detection event, assuming perfect detectors. Dotted black
line: Average probability of a wrong detection type, leading
to a bit error in the pairwise distributed key. Solid yellow
line: Probability of successful detection for the original
protocol in [6]. Horizontal axis: Intensity µ of the coherent
states prepared by the users.
