26
Scattering Protons
all logarithmic corrections as they are provided by DGLAP evolution, but it does not contain any
power-like heavy quark corrections m2/Q2 which may be phenomenological important in certain
regions of the kinematic phase space. ZM-VFNS usually generates unphysical discontinuities
where the scale Q equals any of the heavy quark masses. However, as all the power suppressed
corrections are neglected all the perturbative calculations simplify significantly.
The FONLL scheme.
A more refined prescription is the FONLL scheme [106], presented
in Ref. [107] for DIS observables, with a more recent implementation provided in [5]. The
FONLL scheme enhances the fixed order calculation by the resummation of the pseudo-collinear
logs, which can become arbitrary large. The procedure can be applied either to one or more
heavy quark thresholds, and generalization to the polarized case are possible, provided that
the massive calculation are available [12]. In practice, one combines FFNSnf and FFNSn1 + 1
while taking care of the double counting and define
F FONLL(Q2, m2
h) = F (nf)(Q2, m2
h) + F (nf+1)(Q2) −F (nf∩nf+1)(Q2, m2
h)
(1.103)
where the intersection operation ∩indicate the overlap between the two schemes.
Calculations performed in a decoupling scheme with nf light quarks retain the full dependence
on the heavy quark mass and include the contribution of heavy quarks at a fixed perturbative
order (FFNSnf). Calculations performed in a scheme in which the heavy quark is treated as
massless (FFNSn1 +1), and endowed with a PDF that satisfies perturbative matching conditions,
resums logarithms of Q2/m2
h to all orders through the running of the coupling and the evolution
of PDFs, but does not include terms that are suppressed as powers of m2
h
Q2 . In the r.h.s of
Eq. (1.103), each component obeys factorization and is thus given by a convolution between
a PDF f and a coefficient function C, given in the corresponding scheme. The intersection
coefficient is given by Eq. (1.100) and contains only the massive pseudo-collinear terms and
has to be convolved with an nf PDF set. This construction reduces to the decoupling calculation
for Q2 ≈m2
h and to the massless one for Q2 ≫m2
h.
When computing Eq. (1.103) multiple approaches are possible: in the original publication
[107], all the terms are rewritten analytically in the FFNSnf + 1 scheme such that a single
PDF convolution is needed. However, this approach is not optimal at higher orders where
the matching condition expressions become more involved and their explicit inversion can be
complex; in Ref. [5] we show how Eq. (1.103) can be implemented more easily evolving the
different PDFs in their respective schemes and joining the different pieces only at structure
function level. The latter method is also more straightforward to extend in case of multiple
thresholds (charm and bottom), where the procedure is applied iteratively, while the method of
Ref. [107] would require re-expressing the massive scheme PDFs into massless scheme PDFs
twice.
