Under consideration for publication in J. Fluid Mech.
1
Banner appropriate to article type will appear here in typeset article
Constructing wall turbulence using hierarchically
attached hairpin vortices
Weiyu Shen1,2,a, Yuchen Ge1,3,a, Zishuo Han1, Yaomin Zhao1,3† and Yue Yang1,3‡
1State Key Laboratory for Turbulence and Complex Systems, College of Engineering, Peking University,
Beijing 100871, PR China
2Max Planck Institute for Solar System Research, 37077 G¨ottingen, Germany
3HEDPS-CAPT, Peking University, Beijing 100871, PR China
aThese authors contributed equally to this work.
(Received xx; revised xx; accepted xx)
Wall-bounded turbulence is characterized by coherent, worm-like structures such as hairpin
vortices. The organization of these vortices near the wall can be modeled using the attached-
eddy hypothesis, which effectively describes velocity statistics in the log-law region and
energy-containing motions. However, the complex geometry and diverse scales of vortex
structures in wall turbulence present significant challenges for developing and applying
physics-based models. Here, we model wall turbulence as an ensemble of complex vortices,
offering a systematic approach to constructing turbulence fields enriched with hierarchically
organized hairpin vortex packets at a range of Reynolds numbers. The geometry and distribu-
tion of these vortex packets are calibrated to match physical observations and flow statistics.
Our model successfully reproduces key features of wall turbulence, including mean velocity
profiles, higher-order velocity fluctuation moments, near-wall streaks, and energy spectra that
align with theoretical and numerical findings of turbulent channel flows at friction Reynolds
numbers from 1,000 to 10,000. Furthermore, the constructed channel turbulence transitions
rapidly to fully developed turbulence through direct numerical simulation, demonstrating its
practicality for generating inlet or initial conditions in numerical simulations. This approach
significantly reduces computational costs associated with turbulence development while
providing a robust framework for testing and advancing turbulence models based on vortex
structures.
Key words: wall turbulence, boundary layer, vortex dynamics
1. Introduction
Wall turbulence is ubiquitous, playing a critical role in a wide range of natural and
engineering systems. A major aspect of understanding wall turbulence is identifying the
† Email address for correspondence: yaomin.zhao@pku.edu.cn
‡ Email address for correspondence: yyg@pku.edu.cn
arXiv:2504.06761v1  [physics.flu-dyn]  9 Apr 2025
