International Journal on “Technical and Physical Problems of Engineering” (IJTPE), Iss. 61, Vol. 16, No. 4, Dec. 2024 
183 
The reconstruction phase is based on the following 
key principles: 
• The advantages of an efficient technological model for 
complex gas pipeline systems. 
• The uninterrupted transportation of planned gas flows 
to consumers. 
• The level of reliability indicators for complex gas 
pipeline systems. 
• The safety of the operation and environmental aspects 
of complex gas pipeline systems. 
• Leakage detection technology for pipeline safety. 
• Integration of Modern Control Theories. 
The "Main Pipeline Design" standards state that 
parallel gas pipelines are complex systems consisting of 
two or more pipeline lines. These lines have the same 
pressure at the beginning and end sections and are 
equipped with at least two connectors and connecting 
fittings to ensure the transfer of gas flow between the 
pipelines during technical operations and emergencies.  
In other words, the information obtained from changes in 
gas flow parameters at the end sections of the system due 
to the failure of one of the pipeline lines in parallel gas 
pipelines is not reliable. According to the research 
conducted in reference [5, 7], it was confirmed that 
depending on the operating conditions of gas pipelines, 
the pressure values at the beginning and end sections of 
damaged (ruptured) and undamaged pipeline lines were 
equal.  
Moreover, it was even observed that, at any given time 
during operation, the change in pressure at the beginning 
and end of the gas pipeline was greater for the 
undamaged pipeline line than for the damaged one. In 
such conditions, identifying the damaged section in the 
dispatcher center becomes impossible. Indeed, the 
information obtained from the non-stationary nature of 
gas dynamic processes makes it unreliable for the 
effective management of gas pipeline systems. Therefore, 
the development of effective gas transportation Figures 
for the reconstruction of existing parallel gas pipelines 
has become a pressing issue. This is crucial for ensuring 
the long-term utilization and environmental safety of 
complex gas pipeline transportation, as well as for 
achieving reliable and trouble-free operation and efficient 
management of emergency situations.  
To prepare the technological-based reporting Figure 
for this purpose, the following issues need to be 
addressed: 
1) Implementation of effective strategies for managing    
parallel laid distributor pipeline systems during normal 
technological operating regimes and in case of 
emergencies; 
2) Utilization of new methods with high quality for 
analyzing and optimizing the management of emergency 
and technological conditions and the selection of rational 
operating regimes; 
3) Prevention and minimization of the consequences of 
emergency situations; 
4) 
Ensuring 
the 
accuracy 
of 
damage 
location 
determination, automatic detection in real-time mode, and 
minimizing the impact of interventions in detection 
modes. 
One of the pressing issues is to develop a method to 
minimize the transmission time of measured and 
controlled data on non-stationary flow parameters of gas 
networks to dispatcher control centers. The essence of the 
studied method lies in justifying a targeted technological 
variant for reconstruction by enhancing the efficiency of 
gas transportation under non-stationary conditions.  
It is known that one of the main requirements for the 
reconstruction of gas pipelines is the application of 
modern technologies to the existing system. The China 
National 
Petroleum 
Corporation 
(CNPC) 
has 
independently developed 27 unique technologies across 
five series that have been successfully applied in the 
construction and management of various gas pipelines. 
These technologies have been implemented in the 
Lanzhou-Chengdu Chongqing Gas Pipeline, as well as 
pipeline projects in Sudan, Libya, India, Russia, and 
Central Asia. Some of these technologies include: 
Oil and Gas Pipeline Flow Assurance Technology; 
Oil and Gas Pipeline Simulation and Optimization 
Technology; 
Pipeline Integrity Management System; 
Early-warning and leakage detection technology for 
pipeline safety; 
Pipeline Emergency Repair Technology, and so on. 
However, leaks in pipeline networks remain one of 
the primary causes of countless losses to pipeline 
stakeholders and the surrounding environment. Pipeline 
failures can lead to severe environmental disasters, 
human casualties, and financial losses. To prevent such 
hazards and maintain a safe and reliable pipeline 
infrastructure, it is essential to implement early warning 
and leakage detection technology for pipeline safety. The 
pipeline leakage detection technologies are discussed in 
[6], summarizing the latest advancements. Various leak 
detection and localization methods in pipeline systems 
are reviewed, with their strengths and weaknesses 
highlighted. Comparative performance analysis is carried 
out to provide guidance on which leak detection method 
is most suitable for specific operational parameters. 
Furthermore, research gaps and open issues for the 
development of reliable pipeline leakage detection 
systems are discussed.  
As an example, in [10, 18], we can mention a method 
based on a device that uses ultrasonic waves for radiation 
to manage pipelines. In the study being examined, 
acoustic sensors installed outside the pipeline detect the 
internal noise level and establish a baseline with specific 
characteristics. The self-similarity of this signal is 
continuously analyzed by the acoustic sensors. When a 
leak occurs, the resulting low-frequency acoustic signal is 
detected and investigated. If the properties of this signal 
differ from the original, an emergency signal is triggered. 
The received signal is stronger near the leak location, 
allowing for the localization of the leak. When a leak is 
detected, waves are reflected, and the location of the leak 
is determined by the emission speed of the wave and the 
return time of the scattered signals.  
