Nonhermitian topological zero modes at smooth domain walls: Exact solutions
Pasquale Marra
1, 2, 3, ∗and Angela Nigro
4, †
1Department of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Sophia University, 7-1 Kioi-cho, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-8554, Japan
2Department of Physics, and Research and Education Center for Natural Sciences,
Keio University, 4-1-1 Hiyoshi, Yokohama, Kanagawa, 223-8521, Japan
3Graduate School of Informatics, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-Ku, Nagoya, 464-8601, Japan
4Dipartimento di Fisica “E. R. Caianiello”, Università degli Studi di Salerno, 84084 Fisciano (Salerno), Italy
The bulk-boundary correspondence predicts the existence of boundary modes localized at the edges of
topologically nontrivial systems. The wavefunctions of hermitian boundary modes can be obtained as the
eigenmode of a modified Jackiw-Rebbi equation. Recently, the bulk-boundary correspondence has been extended
to nonhermitian systems, which describe physical phenomena such as gain and loss in open and non-equilibrium
systems. Nonhermitian energy spectra can be complex-valued and exhibit point gaps or line gaps in the complex
plane, whether the gaps can be continuously deformed into points or lines, respectively. Specifically, line-gapped
nonhermitian systems can be continuously deformed into hermitian gapped spectra. Here, we find the analytical
form of the wavefunctions of nonhermitian boundary modes with zero energy localized at smooth domain
boundaries between topologically distinct phases, by solving the generalized Jackiw-Rebbi equation in the
nonhermitian regime. Moreover, we unveil a universal relation between the scalar fields and the decay rate and
oscillation wavelength of the boundary modes. This relation quantifies the bulk-boundary correspondence in
nonhermitian line-gapped systems in terms of experimentally measurable physical quantities and is not affected
by the details of the spatial dependence of the scalar fields. These findings shed some new light on the localization
properties of boundary modes in nonhermitian and topologically nontrivial states of matter.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The bulk-boundary correspondence, which predicts the presence and number of localized boundary modes in relation to the
topological invariants in topologically nontrivial condensed matter systems, such as topological insulators and superconductors [1–
5], regardless of the specific details of the physical laws governing the system [6–8]. However, only the specific form of these
laws can accurately describe the local physical properties of these excitations, such as their localization and spatial behavior.
Generalizations of the bulk-boundary correspondence apply to nonhermitian systems [9, 10] as well. Nonhermitian Hamiltonians
naturally describe a variety of physical systems, such as open systems in the presence of gain and loss mechanisms, or dissipation,
and exhibit the presence of complex energy spectra [9–15] in several different condensed matters and metamaterials [16–24].
A fundamental distinctions in this case is between spectra with line gaps and point gaps [11–13]. Point gaps describe energy
eigenvalues that do not cross a reference point (usually the origin at zero), while line gaps describe energy eigenvalues that do
not cross a reference line in the complex plane. Any nonhermitian Hamiltonian with line gaps can be adiabatically deformed
into a corresponding hermitian hamiltonian with conventional energy gaps. Hence, the bulk-boundary correspondence and the
definition of topological invariants can be directly extended in this case. Hermitian Hamiltonians with nontrivial topology are
naturally described by a modified Jackiw-Rebbi equation [4, 5], which is a spinorial second-order linear differential equation,
which generalized the original Jackiw-Rebbi equation [25], which is a spinorial first-order linear differential equation. Henceforth,
nonhermitian hamiltonians can be described by a nonhermitian version of the modified Jackiw-Rebbi equation with complex
coefficients.
In recent works, we derived the analytical solutions of the modified Jackiw-Rebbi equation describing zero energy boundary
modes at smooth domain walls between topological trivial and nontrivial phases in the hermitian regime [26] and extended some
of these findings to the nonhermitian regime [27]. In this work, we derive the analytical form of the wavefunctions of zero
modes in nonhermitian line-gapped systems described by a modified Jackiw-Rebbi equation with space-dependent mass and
velocity terms, allowing for complex coefficients. The space dependency describes the case of a smooth domain wall, i.e., the case
where the nonuniform space dependence is confined in a region of finite length w. This allows us to derive the bulk-boundary
correspondence for nonhermitian line-gapped systems by directly establishing the correspondence between the nonhermitian
topological invariant and the asymptotic decay rate of the zero modes. We thus analyze several properties of these zero modes,
such as the localization length ξ, oscillation wavelength λ, conditions for the reality of the wavefunction, local properties, and local
topological invariant, and show specific examples of nonhermitian zero modes corresponding to different regimes. This allows us
to distinguish between qualitatively different cases: featureless zero modes in the limit w →0, having "no hair" (in analogy with
other featureless objects such as black holes); non-featureless zero modes in the regime ξ, λ > w > 0, having "short hair" (i.e.,
effectively featureless at long length scales); non-featureless zero modes in the regime w > ξ, λ > 0 having "long hair" (i.e.,
being nonfeatureless at all length scales). We also discuss possible experimental signatures of the bulk-boundary correspondence
by unveiling a universal relation between the local properties of the zero modes (localization length and oscillations wavelength
λ) and bulk physical quantities.
arXiv:2504.07098v1  [hep-th]  9 Apr 2025
