We hypothesize that the increase of ∆CF at night is due to drizzle suppression
by aerosols. Cloud top cooling is stronger at nighttime for marine low clouds because
of the absence of solar heating [35]. The stronger cooling tends to drive stronger con-
vection and thicker clouds at night (see Figure 4 for an illustration), which makes
them more likely to produce drizzle/precipitation during the night [5]. This nighttime
enhancement of drizzle has been observed for low clouds by space-borne radar mea-
surements across low cloud areas [36]. Ship-emitted aerosols therefore are thus more
likely to interact with precipitating clouds and suppress drizzle at nighttime than dur-
ing the day. Suppression of drizzle is more conducive to stronger ∆CF, which explains
the day-night difference in CF adjustment [2, 7, 19, 37]. While the diel change in CF
adjustment is qualitatively similar for both polluted and clean background clouds,
both ∆CF and its diel change are larger for clean background clouds than those for
more polluted background clouds, which can be explained by the effect of precipita-
tion suppression on CF of polluted clouds and the effect of precipitation on reducing
CF on clean clouds [5, 35, 38]. This difference also agrees with the dependence of CF
adjustment inside ship-tracks on background precipitating conditions [7]. This inter-
pretation is also consistent with the decreasing trend of ∆Nd/Nd after the 10 hour
mark because cloud precipitation is a strong sink for aerosol particles and Nd and
more precipitation likelihood reduces ∆Nd/Nd.
We calculate the cloud top height difference (∆CTH) between ship-track and
background clouds for each track segment. ∆CTH is significantly greater, at 99%
confidence level, for segments formed during the night than those during the day. It
increases from around 30m to about 50m at night. The temporal evolution of ∆CTH
is similar to that of ∆CF with an increase at around 10 hr of age that marks the
nighttime formation of tracks. The increase in ∆CTH after 10-hour is physically
consistent with drizzle suppression that tends to increase cloud top height [5, 39–41].
The time evolution of CF adjustment to aerosols, dCF
dNd , has a similar increase
for segments that are formed during nighttime (Figure 3c). The magnitude of relative
increase in dCF
dNd between nighttime and daytime is stronger, ˜300%, than that of ∆CF.
This is because of lower ∆Nd for nighttime and more aged clouds while ∆CF is also
stronger. The divergence between ∆Nd and ∆CF suggests that the stronger ∆CF
observed in more aged and nighttime clouds reflects the cumulative impact of aerosols
over time, rather than an instantaneous response [20].
We illustrate our hypothesis regarding the diel changes of cloud adjustments in
Figure 4. In general, nighttime marine low clouds are thicker and more likely to drizzle
driven by stronger cloud top radiative cooling in the absence of solar heating during
the day. Ship-tracks formed during the night therefore reside in background clouds
that are more likely drizzling, and precipitation suppression by ship-emitted aerosols
leads to stronger ∆CF than those formed during daytime [5, 7, 20, 21]. Diel changes
of ∆Nd and ∆CTH are also consistent with this view. The timing of the change in
all these cloud variables is also consistent with each other and this interpretation.
The fact that we can observe this diel change suggests that cloud adjustments last
for hours, not just instantaneous, which makes them meaningful for the aerosol-cloud
interaction studies [5, 18, 20].
7
