Supremacy regime (Preskill, 2012)? And can the characterization be used to
provide statistically sound upper bounds for the quantum noise of classically
intractable quantum hardware?
Conformal Prediction (CP) is a data-driven, scalable, and assumption-
free uncertainty quantification technique. CP’s recent popularity relies on
the increasing demand for trustworthy and reliable AI, with general appli-
cability and mild assumptions. Designed and commonly used to assess the
uncertainty of ML systems in the finite-sample regime, CP is rarely exploited
in AI-unrelated applications, e.g. to calibrate and characterize physical de-
vices or complex natural processes.
In principle, CP’s model-agnosticism
may help quantify the output randomness of any partially observed physical
system. Compared to more standard statistical approaches, e.g. Bayesian
inference, CP can be expected to be more robust because it does not require
to guess or approximate the system’s dynamics. In QC, modeling the details
of the data-generating process is particularly hard because of the unavoid-
able interactions with the environment and the complex-valued formalism of
Quantum Mechanics, which is partially incompatible with the classical no-
tion of probability (Feynman et al., 1951). Can a frequentist approach as CP
overcome this challenge?
Using CP to evaluate the unmodeled parts of quantum hardware noise, we
provide reliability guarantees for classically intractable QC systems. Tech-
nically, we aim to test whether noise characterizations trained on small de-
vices can be extrapolated to devices and tasks that go beyond the Quantum
Supremacy boundary. Assuming hardware noise increases as a function of a
device’s features, e.g. its size and depth, we analyze the validity and efficiency
of CP intervals when we calibrate and test the algorithm on circuits of dif-
ferent sizes. A prior, usual CP validity is not guaranteed in this case because
the output distributions of small and large devices may be non-exchangeable.
1.1
Contribution
CP for physical systems.
Using CP beyond the evaluation of AI systems
is new. To our knowledge, there are no examples of CP-based schemes to
directly estimate and quantify the uncertainty of physical systems.
Unpaired samples.
Park and Simeone (2023) use CP in the QC frame-
work but focus on Quantum ML applications, which are trained to solve
standard ML tasks, e.g. MNIST digit recognition. Unlike Park and Simeone
