2 
 
Main text 
 
Introduction 
Phonon polaritons (PhPs) are hybrid optical modes arising from the coupling of photons with 
optical phonons either confined in the bulk or at the surface of polar materials. Specifically, surface 
phonon polaritons (SPhPs) can be excited in Reststrahlen bands (RBs), the spectral regions 
between the transverse and longitudinal optical phonon frequencies, where the real part of the 
dielectric function is negative1. The ability of PhPs to compress the light wavelength and enhance 
optical fields at the subdiffractional scale has enabled various applications including optical 
sensing2,3, light guiding4–6, perfect absorption7, superlensing8–10, coherent thermal emission11, and  
heat transfer12–16. Recent studies have focused extensively on the two-dimensional van der Waals 
(vdW) materials, such as hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)4,17–21, molybdenum trioxide (MoO3)22–29, 
and vanadium pentoxide (V2O5)30, supporting highly confined PhPs with low propagation losses. 
However, high-quality vdW material samples are typically fabricated by mechanical exfoliation 
techniques. This stochastic method offers limited control over lateral size and thickness, 
preventing scalability and practical device integration. While large vdW materials can be produced 
via scalable chemical vapor deposition (CVD), their PhP application is challenged by high defect 
densities and misaligned grains, which introduce phononic losses and degrade polariton 
propagation27,31,32. 
 
Another factor limiting the use of PhPs is that the available low-loss polaritonic materials, such as 
the aforementioned vdW compounds30,33,34 and covalent silicon carbide (SiC)1, primarily operate  
in the mid-infrared range (above 750 cm-1).  Experimental demonstrations of highly confined PhPs 
in the far-infrared and terahertz regime that propagate over a distance of several wavelengths are 
scarce, primarily focusing on terahertz PhPs in vdW materials including GeS35,36 and MoO337, with 
the figures of merit being moderate compared to their mid-infrared counterparts. This presents a 
significant obstacle for crucial applications of PhPs for long-wavelength optoelectronics and 
thermal management. Specifically, PhPs have demonstrated the ability to enhance the in-plane 
thermal conductivity of free-standing films or nanowires made from polar dielectrics such as SiC13, 
SiNx38 and SiO214,39, providing an intriguing approach for heat dissipation in microelectronics and 
integrated photonics. However, these applications necessitate low-loss far-infrared PhPs capable 
of being thermally excited at relatively low temperatures. The conductivity enhancement in these 
materials remains limited at room temperature either due to the high loss of far-infrared PhPs in 
SiNx and SiO2 or the low population of thermally excited mid-infrared PhPs in SiC.   
 
To overcome the limitations of the random fabrication and constrained range of operating 
frequencies, it is essential to explore scalable alternative materials that support low-loss, tunable 
PhPs in the far-infrared range (below 400 cm-1 or equivalently with free-space wavelength longer 
than 25 μm). Recently, high-quality, free-standing complex oxide membranes have been created40–
53 and explored as a novel platform for infrared PhPs54,55. Compared to vdW materials, these 
