change between symmetry actions. For instance, if we take the trivial boundary
condition 1 for the physical boundary, no anyons are condensed along that bound-
ary and there can be no TPOs on the Z4 symmetry boundary’s lines, hence the
entire symmetry must act eﬀectively. This corresponds to the ‘canonical gSPT’
phase of [10, Figure 1], which describes an eﬀectively-acting symmetry.
Another choice we could make would be to choose a topological boundary con-
dition for the physical boundary, in which case there is the possibility of TPOs
living on the symmetry boundary. When we pick the physical boundary’s con-
densable algebra to match the symmetry boundary (i.e. Bphys. = 1⊕e⊕e2⊕e3), the
anyons attached to these TPOs end on physical boundary TPOs, leading to ground
state degeneracy. This leads to a symmetry-broken phase, which in this case is
Z4 gauge theory. The opposite extreme has us taking Bphys. = 1 ⊕m ⊕m2 ⊕m3,
in which case the anyons connecting to the symmetry boundary’s TPOs also run
along the physical boundary, leading to a totally trivially-acting symmetry after
interval compactiﬁcation – this produces the Z4 SPT phase.
The case of interest to us is an in between one where we take a non-trivial but
also non-topological boundary condition for the physical boundary, allowing for a
Z4 symmetry which is only partially eﬀectively-acting. The two cases in which we
are able to do this without introducing ground state degeneracy are Bphys. = 1⊕m2,
leading to a gSPT phase and Bphys. = 1 ⊕e2m2, leading to the igSPT phase. As
discussed above, both of these lead to phases in which the eﬀectively-acting part
of the symmetry is Z2, diﬀerentiated by its Z2-valued anomaly.
With this setup, let us perform some manipulations of the 2d partial traces we
would obtain when gauging the Z4. Concretely, we select the condensable algebras
Bsym. = 1 ⊕e ⊕e2 ⊕e3 and Bphys. = 1 ⊕e2m2 to deﬁne boundary conditions for our
SymTFT. We follow the same process as [6, Section 3.2], but this time we regard
the TPOs living on the m lines as connected to bulk anyons. There are two TPOs,
one of which is the identity operator and the other which fuses as Z2. Since the
full theory does not exhibit ground state degeneracy, the non-trivial TPO must
stem from a non-trivial anyon which is condensed on the physical bondary, which
can only be e2m2.
We illustrate in Figure 6 how the partial trace Zm,m3 is mapped to Zm,m.
Beginning in Figure 6a, we illustrate the topological lines of Zm,m3, which in the
SymTFT should be thought of as living on the symmetry boundary. In Figure 6b
we add the local identity operator on the m3 line, connected to the identity anyon.3
Moving to Figure 6c we split this line/operator into two pieces: e2m2 lines ending
on non-trivial TPOs labeled σe2m2. This splitting is simply the inverse of their
Z2 fusion. Since this space is meant to be a torus (the top/bottom and left/right
3Bulk lines and the boundary operators to which they connect are drawn in blue.
24
