surface temperature change has opposite sign to the radiative budget changes, which leads to the
existence of a local maximum in the subtropics and local minimum at the equator. Hence, the
dry model does not capture the simulated strong extratropical warming with a local maximum in
mid-latitudes, the local minimum in the subtropics and the local maximum at the equator (although
the value of the predicted surface temperature change there matches the GCM-simulated change).
Our second level of complexity takes into account circulation changes in a simple way by allowing
the diffusivity to vary between the control and the superrotating states. The resulting surface
temperature changes (Fig. 12, panel a) capture the warming of the extratropics with the correct
magnitude. However, this modified dry model still fails to replicate warming in the deep tropics;
in a dry diffusive picture, the prescribed increased OLR can only be compensated by reducing the
meridional temperature gradient in this region. On the other hand, in a moist model the meridional
MSE gradient can be reduced while still increasing the meridional temperature gradient if the
meridional gradient of relative humidity is reduced concurrently. The forcing/feedback analysis
above suggests that this happens as a consequence of the collapse of the meridional overturning
circulation.
Figure 12 (panel a, green curve) shows the surface temperature predicted by the EBM for
consistent radiative budget changes and relative humidity changes, but without any diffusivity
changes. We note that this moist model predicts warming at the equator but of a magnitude that is
much stronger than that observed in the GCM simulations. If we also take into account diffusivity
changes resulting from the presence of the strong equatorial jet, the EBM forced with the GCM-
simulated radiative budget changes predicts surface temperature changes (Fig. 12, panel a) that
are very similar to those found in the GCM simulations, showing that diffusivity changes play a
mitigating role in the tropics compared to the changes in the meridional distribution of relative
humidity alone.
Overall, solving this simple energy balance model in different configurations revealed the ingre-
dients needed to reproduce the simulated surface temperature changes in two distinct regions. The
relative humidity changes induced by the imposed circulation changes are key to reproduce the
tropical warming, whereas the mid-latitude response is driven by changes in the way the circulation
transports energy.
27
