PAGIONO
An ionospheric activity index
Dr.Paul.Kinsler@physics.org
FIG. 1. Shows a combination of measurement sampling and cate-
gorization into low, medium, and high magnetic latitudes (coloured
black, brown, and white respectively), regions where there is no data
coverage are dark blue. The magnetic latitude zones are as deter-
mined at the altitude of the ionosphere (i.e. not the magnetic lat-
itude at ground level), as based on a sinusoidal approximation to
the relevant figure(s) shown at the end of the WMM2015 [43] and
WMM2020 [44] reports. We use an ionosphere-altitude demarka-
tion of magnetic latitude, because the signal intersection/interaction
is in the ionosphere, and not at ground-level.
B.
dTEC frequency histograms
Each data slice contains a number of dTEC events (or val-
ues δEC) that match the division criteria used to define it.
These can be binned into frequency histograms, histograms
which usually – especially at large event numbers – are peaked
around a centre near δEC = 0 and have widths less than 1
TECU/s wide. These frequency histograms provide us with
an estimate of the probability density function (PDF) P(δEC)
for the dTEC values in that data slice.
Since the histograms are peaked, and the number of dTEC
events is finite, they tend to be poorly sampled at larger dTEC
values and so we restrict our histograms to have bin centres
δi within the range (−2,2), a restriction which still encom-
passes the great majority of events, even during extremely ac-
tive conditions. We split that range into 400 equal width bins,
200 bins centred at negative δEC’s, and 200 centred at positive
δEC’s; there is no bin centred at δEC = 0.
In what follows, although we initially create and analyse
histograms based on unscaled dTEC events, we use those ini-
tial results to motivate and justify a normalisation proceedure
for dTEC values. Thus, in our main analysis we create, fit,
and analyse frequency histograms based on these normalised
dTEC values, and not on the unscaled dTEC. However, in ei-
ther case our fitting procedure is unchanged, and we describe
that next.
C.
Fitting I: the core and the wings
The main fitting function contains four parts, mainly con-
sisting of a central Gaussian core added to two independent
exponential decays, one in the positive dTEC direction, one
negative; and a shared offset from exact zero dTEC. For
brevity, we will henceforth refer to this as a “G2E” (a Gaus-
sian plus two exponentials) fit. This requires 7 real-valued
parameters {αi}, where all but the offset are always positive
valued, and where odd indices denote widths, and even indices
denote amplitudes. The fitting function is:
pG2E({αi};δEC)
= α2G(α1;δEC −α0)
+α4E−(α3;δEC −α0)
+α6E+(α5;δEC −α0),
(2)
where δEC is dTEC, G(α;x) is a normalised Gaussian with
standard deviation α centred at zero, and E±(α;x) are one-
sided and normalised exponentials with width parameters α3
and α5. One of these (E−) is non-zero only for δEC ≤α0 val-
ues, and the other (E+) is non-zero only for δEC ≥α0 values.
These fitting functions are therefore
G(α;δ)
=
1
√
2πα exp

−δ 2/2α2
;
(3)
E−(α;δ) = 1
α exp[−|δ|/α],
δ < 0;
(4)
E+(α;δ) = 1
α exp[−|δ|/α],
δ > 0;
(5)
where E± are otherwise zero, except at exactly δ = 0 where
we replace the value of the exponential function with 1/2.
When fitting pG2E to a dTEC frequency histogram, we
set a minimum allowed width for the gaussian and exponen-
tial components equal to the dTEC resolution scale of 0.005
TECU/s.
This pG2E is sufficient to accurately characterise most dis-
tributions with event counts over 10k, although note that even
on our chosen “quiet” days, some bins contained event distri-
butions which did not conform as well as might be hoped.
Allowing both the centre offset α0, a potential smooth cen-
tral gaussian peak, and the aymmetry of exponentials E+ and
E−is key to getting an acceptable fit on as many sampled
distributions as possible; as is the ability to match sharp cen-
tral peaks if the exponential fits dominate. This is partly be-
cause the python routine used (scipy.optimize.curve_fit) can
sometimes – although not frequently – give poor results for
no obvious reason. However, the large number of data slices
requiring fits means that they could not all be reasonably in-
spected and/or patched manually, so an automated procedure
and a flexible fitting function was needed. Here our code first
fits the data to both (a) a simple gaussian, and (b) an attempt
at that of (2); finally choosing the closest match.
When computing the best fits, we needed to decide whether
or not to assert error bars on the histogram-distributions of
sampled dTEC values. We could, for example, estimate sta-
tistical error bars on the basis of the number of dTEC values
in each of the distribution’s (histogram’s) internal bins. How-
ever, the naturally much better sampling of the centre would
then end up (over-)prioritising a good fit to the centre of the
distribution at the expense of matching the wings and widths.
Since here we are more interested in those widths and wings
of the distributions, we did not specify error bars; thus im-
plicitly asserting equal error bars over the whole range. It is
of course possible that some more systematic proceedure – or
a numerical/ experimental investigation would be preferable,
but we leave that for later work.
We characterised the goodness of our fit using the summed
absolute differences between the P(δEC) created from the
binned data, and the fit itself (p({αi};δEC)), i.e.
for bin-
centres δi,
Dif = ∑i |P(δi)−p({αi};δi)|.
(6)
See the Supplementary Material
for some not-untypical
distributions as might be seen over a range of event counts.
5
