 
9
increasing mass flow rates. There does not appear to be any trends based on regolith type or 
particle size in Figure 6, with mass flow rate and density noted as the dominate parameters. 
 
3.4 Volumetric Erosion Rate and Cohesion 
Leveraging the equation for cohesion as a function of density (eq. 3), as well as the 
empirical fit values in Table 1 for LHS-1, LMS-1, LHS-1D, and glass beads from Dotson et al. 
(2024), the volumetric erosion rate is shown in Figure 7 as a function of cohesion. Of note, both 
axes in Figure 7 have been plotted using a logarithmic scale in order to highlight relationships 
across a broad range of cohesion values and volumetric erosion rates from viscous erosion. 
Calculated cohesion values ranged between 184-3,062 Pa for trials with a constant mass flow 
rate of 215 slpm, 196-2,202 Pa for trials with a constant mass flow rate of 170 slpm, and 324 – 
4,124 Pa for trials with a constant mass flow rate of 125 slpm. As shown in Figure 7, dashed 
lines are drawn between points of similar mass flow rate for illustration purposes only and do 
not represent a specific model or mathematical fit. For all mass flow rates, increasing simulant 
cohesion initially resulted in a decrease in observed volumetric erosion rate. Yet, continuing to 
increase cohesion eventually resulted in no change or a slight increase in volumetric erosion 
rate. The largest change in observed volumetric erosion rates was noted for mass flow rates of 
125 slpm. This behavior is discussed in Section 4.4 below. There does not appear to be any 
trends based on regolith type or particle size in Figure 7, as data points are well distributed. 
 
Figure 7. Observed volumetric erosion rates plotted against cohesion calculated using eq. 3. 
3.5 Equations for Viscous Erosion 
 
The observed volumetric erosion rates due to viscous erosion, as measured during this 
study, are plotted in Figure 8 against the calculated values for volumetric erosion rate (using eq. 
1, which assumes viscous erosion) for each mass flow rate. The calculated volumetric erosion 
rates from eq. 1 (X-axis) ranged from 0.2-10.3 cm3/s, while the observed volumetric erosion 
rates ranged from roughly 0.1 – 16.2 cm3/s. The dashed line in Figure 8 is a linear fit with a 
slope of 1 and intercept of 0, representing where the X-axis and Y-axis values are equal. If the 
experimental results match the model in eq. 1, the data points should fall on the dashed line as 
shown. In Figure 8, the observed volumetric erosion rates from viscous erosion generally match 
the theory well, with a goodness of fit (R2 value) of 0.72, with some discrepancies discussed in 
