parameter ϵ [34]. To accurately determine the phase shifts and interaction potential in multi-channel scattering,
three coupled nonlinear differential equations must be solved, incorporating the mixing parameter through Stapp
parametrization.
To obtain the inverse potential for individual states and their corresponding mixing parameter, we optimized
30 parameters of the reference function. This results in a complex 30-dimensional parameter space, leading to
increased computational time and challenges in adjusting the bounds for each parameter.
Initially, the phase equation is solved for single-channel scattering to estimate the bounds within which the
possible solution must lie. Once a rough estimation of these bounds is obtained, it becomes easier to iteratively
solve the coupled phase equation for multi-channel scattering. This approach allows for readjusting the bounds to
refine the solution more effectively.
The optimised model parameters for multi-channel scattering are given in Table 2. The constructed inverse
potential, along with their corresponding phase shifts, are depicted in Fig. 3.
For the S-D channel, the obtained phase shifts closely agree with the expected values, while discrepancies appear
in the mixing channel. This is because the phase shifts for the S and D channels are significantly larger than those
arising from their coupling. The deviation in the mixing channel phase shifts is primarily due to the discrete nature
of the experimental data in the 6–7 MeV range. However, in the 8–12 MeV range, the obtained phase shifts match
the expected values exactly for both the single-channel and mixing-channel cases.
The phase shift values for the 3S1 state follows a decreasing trend, indicating both repulsive and attractive
characteristics, with a potential depth of 5 MeV at a distance of rd = 4 fm..
For the 3D1 state, the phase shift values increase positively, resulting in an inverse potential that also exhibits
both repulsive and attractive features, with a depth of Vd = 38.22 Mev at a distance of rd = 1.15 fm
The mixing parameter ϵ takes negative values in an increasing order, suggesting an attractive interaction up to 4
MeV , beyond which repulsion becomes dominant. Consequently, the tensor potential exhibits a stronger repulsive
nature in correspondence with ϵ. This type of coupling leads to positive parity states and explains the absence of
strong negative parity states in 6Li. Supporting the interpretation of 6Li as a weakly bound alpha-deuteron system
with well-defined cluster dynamics.
These findings highlight the intricate balance between attractive and repulsive forces in shaping the interaction
potential.
4.3
Cross-section and Resonance energy
Partial cross-sections are calculated using the phase shifts corresponding to orbital angular momentum ℓ−channels
according to the formula
σl = 4π
k2 (2l + 1)sin2δl(E)
(19)
The partial cross sections for resonance states 3D1, 3D2 and 3D3 are calculated from the obtained phase shift values
and plotted in Fig. 4 as a function of E (MeV ) 3D1 and 3D2 have broad resonance while 3D3 exhibits a very sharp
resonance. Resonance parameters for 3D1, 3D2 and 3D3 are given in Table 3.
For T = 0,
Jπ = 1+, 2+, 3+ are excited state of α −d system, which exhibits resonance below the energy
11
