here Qps
1 is the bit error rate between Aps
1 and Bps
1 . By bounding Hϵ
min(B1|E) using the chain rule and
the data-processing inequality for smooth min-entropy, the following bound on the secret key rate can be
obtained
r ≥ηA[1 −h(Qps
1 )] −h(Q2) −(1 −q),
(173)
where q is a measure of how distinct Bob’s two measurements are. Q2 is the bit error rate between A2
and B2.
In analogy to the connection between DI-QKD and the violation of Bell inequalities, here the security
of this one-sided DI-QKD is related to the demonstration of quantum steering. That is, ηA[1 −h(Qps
1 )] −
h(Q2) −(1 −q) ≤0 can be understood as an EPR-steering inequality [431–433]. Because closing the
detection loophole in a steering experiment is easier than in a Bell test, 1SDI-QKD is more feasible
to realize experimentally.
For example, consider a typical experimental setup, where a source sends
maximally entangled two-qubit states to Alice and Bob through a depolarizing channel with visibility v,
with measurement settings A1 = B1 = σz and A2 = B2 = σx. Then, for perfect visibility v = 1, a positive
secret key can be obtained whe Alice’s detection efficiency ηA > 65.9%, which is much lower compared to
those in DI-QKD. As a comparison, for the cases where Alice and Bob have the same detection efficiency,
to close the detection loophole in DI-QKD requires η > 94.6% are needed ( η > 91.1% for post-selected
data).
As is the case for most conventional proofs, the security for the above 1SDI-QKD protocol provided for
the asymptotic limit of infinitely long keys. In practical implementations, the number of signals used for
establishing a secure key is finite. For the case of 1SDI-QKD, finite lkey analysis was addressed by Wang
et.al [434] based on the asymptotic of 1SDI-QKD presented above. They present the secure key rate of
1SDI-QKD with finite resources by employing the smooth min-entropy and smooth max-entropy[435, 436]:
l ≈Hϵ′
min(Y ps
1 |E) −Hϵ′
max(Y ps
1 |Xps
1 ).
(174)
Using the uncertainty relation for smooth entropies [437] and the upper bound for smooth-max entropy
[438], the following bound for the key rate will be obtained
r ≥ηAP 2
Z[1 −h(Qps
1 )] −P 2
Z[1 −q + h(Q2 + µ)] −1
N log2
2
ϵcor
,
(175)
where PZ is the probability that Alice (and also Bob) chooses the measurement in Z basis and µ =
q
n+k
nk . k+1
k . ln
2
ϵsec , with n and k being the length of the raw key and the length of the bit string used for
parameter estimation respectively. ϵcor is the security parameter bounding the possibility that Alice and
Bob have different outputs.
For comparison purposes the simulation results were done in [434] and show that the sifted key rate
is consistently lower than that predicted by the asymptotic case, particularly when considering finite-key
analysis. Furthermore, the outcomes reveal that the relative difference between the asymptotic and non-
asymptotic cases (δ = r∞−rN
r∞
) gradually diminishes as the detection efficiency ηA increases. Notably, the
investigation also pinpoints the minimum number of exchanged quantum signals required for achieving
efficient detection efficiencies. The results illustrate the potential for a non-zero final secret key rate,
approaching 9 × 106, specifically when ηA reaches 0.67.
This underscores the viability of attaining
substantial secret key rates even in scenarios involving moderate detection efficiency.
The protocols mentioned above are the QKD schemes that encode a discrete variable (DV) key in a
two-dimensional space, typically encoded into a pair of entangled photons. Considerable attention has
also been devoted to schemes that instead utilize the quadratures of the optical field, in which one has
access to deterministic, high-efficiency broadband source and detectors. In this case, the secret key is
now a continuous variable (CV) that is encoded in states living in an infinite-dimensional Hilbert space.
This kind of protocol has some advantages over the discrete variable counterpart. The very important
ones are that in the CV case, detection-loophole-free tests have been experimentally feasible for over 30
years [187] and very strong violations of steering inequalities have been demonstrated. These benefits
provide enough motivation for studying the possible one-sided device-independent CV QKD (1SDI-CV-
QKD). This was done by Walk et.al [439] where they studied Gaussian CV-QKD protocols from the
perspective of 1SDI-QKD against collective attacks, and showed that 1SDI-CV-QKD is possible even
with coherent states. The existence of non-zero key rates was connected to the steering parameters for
Gaussian states. An experimental implementation achieved positive secret keys under a lossy channel
for both entanglement based and coherent state protocols. A version of a 1SDI-CV-QKD protocol that
generates a finite and composable key and is secured against coherent attacks was reported by Gehring
et.al [102]. The experiment used two continuous wave optical light fields whose amplitude and phase
68
