XXX:8
Israel et al.
3.4
Modeling Data Flows
Before the network topology is developed and the firewalls are configured, the data flows be-
tween the different cyber nodes in the WAN need to be identified. These data flows represent the
applications or services running at each node and the data they exchange. The data consists of mea-
surements and commands transmitted between the substation and the UCC and between the UCC
and the BA. The data can have many formats, depending on the application-layer communication
protocol. These protocols are usually encapsulated in TCP/IP packets. Including the data flows in
our model is essential because if a link or node fails due to a physical problem or a cyber attack,
the impacted nodes can be observed.
Fig. 4 illustrates the WAN nodes, e.g., substation, UCC, and BA, and the data flows between them.
In each node, specific cyber components communicate with each other based on the network archi-
tecture and data flows described in [9]. The cyber components have assigned protocols depending
on their function. The current model assumes the following four communication protocols:
• Inter-Control Center Communications protocol (ICCP) [13] is used for communication
between control centers and a regulatory agency (balancing authority). For example, one
of the roles of the regulatory is to communicate with utilities and make sure the power
grid’s voltage and frequency remain stable. It operates over a wide area network. Balancing
authorities can read values and send grid operation commands to utilities. Typically, the
utility has an ICCP server configured to send periodic ICCP reports to the balancing
authority.
The 2,000-bus use case, which is a synthetic model of the Texas’ power grid, has one balancing
authority called Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT). All market participants in
the Texas grid report to ERCOT using ICCP protocol[5].
• Distributed Network Protocol 3 (DNP3) is an industrial control system (ICS) protocol
designed for SCADA systems. A typical scenario for DNP3 is for the SCADA master to
read values and send commands to field devices in the substation. Inside the substation, we
assume the communication between the outstation node and the Real-Time Automation
Controller (RTAC) also uses DNP3 protocol.
• Secure Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTPS) can be used inside a substation and between
substation and the utility control center. A typical scenario would be for a substation to have
a local web-based server that can transfer encrypted data to the human-machine interface
(HMI) host in the utility control center. Details of this data flow can be found in [9].
• Structured Query Language (SQL) is a database protocol for uploading or retrieving sub-
station data from the outstation to the local database, which the web server can access.
Another scenario is that utilities use SQL databases located for example in a demilitarized
zone where utility managers or even customers can monitor the utility’s data, such as load
or power generation.
In the proposed model in this work, firewalls are strategically positioned at substations, UCCs,
and BAs to monitor and regulate network traffic. A firewall acts as a barrier that filters both inbound
and outbound communications within the network. For instance, a firewall located at a substation
might be configured with a rule that specifically allows incoming DNP3 requests from the utility
control center. This configuration is illustrated in Fig. 4, where the model incorporates rules defined
by the firewall Access Control Lists (ACLs).
4
Algorithm
This section describes how the proposed tool, SAM-GT, generates the cyber topology given any
electric grid model. Fig. 5, provides an overview of the algorithm which is mainly divided into two
