The curious case of operators with spectral density increasing as Ω(E) ∼e Const. E2
Erik Aurell∗
KTH – Royal Institute of Technology, AlbaNova University Center, SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden
Satya N. Majumdar†
LPTMS, CNRS, Univ. Paris-Sud, Universit´e Paris-Saclay, 91405 Orsay, France
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
Motivated by a putative model of black holes as quantum objects we consider what types of
operators would have a corresponding spectrum. We find that there are indeed such operators, but
of a rather unusual types, and for which the wave functions are only barely localized. We point out
a tension between such almost delocalized states and black holes as compact objects.
PACS numbers: 03.67.Lx, 42.50.Dv
Keywords: superexponential spectra, high-energy condensation, quantum black holes, Bekenstein-Mukhanov
model
Introduction: According to Bekenstein and Hawking, a
black hole has an (non-dimensional) entropy 1
4
A
ℓ2
P where
A is the area of the black hole horizon, and ℓP
≈
1.6 × 10−35 m is the Planck length. For an electrically
neutral spherically symmetric (Schwarzschild) black hole
this is also 4π M 2
m2
P where M is the black hole mass, and
mP ≈2.2 × 10−8 kg is the Planck mass. If Boltzmann’s
formula holds for this entropy, for a solar mass black hole
(M ≈2.0 × 10 30 kg), it would correspond to about e1077
activated degrees of freedom. It is a major unsolved prob-
lem of modern fundamental physics what these degrees
of freedom are.
Let us note that the estimate of the black hole entropy
can be arrived at in several ways. The most immediate
is to use the classical thermodynamic formula
1
T =
∂S
∂E
in a setting where E = Mc2 is the energy and T is the
Hawking temperature, determined by Bogolyubov trans-
formation between ingoing and outgoing states of ele-
mentary particles propagating in the curved space-time
around the black hole [1–4].
It makes no reference to
anything happening inside the black hole. The second
is to estimate the number of quantum states of matter
that could collapse and give rise to a black hole with given
macroscopic black hole parameters (mass, electric charge,
angular momentum). Such an estimate was first carried
out by Bekenstein in the very first paper on black hole
entropy [5], and later refined by Mukhanov in [6]. From
the viewpoint of statistical mechanics this is a coarse-
grained entropy (coarse-graining by the outside observer
only knowing about mass, electric charge and angular
momentum). As it is based on ignorance of what goes on
the inside it also makes no statement on what the excited
degrees of freedom of the black hole may be.
The number of hypotheses that have been put forward
to describe black holes, and which may give a statistical
mechanics (or other) interpretation of black hole entropy,
is too vast to be fully cited here; we refer to well-known
reviews [7–11] and recent high-profile contributions [12–
18], and papers cited therein. However, if such an inter-
pretation exists, and if it is based on quantum mechanics,
then a black hole with mass about M would, as a quan-
tum object, have a number of states of approximately
that mass, and the black hole entropy would be the log-
arithm of the density of states (ignoring the other two
macroscopic parameters, electric charge and angular mo-
mentum).
Mukhanov and Bekenstein [19–21], see also [22], hence
proposed that the masses of black holes are quantised in
multiples of the Planck mass (as Mn ∼√n mP ), each
state being exponentially degenerate (Dn ∼eαn). Ad-
justing suitably the constants one can thus arrive at an
interpretation of black hole entropy as S(M) = log Dn
where n = M 2
m2
P . What has not been discussed previously
is if and when such spectra of operators can actually oc-
cur in reasonable mathematical models. To do so is our
goal here.
A simple model: We consider a quantum gas of N non-
interacting bosons. Since the bosons are non-interacting,
this many-body system can be described in terms of the
energy levels of a single particle and the associated occu-
pation numbers. More precisely, let {ϵi} denote the sin-
gle particle spectrum. For convenience, we choose ϵi ≥0
without any loss of generality. Then a microscopic state
of the system can be labelled by {ni}, where ni ≥0 is
the occupation number of the i-th single particle level.
The microcanonical partition function Ω(E), associated
to a total energy E of the many-body system can then
be simply expressed as
Ω(E) =
X
ni≥0
δ
 
E −
X
i
ni
!
.
(1)
This model of noninteracting bosons has appeared in
many contexts, most recently in the context of cold atom
experiments. It has numerous applications in many do-
mains of physics and mathematics, including even in
number theory.
For example, how many ways an in-
teger E can be partitioned, i.e., expressed as a sum of
arXiv:2504.06623v1  [gr-qc]  9 Apr 2025
