Solving General QUBOs with Warm-Start QAOA via a Reduction to
Max-Cut
BIKRANT BHATTACHAYRA, California Institute of Technology, USA
MICHAEL CAPRIOTTI, Northwestern University, USA
REUBEN TATE, CC3: Information Sciences, Los Alamos National Laboratory, USA
The Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) is a quantum algorithm that finds approximate solutions
to problems in combinatorial optimization, especially those that can be formulated as a Quadratic Unconstrained Binary
Optimization (QUBO) problem. In prior work, researchers have considered various ways of "warm-starting" QAOA by
constructing an initial quantum state using classically-obtained solutions or information; these warm-starts typically cause
QAOA to yield better approximation ratios at much lower circuit depths. For the Max-Cut problem, one warm-start approaches
constructs the initial state using the high-dimensional vectors that are output from an SDP relaxation of the corresponding
Max-Cut problem. This work leverages these semidefinite warmstarts for a broader class of problem instances by using a
standard reduction that transforms any QUBO instance into a Max-Cut instance. We empirically compare this approach to a
"QUBO-relaxation" approach that relaxes the QUBO directly. Our results consider a variety of QUBO instances ranging from
randomly generated QUBOs to QUBOs corresponding to specific problems such as the traveling salesman problem, maximum
independent set, and portfolio optimization. We find that the best choice of warmstart approach is strongly dependent on the
problem type.
CCS Concepts: • Theory of computation →Semidefinite programming; • Hardware →Quantum computation.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: QAOA, approximation algorithms, Max-Cut, warm-starts
ACM Reference Format:
Bikrant Bhattachayra, Michael Capriotti, and Reuben Tate. 2025. Solving General QUBOs with Warm-Start QAOA via a
Reduction to Max-Cut. ACM Trans. Quantum Comput. 1, 1 (April 2025), 24 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1
Introduction
The Quantum Appoximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) is a hybrid quantum-classical optimization algorithm
developed by Farhi et al. [1] designed to solve combinatorial optimization problems. This algorithm uses a classical
optimization loop to fine-tune the parameters of a quantum circuit. The ansatz for QAOA circuits is based off of a
Trotterization of the adiabatic quantum algorithm [1, 2].
Many NP-hard problems can be formulated as quadratic optimization problems over discrete variables [3];
such quadratic formulations are well-suited for QAOA (and quantum algorithms in general) due to the natural
correspondence between the quadratic terms and native two-qubit gates that exist on most quantum devices.
Authors’ Contact Information: Bikrant Bhattachayra, California Institute of Technology, USA, bbhattac@caltech.edu; Michael Capriotti,
Northwestern University, USA, michaelcapriotti2028@u.northwestern.edu; Reuben Tate, CC3: Information Sciences, Los Alamos National
Laboratory, USA, rtate@lanl.gov.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
permissions@acm.org.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 2643-6817/2025/4-ART
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
ACM Trans. Quantum Comput., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2025.
arXiv:2504.06253v1  [quant-ph]  8 Apr 2025
