mechanisms. In this context, we can write the anomalous TOA energy budget as:
ğ›¿ğ‘…
|{z}
Total TOA balance
=
ğ¹
|{z}
Forcing
âˆ’ğœ†ğ›¿ğ‘‡s
|{z}
Feedbacks
,
(2)
where ğœ†is the climate feedback parameter.
The radiative forcing term ğ¹in Eq. (2), diagnosed using the fixed-SST simulations, can be
interpreted as the change in the TOA radiation budget driven by the prescribed torque and circulation
change. The feedback term ğœ†ğ›¿ğ‘‡s, on the other hand, includes all changes in TOA radiation linearly
related to surface temperature. This is the standard framework for studying the climate sensitivity
to CO2 radiative forcing (Sherwood et al. 2020). However, it is also applicable to our study where
the question is not the climate response to CO2 forcing but rather the climate response to an imposed
superrotating state, which we expect to drive a radiative forcing through a reorganization of water
vapor and temperature. In particular, we are interested in distinguishing the direct consequences
of the circulation changes we impose, through the prescribed torque at the equator, from the
consequences related to feedbacks involving water vapor and temperature.
c. Radiative kernels
We decompose changes in the TOA radiation budget into components representing different
physical processes using radiative kernels (Soden et al. 2008). Kernels quantify the radiative
responses of the system to a unit change of a given quantity at a given point in space. In general
terms and assuming linearity, we can approximately write a TOA radiation change, ğ›¿ğ‘…, as a function
of the radiative kernels and changes in the various physical quantities affecting TOA radiation:
ğ›¿ğ‘…â‰ˆ
âˆ‘ï¸
ğ‘‹
ğœ•ğ‘…
ğœ•ğ‘‹
|{z}
radiative kernel
ğ›¿ğ‘‹,
(3)
where ğœ•ğ‘…/ğœ•ğ‘‹is a radiative kernel and ğ‘‹represents quantities affecting the TOA radiation, such as
temperature or specific humidity. Kernels are computed by running a radiation scheme on two base
states that differ only by a local change in the chosen variable, for instance a 1 K temperature change
or a 1 % specific humidity change at a given point in space. In our case, we use radiative kernels
computed for Isca with the same setup as that employed in this study (aquaplanet, no clouds or sea
7
