Evidence for Intrinsic charm in the proton
73
3.2. Evidence of intrinsic charm
Here we provide for the first time evidence for intrinsic charm by exploiting a high-precision
determination of the quark-gluon content of the nucleon [109] based on machine learning
and the largest experimental dataset ever. We disentangle the intrinsic charm component from
charm-anticharm pairs arising from high-energy radiation [104] (Section 3.2.1).
In Section 3.2.2 we establish the existence of intrinsic charm at the 3σ level, with a momentum
distribution in remarkable agreement with model predictions [239, 247].
Later, in we analyze this evidence at the level of momentum fraction (Section 3.2.3). Finally,
in Sections 3.2.4 and 3.2.5 we confirm these findings by comparing to a recent data on Z
production with charm jets in the forward region from the LHCb experiment [248].
3.2.1. The intrinsic charm determination
The intrinsic charm component can be disentangled from it as follows. First, we note that in the
absence of an intrinsic component, the initial condition for the charm PDF is determined using
perturbative matching conditions, computed up to NNLO, and recently extended up to N3LO
(cf. Section 1.4.2). The assumption that there is no intrinsic charm amounts to the assumption
that all 4FNS PDFs are determined using perturbative matching conditions in terms of 3FNS
PDFs that do not include a charm PDF. These matching conditions determine the charm PDF in
terms of the PDFs of the three-flavor-number-scheme (3FNS), in which only the three lightest
quark flavors are radiatively corrected. So the assumption of no intrinsic charm amounts to
the assumption that if the 4FNS PDFs are transformed back to the 3FNS, the 3FNS charm PDF
is found to vanish. In this context, intrinsic charm is by definition the deviation from zero
of the 3FNS charm PDF [249]. Hence, this perturbative charm PDF is entirely determined in
terms of the three light quarks and antiquarks and the gluon. However, these perturbative
matching conditions are actually given by a square matrix that also includes a 3FNS charm PDF
and this does not need to vanish (Eq. (1.101)): in fact, if the charm quark PDF in the 4FNS is
freely parametrized and thus determined from the data [104], the matching conditions can be
inverted. This possible 3FNS charm PDF, is then by definition the intrinsic charm PDF: indeed, in
the absence of intrinsic charm it would vanish [249]. Unlike the 4FNS charm PDF, that includes
both an intrinsic and a radiative component, the 3FNS charm PDF is purely non-perturbative
and is not equal to the 4FNS charm PDF, since matching conditions reshuffle all PDFs among
each other.
In summary, intrinsic charm can then be determined through the following two steps, summa-
rized in Fig. 3.6. First, all the PDFs, including the charm PDF, are parametrized in the 4FNS at
an input scale Q0 and evolved using NNLO perturbative QCD to Q ̸= Q0. These evolved PDFs
can be used to compute physical cross-sections, also at NNLO, which then are compared to a
global dataset of experimental measurements. The result of this first step in our procedure is
a Monte Carlo (MC) representation of the probability distribution for the 4FNS PDFs at the
