Limitations. Several works [31, 27] find Orb-v2 yields inaccurate finite-difference estimates of
second and third order derivatives of the PES when using small atomic displacements, resulting
in poor thermal conductivity estimates. Zhao et al. [47] observe that Orb-v2 underperforms
many other potentials in identifying transition state pathways; again, this is a workflow involving
higher-order information from the PES. The MLIPX benchmarking tool [48] has revealed that
Orb-v2’s geometry optimizations of out-of-distribution slab-adsorbate systems can be unreliable
with non-convergent energy graphs. Finally, a limitation has been highlighted by Bigi, Langer,
and Ceriotti [22], who demonstrated that existing non-conservative models systematically fail to
conserve energy in NVE MD simulations.
Diagnosis.The last two limitations primarily stem from non-conservatism. The other limitations
are more subtle, but we have broadly arrived at the same conclusion as Fu et al. [40], namely
that enforcing smoothness can be critical for downstream tasks involving higher-order derivatives
of the PES. Unlike Fu et al. [40]—whose starting point was an Equiformer architecture [14]—our
starting point of Orb-v2 is already relatively smooth due its use of a small number of radial
basis functions and smooth envelope cutoffs in its attention layers. Nevertheless, we find room
for improvement on this front, as captured in our modelling updates below.
Appendix C:
Orb-v3 modelling updates
Motivated in part by the above limitations, as well as the desire for increased speed, Orb-v3
deviates in a significant number of ways from its predecessor:
Model Compilation. A simple but important update was to compile the model in PyTorch [7].
Models are compiled by default whilst still allowing for dynamic graph sizes due to Pytorch’s
advanced compilation engine, which can take into account dynamic shapes. Importantly, Orb-v3
requires torch==2.6.0 because there is a bug involving compilation of computation graphs
containing RMSNorm in previous versions of torch.
Width over depth. We increase the width of every MLP in the GNS backbone from 512 to 1024.
This allows us to train a 5 layer model with approximately the same parameter count (∼25𝑀)
as Orb-v2, but is 2 −3× faster.
Direct and conservative models. In addition to direct models, we also release conservative
models that compute forces and stress via backpropagation of the energy with respect to
positions and a symmetric displacement tensor, respectively [13, 11].
Larger, more diverse dataset. Our main models are trained on OMat24 (AIMD only), rather
than the Mptraj and Alexandria datasets used by Orb-v2.
Smoother edge embeddings. The edge embeddings in Orb-v2 were a concatenation of each
edge vector (normalized to unit length) and 20 Gaussian radial basis functions (RBFs) applied
to the edge length. In Orb-v3, we instead compute an outer-product between Bessel radial basis
functions and Spherical Harmonic angular embeddings. Specifically we use 8 Bessel bases and
set 𝐿𝑚𝑎𝑥= 3 for the spherical harmonics.
Huber loss and pair repulsion. We adopt two useful ideas from Batatia et al. [21]. Firstly, we
switch from using mean absolute error losses for energies, forces and stress, to using Huber
losses (delta = 0.01). We also include a non-learnable ZBL pair repulsion term in our models,
enabling them to more accurately model strong repulsive forces for atoms close together.
Controllable max neighbors. We release models with unlimited numbers of neighbors, in
addition to a maximum of 20 as used by Orb-v2. As demonstrated throughout the paper,
limiting neighbors reduces costs; both the graph construction cost and the cost of the model
14
