5
nm × thickness nm. The magnitude (|⃗M|) of the magnetiza-
tion vector within each cuboid is assumed to be constant. The
equilibrium magnetization [⃗M ≡⃗M(θ, φ)] state for a given
geometry under the application of global external field is ob-
tained using the gradient descent method (GDM). The GDM
method is based on the assumption that a physical system will
evolve along a path that minimizes the total energy of a given
system.
The above stipulated process is iterated until the ˆM ×( ˆM ×
⃗Hef f ) = ⃗Bef f /µo < 0.1 A/m, where the total internal effec-
tive field can be obtained by using the formula
⃗Hef f = −
∂ETot
∂⃗M

(in SI units).
(13)
OOMMF provides functionality for storing both local and
global magnetization values, as well as local demagnetization
field values. These local quantities can be visualized as a func-
tion of spatial coordinates using the OOMMF graphics viewer
module or the open-source OOMMF Tools module44,45. Dy-
namic magnetization simulations can be performed using
OOMMF in conjunction with user-developed postprocessing
scripts. The steps for calculating the FMR frequency under a
given external magnetic field are as follows:
1. Determine the equilibrium magnetization configuration
for a given external field using the energy minimization
method described earlier.
2. Introduce a Gaussian magnetic field pulse perpendicu-
lar to the film plane, with a full width at half maximum
(FWHM) of a few picoseconds (e.g., 2.5 ps) and an am-
plitude of a few millitesla (e.g., 5 mT). After applying
the pulse, the system relaxes dynamically according to
the LLG equation. A map of the local magnetization
can be then recorded in ∆t steps (for example 20 ps)
for a total time duration of T. The frequency resolution
of the simulated ferromagnetic resonance spectra can
be written as ∆f = 1
T . The stored data for the mag-
netization ⃗M ≡⃗M(x,y,z,ti) can then be read out into
MATLAB matrix or Numpy format45 and Fourier trans-
formed. The local power density, (i.e., the squared am-
plitude for each pixel) can be integrated over the whole
geometry to yield the global power density. Also, the
local power densities can be mapped for each frequency
to show the inhomogeneous distribution of the power
absorbed for the corresponding frequency.
Apart from OOMMF, other open-source (e.g., Mumax346)
and proprietary micromagnetic simulations packages47 have
been successfully utilized for simulating FM nanostructures
and interested readers are referred to Ref. [47] for a list of
these simulation packages.
IV.
NANOFABRICATION
Fabricating sub-micron 2D and 2.5D ASIs for magnetiza-
tion dynamics measurements, composed of metallic magnetic
films like Ni81Fe19, often involves positioning them at a nomi-
nal distance of 50 nm or less from each other. Techniques such
as electron beam lithography (EBL)25,31 and deep ultraviolet
lithography4 with lift-off methods are commonly employed
for the fabrication of these intricate nanostructures. Of these,
EBL with lift-off stands out as a preferred method, primar-
ily for its ability to create prototypes of arbitrary periodic and
aperiodic shapes without the need for mask blanks, thus ex-
pediting the fabrication process. Moreover, EBL facilities are
widely accessible at research universities, further enhancing
its appeal.
EBL systems utilized in the fabrication of ASI samples
are typically either converted scanning electron microscope
(SEM) systems [Fig. 3(a)] or standalone EBL systems. Con-
verted SEM systems are typically limited to a 30 keV ac-
celeration voltage, whereas standalone EBL systems rou-
tinely operate at 100 keV. Standalone EBL systems capital-
ize on higher accelerator voltages to achieve finer resolu-
tion in thicker resists by exploiting reduced forward scatter-
ing and longer-range back scattering for higher primary elec-
tron energies48. Notably, bilayer resist-based lift-off processes
often exhibit lower resolution compared to single-layer resist
techniques49,50.
The initial phase in crafting magnetic nanostructures in-
volves applying a mask that responds to electrons of specific
energies from the EBL instrument. This mask, known as the
e-beam resist (ER), comprises a solid polymer that is typically
dissolved in a liquid solvent for spin coating and is sensitive
to the incoming electron beam. Upon interaction with the ER,
the primary electron, or secondary electrons, either excites or
ionizes atoms in the polymer. These processes trigger chem-
ical reactions within the ER, leading to its categorization as
either positive or negative ER, based on the beam’s effect. For
positive ER, the incident beam prompts chain-scission reac-
tions, breaking polymer chains into smaller fragments, thus,
reducing the molecular weight and enhancing solubility in the
developer solvent. Conversely, negative ER undergoes cross-
linking reactions, increasing molecular weight and reducing
solubility in the developer. Consequently, positive ER dis-
solves in exposed areas, leaving behind the unexposed regions
to form the desired pattern53,54.
The performance of an ER is evaluated based on several pa-
rameters: a) Tone: Dictates the portion of ER removed during
development, determining whether the ER is positive or neg-
ative. b) Sensitivity: Determines the required dose required
to expose the ER. It is typically measured in primary elec-
tron charge per area but can also be measured in energy per
volume. c) Resolution: Specifies either the minimum feature
size or the minimum pitch achievable with a particular resist.
d) Contrast: Describes the change in the rate of resist devel-
opment with dose. e) Etch Resistance: Determines the ER’s
resistance to chemical or physical etching. Two widely used
positive ERs for the fabrication of ASI include:
Polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA): Renowned for its high
resolution (2-20 nm)55, PMMA exhibits high contrast but low
sensitivity and resistance to dry etching53. Due to its low sen-
sitivity, PMMA demands a higher dose for effective clearing.
A bilayer resist approach is often used with PMMA in which
