boosted photon energy of the low-energy spectral line is Eline = Γ2Elow/(1 + z), where Γ is the
jet bulk Lorentz factor and Elow represents the low-energy spectral line of the particular element.
If the observed spectral feature inGRB 221023A arises from the 6.4 keV iron K-α line, and the
typical photon energy of the observed line is around 2.1 MeV, this would require a jet bulk Lorentz
factor Γ to be about 18(1+z)
1
2. Considering a redshift of z = 2, the bulk Lorentz factor Γ is about
31. This scenario faces the same issue as the first one, namely, the low bulk Lorentz factor problem.
The third possible scenario is that the narrow emission feature may originate from MeV
nuclear de-excitation lines. The energetic particles interacting with ambient matter could excite
heavy nuclei which can emit MeV γ-ray line emissions via de-excitation, such as the 4.44 MeV line
from 12C and the 6.13 MeV line from 16O 38–40. In fact, nuclear de-excitation line emissions from
12C and 16O have been observed in solar flares41–43. Moreover, the existence of such nuclear de-
excitation line has long been anticipated to be found within supernova remnants44–47. The observed
photon energy of the nuclear de-excitation line is Eline = Eelement/(1 + z), where z is the redshift,
and Eelement corresponds to the energy of the particular element’s nuclear de-excitation line. If we
assume that the narrow emission feature in GRB 221023A arises from nuclear de-excitation lines
of 12C or 16O, it corresponds to redshifts of z = 1.1 or z = 1.9, respectively. However, the radiation
from the nuclear de-excitation of the ambient matter is almost isotropic, while the gamma-ray burst
is collimated. Therefore, the energy budget needed to generate such a MeV emission line would be
larger than the energy of the prompt emission for a typical half-opening angle θj = 0.1 rad. Note
that for a large θj, such as θj > 0.3 rad, this energy problem can be alleviated.
The fourth possible scenario is that the heavy nuclei, especially relativistic hydrogen-like
high-atomic-number ions originating from the β decay of unstable nuclei and/or the recombination,
entrained in GRB jets can produce such a narrow MeV emission line via electron de-excitation 48.
In this model, the reflection of the radiation from the WR star can generate enough seed photons to
excite electrons. After the jet with heavy nuclei breaks through the photosphere and hydrogen-like
heavy ions are generated by β decay and/or recombination, the emission line can be generated.
The emission lines occur at an energy of Eline = Γϵz/(1 + z), where ϵz = meα2c2Z2/2 is the
Rydberg energy, α is the fine-structure constant, and Z = 29 is the atomic number of the copper.
Note that we take copper as an example here since it can satisfy the half-life requirement of the
model. This model can explain the MeV emission line of GRB 221023A well with reasonable
parameters. We assume the half-opening angle θj of the GRB jet is about 0.1 rad and the redshift
z = 0.1, we estimate that the jet beaming-corrected gamma-ray emission energy of GRB 221023A
is about 7 × 1049 erg. Considering the propagation distance d = 4.8 × 1011 cm, which corresponds
to the timescale without an observable MeV emission line at the beginning, the Lorentz factor of
the jet, Γ = (1+z)Eline/ϵz, is about 300. The total mass of heavy nuclei entrained in the GRB jet is
6
