4
FIG. 2. Constructing the Floquet cavity in optomechanical systems. a Micrographs of the device, showing the entire chip
(top) and zoomed-in drums (bottom). We select the larger drum (left) for the demonstration, while the other one is ignored.
b Equivalent circuit model: straight arrows indicate the corresponding applied signals (blue for cavity-1, purple for cavity-2).
c Cavity-1 serves as the auxiliary driving cavity to drive the mechanical oscillator into self-induced oscillation. Cavity-2 is
modulated by the oscillator to construct the Floquet giant-mode cavity. d Mechanical oscillator spectrum transitioning from
thermal state to self-induced oscillation regime; the red curve marks the spectrum at Pde. Data are smoothed using a sliding
average over 100 points. e The reflection spectrum of the cavity-2 measured by S21 as a function of increasing drive power.
Colored dots: measurements; black lines: fits. X0 is incorporated into ωc2. The inset marks the drive application position.
sponding to the oscillator frequency ωm. We studied the
effect of modulation power, the results are demonstrated
for Pd at -5 dBm, 3 dBm, and 10 dBm. Before the crit-
ical power point Pde, the mechanical oscillator stays in
thermal state and thus only the pure cavity-2 signal can
be detected.
When Pd > Pde, the mechanical oscilla-
tion in the phonon lasing regime can modulate cavity-2
into the Floquet giant modes. Increasing the modulation
strength enhances the ability of photons to transition to
higher-order Floquet energy levels. Consequently, the in-
tensity of the intrinsic frequency signal diminishes, while
higher-order sidebands become more pronounced. The
result from the free parameter fitting indicates that, un-
der a 10 dBm drive, β is approximately 1.92.
Floquet frequency comb
Before demonstrating the Floquet cavity frequency
comb, we characterized the formation and evolution of
the Kerr optomechanical frequency comb of the cavity-
2 with a sufficient pump power Pp2. As shown in Fig.
3a, the minimum possible threshold power occurs at the
blue sideband ∆p2 = ωp2 −ωc2 ≈Ωm because of max-
imized antidamping, triggering the optomechanical in-
stability most efficiently. For cavity-2, this threshold is
Pp2 = 11 dBm.
To achieve a stable self-induced oscillation, we applied
a fixed drive power Pd = 10 dBm. Additionally, we in-
troduced the pump signal as the energy source for the
frequency comb, as shown in Fig. 3b. We characterize
the formation and evolution of Floquet cavity frequency
comb. Fig. 3c illustrates the effects of different tuning
and power. The local minima occurring at the sideband
frequencies ∆p = ωp −ωc2 = mωm are due to the fact
that they allow for high photon input. We demonstrate
the flexible tuning capability of the Floquet frequency
comb within the range of −3ωm ≤∆p ≤3ωm. Notably,
frequency comb can also emerge in the red sideband re-
gion of the cavity-2 (∆p < 0), which is completely absent
in Kerr optomechanical combs (for κ < Ω) [46–49, 56].
In theory, the pump power could be much lower, but
it is constrained by the limitations of the detection ac-
curacy in our experimental setup.
Fig.
3d shows an
example of the frequency comb at ∆p = −1 × ωm. As
the pump power increases, the number of detectable fre-
