become the dominant factor in stopping the collapse, a scenario well described by the
Khlopov-Polnarev (KP) formalism [21–26]. This last, typically ignored in the literature,
was originally thought for matter-dominated scenarios.
We choose to work under this
formalism as we understand that it better describes the collapse dynamics of perturbations
in matter-dominated scenarios. We have already explored this in previous works [27, 28],
but here, we consider two new elements: the decay of the inflation field into radiation
and the posterior evaporation of the PBH via Hawking radiation, which we describe in
what follows. Further, we will apply these considerations to an extended distribution of
perturbations, contrary to the standard monochromatic assumption.
Since PBH form from the collapse of amplified perturbations, a central element in
its formation is the appearance of a pronounced peak in the inflationary power spectrum.
Various inflationary scenarios can lead to such an amplification of curvature perturbations.
For instance, in single-field models, mechanisms such as an inflection point [29–32] or a
step-like feature in the potential [33–36] can generate the necessary peak. For multi-field,
this peak can be produced through non-canonical kinetic terms [37–40], the interplay of
multiple axion fields [41, 42], or waterfall trajectories in hybrid models [43–47].
For a
comprehensive review of these mechanisms, see [48]. Although the parametrization of the
power spectrum via a Gaussian peak is introduced in an ad hoc manner in our study,
adjusting its height and position effectively encapsulates the essential physics of almost
every inflationary model mentioned earlier. This is the approach we will follow, remaining
agnostic about the precise physical mechanism of the amplification of perturbations during
inflation.
Interest in PBH has grown recently due to their potential to answer several questions
in cosmology. In particular, they have been proposed as candidates for dark matter, as
generators of structure in the universe, or even as seeds for the formation of supermassive
black holes in the center of galactic nuclei. See [17, 49] for a review. However, although
observational data tightly constrain their abundance [17, 36, 50–57], for small masses (≲
1010g), these constraints rely on the nature of Dark Matter, which is currently unknown [58].
For this reason, the constraints can be relaxed to the point that PBH come to dominate
the energy density of the universe, a period called PBH-dominated, which behaves as
pressureless matter. If this occurs, their inherent Poissonian fluctuations in density can
source a stochastic background of gravitational waves, providing a unique observational
window into the early universe.
To eventually recover the standard radiation-dominated era necessary for successful
Big Bang Nucleosynthesis (BBN), we consider the inflaton decay into Standard Model
particles, thereby reheating the universe. This is achieved by considering the scalar field’s
decay into radiation, with decay rate Γϕ. However, if PBH dominates before that, then the
universe is reheated through Hawking evaporation [59–61], and the reheating temperature
corresponds to the evaporation temperature of the PBH. Refs. [62–66] considered that the
PBH-dominated phase occurs due to the interplay between the different energy densities
of PBH (matter), and a background fluid with an arbitrary equation of state w > 0,
ignoring the specific formation mechanism of the PBH. We, however, consider that PBH
are produced during an early matter-dominated phase, under the KP formalism, and that
– 2 –
