5
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2
ℓA/L
⟨∆S(2)
A |Qy⟩
L = 16
ε/ε∗= 0
s = 1/2
ε/ε∗= 0.2
s = 4/10
ε/ε∗= −0.4
s = 3/10
FIG. 3.
Average R´enyi-2 entanglement asymmetry over a
window of eigenstates of the Hamiltonian (2) with system
size L = 16 centered around different rescaled energies ε/ε∗
as a function of the subsystem size ℓA. We consider an energy
window ∆ε of 0.002ε∗, 0.0025ε∗, 0.006ε∗for the mean energy
ratios ε/ε∗= 0, 0.2, −0.4, respectively, to encompass in all
the cases ∼200 eigenstates.
The error bar for each point
is given by the standard deviation of the asymmetry in each
energy window. We compare the numerical results with the
analytical prediction in Eq. (7) for the U(1) random state
ensemble, which is represented by crosses joined by a dashed
line (the line is only meant to guide the eye). The relation
between the rescaled energy density ε and the sector s ≡
M/L of the U(1)-symmetric Haar ensemble is reported in
Eq. (3). The black dash-dotted line is the prediction (8) for
the standard non-symmetric Haar ensemble.
trary to our theoretical prediction. It would be interest-
ing to characterize and understand this small subleading
correction.
In Fig. 3, we further analyze the numerical results in
Fig. 1. Here the symbols are the average eigenstate en-
tanglement asymmetry for Qy over energy windows with
different mean rescaled energy density ε/ε∗. For suffi-
ciently small window and statistically significant num-
ber of eigenstates inside the window, this average is an
estimate of the microcanonical expectation value of the
entanglement asymmetry at finite temperature. The re-
sults in Fig. 3 are in good agreement with the analyti-
cal prediction in Eq. (5) for the U(1)-random ensemble
(coloured dashed lines), which clearly captures the de-
pendence on the subsystem size. However, when mov-
ing away from the mid-spectrum, i.e. when |ε/ε∗| →1,
the deviations evidence the presence of a non-universal
O(1) correction which is beyond the scope of our ran-
dom matrix description. The black dash-dotted line is
the prediction (8) for a standard Haar random state,
with no symmetries. As already noted in Ref. [32] for
the entanglement entropy, we observe that Eq. (7) with
M = L/2 provides a more accurate description of the
mid-spectrum.
Conclusions.— In this paper, we demonstrated the
power of entanglement asymmetry in understanding the
universal properties of finite-temperature eigenstates of
local chaotic many-body Hamiltonians. Using the asym-
metry, we determined the effective conserved charge in
the energy eigenstates resulting from the locality of in-
teractions. As we showed, this charge generates the U(1)
symmetry in the ensemble of random states that de-
scribes the statistical behavior of the finite-temperature
eigenstates. We found that it corresponds to the on-site
part of the chaotic Hamiltonian.
The explicit form of
this charge is essential for extracting predictions from the
U(1)-symmetric random state ensemble.
For instance,
it allows us to calculate the asymmetry with respect to
other non-conserved U(1) charges, as illustrated in this
work. The ensemble of random states endowed with this
conserved charge well captures the entanglement asym-
metry over the whole range of energy density of the spec-
trum.
Note that our results only rely on the locality of the
Hamiltonian interactions. Therefore, we expect that they
are universal for chaotic local spin Hamiltonians. In fact,
in [81], we present some numerical results supporting this
conjecture for other Hamiltonians with the same on-site
terms as (2), but different interactions.
Interesting avenues for future research include the
analysis of the universal properties of asymmetry in
chaotic models where the appropriate reference ran-
dom state ensemble contains multiple commuting U(1)
charges, as in Ref. [33], or in systems with non-Abelian
symmetries [22, 83, 84]. It would also be compelling to
explore other applications of our results for the U(1)-
symmetric random state ensemble, such as in the char-
acterization of the stationary state of highly chaotic dy-
namics [34].
Acknowledgments.— We thank Mario Collura, Viktor
Eisler, and Colin Rylands for useful discussions.
PC
and FA acknowledge support from ERC under Consol-
idator Grant number 771536 (NEMO) and from Euro-
pean Union - NextGenerationEU, in the framework of the
PRIN Project HIGHEST no.
2022SJCKAH 002.
Nu-
merical computations were performed using the SISSA
cluster Ulysses.
[1] J. M. Deutsch Quantum statistical mechanics in a closed
system, Phys. Rev. A 43, 2046 (1991).
[2] M. Srednicki, Chaos and quantum thermalization, Phys.
Rev. E 50, 888 (1994).
[3] M. Srednicki, The approach to thermal equilibrium in
quantized chaotic systems, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 32
