2
temperature.
The approach is not restricted to computing energy-
like expectation values and is, in principle, applicable
to computing canonical averages of any order parame-
ter. Accordingly, the method can be advantageously used
on physical systems that are more tractable in QUBO
form than in the native representation.
For such sys-
tems, combining the intervalled QUBO-based sampling
and reweighting scheme can significantly advance the
characterization of the canonical equilibrium properties
beyond state-of-the-art sampling methods such as real-
space Monte Carlo.
We demonstrate this by considering space-filling melts
of ring polymers. The system is, at one time, of broad in-
terest in soft matter physics as well as a paradigm of the
challenges of real-space sampling due to rapidly increas-
ing autocorrelation times with system size and density.
We show that our approach enables the first systematic
characterization of inter-molecular linking of the rings
as a function of their bending rigidity, revealing a non-
monotonic relationship.
The findings highlight the method’s potential for pro-
viding breakthrough insights for QUBO-based physical
models. They also motivate expanding the range of phys-
ical models mapped in QUBO form, where one could
further harness the rapid development of optimization
platforms using quantum algorithms and hardware.
I.
MULTI-HISTOGRAM REWEIGHTING FOR
QUBO
A.
Targeting QUBO-based sampling at energy
intervals
We consider a QUBO-based encoding of a discrete
physical system, represented by a Hamiltonian H whose
ground states are in one-to-one correspondence with the
admissible configurations of the physical system. As in
eq. 1, H can include up to quadratic interactions of the
variables σ, which take values 0 or 1. Throughout this
manuscript, we interchangeably refer to the σs as binary
or spin variables, although in quantum computing con-
texts the latter term is commonly reserved for variables
taking values ±1.
We further assume that the energy E of the physical
system – distinct from the QUBO Hamiltonian H – can
be written as a linear combination of the spin variables
with integer coefficients:
E = E0 + ∆E
X
i
aiσi
(2)
where the ais can also be null. Writing the physical en-
ergy in the form of eq. 2 may require introducing suitable
ancilla spin variables [48]. Without loss of generality, in
the following, we will set E0 = 0 and ∆E = 1 unless
otherwise stated. Specific examples for Ising and lattice
polymer models will be discussed in Sections I D and II.
Plain QUBO-based sampling can be directed and re-
stricted to single values of the discrete physical energy by
complementing H0 of eq. 1 with a quadratic constraint
that penalizes deviations of E from ¯E:
H (σ) = H0(σ) + A
 X
i
aiσi −¯E
!2
,
(3)
with A > 0. Because the added constraint is quadratic, H
is still a QUBO Hamiltonian. Its ground states manifold
now provides a one-to-one coverage of the microcanonical
ensemble at energy ¯E.
In principle, this energy targeting could be repeated for
all admissible values of ¯E. However, even doing so would
not enable the calculation of canonical averages since the
necessary knowledge of the entropic weight of states at
different energies can be gained only by targeting E in-
tervals spanning multiple energy levels rather than just
a single value of ¯E.
To direct the QUBO-based sampling to a specific en-
ergy interval, we extend the space of spin variables to
include a set of so-called slack variables, s1, s2, ..., sm.
These variables are incorporated into a quadratic con-
straint that generalizes the one of eq. 3:
H (σ) = H0(σ) +
 X
i
aiσi −¯E −
m−1
X
k=0
2ksk
!2
.
(4)
Minimizing the above Hamiltonian enables the uniform
sampling of microstates across the energy interval Emin ≤
E ≤Emax, where Emin = ¯E and Emax = ¯E + (2m −1).
Systematically varying ¯E allows for covering the energy
spectrum of the physical system in its entirety.
B.
Density of states from energy-intervalled
sampling
The energy histograms obtained by sampling multiple
overlapping energy intervals contain, in principle, suf-
ficient information to reconstruct the density of states,
W(E), of the physical system. However, W(E) cannot be
reconstructed with standard weighted histogram analy-
sis methods [49–51]. This is because weighted histogram
methods are conceived for samples drawn from numer-
ous Boltzmann or Boltzmann-like ensembles, a condi-
tion fundamentally different from our approach. In our
framework, minimizing eq. 4 yields samples that lack
Boltzmann-like statistical weights and, especially, are re-
stricted to preassigned energy intervals of given widths
and boundaries.
We use variational principles to derive a generalized
weighted histogram analysis framework to recover W(E)
in this new context. This new method uses data sam-
pled from multiple staggered energy intervals to opti-
mally reconstruct W(E) with gapless coverage of the en-
ergy range of interest.
