3 
 
membranes, synthesized through layer-by-layer thin-film epitaxy followed by chemical lift-off, 
are more scalable and reproducible, with millimeter-scale lateral dimensions. The synthesis 
process provides remarkable crystalline quality and enables atomic-scale thickness control, 
allowing for precise adjustments ranging from a single-unit cell thickness to several hundred 
nanometers40–45. This level of precision greatly facilitates the fine-tuning of the dispersion relation 
of PhPs by controlling the thickness. Our recent work has demonstrated that perovskite SrTiO3 
membranes exhibit highly confined SPhPs in the mid-infrared regime54. Despite this promise, far-
infrared PhPs in the oxide membranes have not been investigated in the previous study due to 
significant optical losses inherent to the SiO2 on Si substrate, which possesses a broad lossy 
phonon mode at around 450 cm-1 hindering PhP propagation54. 
 
In this work, we investigate the far-infrared SPhPs in suspended SrTiO3 membranes with the 
thickness of 30-100 nm using near-field synchrotron infrared nanospectroscopy (SINS) (Fig.1a). 
The suspension creates a lossless and symmetric dielectric environment for the membranes, 
enabling exploration of the PhP propagation behavior limited only by intrinsic losses. We analyze 
position-dependent SINS spectra to determine the complex-valued polariton wavevector  (and 
the dispersion relations) and propagation length, which agree well with our theoretical calculations 
and simulations. Our findings reveal a high polaritonic quality factor  =
(
)
(
) up to 24 and an 
exceptionally long lifetime up to 8 picoseconds for the far-infrared SPhPs in the 100 nm thick 
SrTiO3 membranes. These values are comparable to the Q-factor and lifetime of mid-infrared PhPs 
in low-loss polaritonic materials such as hBN, SiC and MoO3 and surpass that of terahertz PhPs in 
MoO3 and GeS. Furthermore, we demonstrate the possibility to tune the polariton dispersion by 
varying the thickness of the membranes from 30 to 100 nm. We verify that a similarly high Q 
factor and lifetime can also be achieved in 50 nm thick membranes, where are notably 500 times 
thinner than the free-space wavelength. Our work unlocks the potential of complex functional 
oxide membranes for advanced far-infrared and terahertz polaritonic applications.  
 
Theoretical calculations of SPhPs in suspended SrTiO3 membranes 
Since SrTiO3 has a cubic crystal structure with isotropic optical properties, for our theoretical 
calculations, we use the isotropic dielectric function of bulk SrTiO3, (), extracted in our 
previous work from the far-field Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy on bulk crystals54. 
Our analysis of the far-field reflectivity spectra of the membranes confirms the validity of using 
the dielectric function of bulk SrTiO3 at least for 100 nm thick  SrTiO3  membrane (Supplementary 
Note 1 and Supplementary Fig.1)54. While it is challenging to extract the dielectric function from 
the FTIR spectra on thinner membranes (since they are dominated by the substrate), we adopt an 
approximation in our further numerical simulations that the dielectric function is thickness 
independent. () displays three RBs corresponding to three sets of TO and LO modes 
(Fig.1b). The RBs cover from the far-infrared (terahertz) to the mid-infrared regime, enabling a 
broad range of operating frequencies of SPhPs, with RB1, RB2 and RB3 ranging from 95-172 cm-
1, 175-475 cm-1 and 546-798 cm-1 respectively. These results are consistent with previously 
