Swinging small quantum systems out of available values of control parameters
4
for optimizing functions that have continuous first and second derivatives. It approximates
the Hessian matrix inverse and finds a local minimum of function iteratively.
3. Two-qubit toy model
Before going to more complicated many-body systems, let us first start with an illustration
of the method’s performance on quite a simple two-qubit model. Let us consider the system
described by the Hamiltonian (1) with
H0 = −∆
2
√
2 (σx
1 + σx
2 + σz
1 + σz
2) ,
(4a)
Hc = −∆σz
1σz
2,
(4b)
where σx
i and σz
i are Pauli matrices acting on i-th qubit. By convention, we introduced
numerical coefficients such that the energy splitting between two states of qubit (the
difference between eigenvalues of the drift Hamiltonian H0) is equal ∆, while the intensity
g(t) is a dimensionless parameter controlling the interaction strength between qubits.
Consequently, in this model time is naturally measured in units of ¯h/∆.
This model
generalizes the exactly solvable two-level system and, although the Hamiltonian can be
easily diagonalized for any temporal value of g, the closed-form analytical solution for the
state preparation problem is unknown. The system is known to have an unexpectedly rich
control phase diagram [27].
Suppose that our goal is to prepare the target state |tar⟩which is the ground state of
the Hamiltonian for g2 = 4 by starting from the initial state |ini⟩being the non-interacting
ground state (g1 = 0). Moreover, we assume that we have experimental access only to
interactions bounded by gB = −gA = 2, which means that the target state cannot be
obtained by a direct adiabatic protocol.
We aim to reach the state |tar⟩by optimizing
time-dependence g(t) to maximize the final fidelity F after fixed protocol time T with the
method described in the previous section.
First, let us note that the fidelity between the initial and the target state is |⟨tar|ini⟩|2 ≈
0.7815.
Therefore, this fidelity is a trivial lower bound for optimization since it can be
obtained by keeping strength constant in time, g(t) ≡0.
It corresponds to M = 0
optimization parameters. By increasing M and performing optimization one can increase
the final fidelity. In Fig. 1a we present the dependence of the highest possible final fidelity
F(T) obtained for a different number of optimization points M and required protocol
time T. It is clear that for a fixed period T, one can increase the maximal fidelity which
eventually saturates at 1. However, for shorter periods T, reaching the fidelity close to 1
is not possible even for a large number of optimization points M. For example, the final
fidelity larger than 99% (dashed line) cannot be obtained for periods smaller than limiting
period TL ≈2.2¯h/∆since a further increase of the number of points M does not change
the performance (black curve). Complementarily, this fact can be deduced from Fig. 1b
presenting the minimal duration T needed to reach the final fidelity F = 0.99 for a given
number of points M. It is clear that for periods shorter than TL (dashed line), an arbitrarily
large number of points M cannot guarantee saturation of the final fidelity over 99%. This
