6
Appendix A: The demographic process
As explained in the main text, the demographic process in interdependent networks involves three steps within each
"generation".
• First, an internetwork failure due to detachment: each node failing in network A causes the detachment of ℓ
other nodes from the GCC of A, with probability Pℓ.
• Second, due to dependency, the events in A lead to ℓ+ 1 failures of nodes in network B. The failure of these
nodes does not cascade back, since their dependent nodes have already collapsed.
• What cascade back is the effect of the m extra nodes that are detached from the GCC of B due to these ℓ+ 1
failures.
Therefore, if m1, m2, ...mℓ+1 are the number of B nodes that detach from the GCC due to the failure of nodes
1..ℓ+ 1, the total number of "descendants" of a single node in A is m = P
i=1,ℓ+1 mi. In other words, the number of
offspring satisfies:
P1→m =
∞
X
ℓ=0
P A
1→ℓP B
ℓ+1→m,
(A1)
where P A and P B denote the detachment probabilities in networks A and B, respectively. Throughout this paper, we
assume that the two networks are statistically identical, thus P A = P B. In Eq. (A1), P1→m (without a superscript)
represents the probability of m being the overall number of offspring per individual, that is, m is the number of nodes
in network A, for instance, that fail due to the back reaction from network B in the next iteration of the cascading
failure.
Appendix B: Preparing interdependent networks at their critical state
In this paper, we report results such as the probability of failure as a function of the initial number of failing nodes,
for two interdependent networks at criticality. In this section, we explain the setup of the numerical experiment,
specifically how to prepare two interdependent networks at their critical state.
We first considered a single network, A, and attacked it with a certain probability, p.
Following the attack,
we randomly removed one node from the GCC and recorded ℓ, the number of nodes that subsequently became
disconnected from the GCC due to this removal (see Appendix A). By repeating this process multiple times, we
obtained a reliable average for the value of ℓ. We then used a bisection search method to identify the p-value where
ℓis approximately equal to one. For an ER network with a mean degree of k = 5, this occurs around p = 0.35.
Once the value of p for which ℓ= 1 was identified, network B was created by duplicating network A. Each node in
network A was then connected to a (randomly picked) node in network B via a dependency link, thereby forming a
pair of interdependent networks at their critical point.
Appendix C: Neutral dynamics
In the main text, we utilized several features of the neutral process, particularly the probability of the process
surviving until time t and the population size, nt, conditioned on survival. These results have been derived by many
authors (see, e.g., [23]). Here, we provide a brief summary of the relevant formulas.
First, the chance of the lineage of a single individual to survive for t generations. For a population of n independent
individuals, each having birth rate b and death rate d, the corresponding master equation is,
dPn
dt
= −(b + d)nPn + b(n −1)Pn−1 + d(n + 1)Pn+1,
(C1)
where Pn(t) is the chance to find n individuals at time t. The dynamics is neutral if b = d, and a natural choice of a
generation time is b = d = 1. In such a case, the distribution of the total number of offspring per individual (i.e., the
number of offspring it generates before its death) is geometric, P1→ℓ= 1/2ℓ+1, with mean one and variance is σ2 = 2.
