AI-Assisted Transport of Radioactive Ion Beams
S. Lopez-Caceres and D. Santiago-Gonzalez
Physics Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois, USA
Beams of radioactive heavy ions allow researchers to study rare and unstable atomic nuclei,
shedding light into the internal structure of exotic nuclei and on how chemical elements are formed
in stars. However, the extraction and transport of radioactive beams rely on time-consuming expert-
driven tuning methods, where hundreds of parameters are manually optimized. Here, we introduce
a system that uses Artificial Intelligence (AI) to assist in the radioactive beam transport process.
We apply our methodology to real-life scenarios showing advantages when compared with standard
tuning methods. Our method can be extended to other radioactive beam facilities around the world
to improve operational efficiency and enhance scientific output.
Particle accelerators continue to lead the way in sci-
entific discovery and technological innovation, deepening
our understanding of the universe, and driving advances
that benefit society.
By providing beams of particles,
these accelerator facilities enable scientists to explore
the fundamental building blocks of matter and unravel
the mysteries of the cosmos. However, constructing and
operating these accelerators is a complex undertaking,
making them some of the most sophisticated scientific
systems in existence.
Among these, facilities that produce radioactive ion
beams (RIBs), see for example Refs. [1–9], play a pivotal
role.
They allow researchers to study rare and unsta-
ble atomic nuclei, shedding light into the internal struc-
ture of exotic nuclei and on how elements are formed
in stars [10]. However, the standard processes for RIB
production and transport rely on expert-driven manual
methods that are both time-consuming and labor inten-
sive, which can limit research productivity.
In this Letter, we introduce a system that uses Arti-
ficial Intelligence (AI) to assist in the radioactive beam
transport process. We present results from applying our
methodology to real-life scenarios where the observable
quantity to maximize is the activity from beta decay of
stopped radioactive ions and where electrostatic devices
are used to transport the beam. We also discuss the re-
sults and advantages when compared with standard tun-
ing methods, and suggest that our method could be ap-
plied to similar radioactive beam facilities worlwide.
Since our method for AI-assisted radioactive beam
transport was tested and implemented at the Californium
Rare Isotope Breeder Upgrade (CARIBU) [3] at Argonne
National Laboratory, in the following paragraphs we oc-
casionally refer to elements in that RIB facility. When
possible, we discuss our method in general terms.
At Argonne National Laboratory, the radioactive beam
source plays a crucial role in advancing nuclear research
as part of the Argonne Tandem-Linac Accelerator Sys-
tem (ATLAS). Since 2008, this source has been produc-
ing beams of radioactive heavy ions through the spon-
taneous fission of Californium-252 (252Cf). These beams
enable scientists to conduct groundbreaking experiments
in nuclear structure, nuclear astrophysics, and national
security.
To support this vital scientific work, the facility pro-
vides nearly 2,500 hours (approximately 100 days) of
beam time per year to researchers from around the world.
Each segment of the beamline comprises 5 to 15 variables
that must be precisely coordinated to guide ions from the
source to the experimental target station.
With more
than 20 beamline segments, this configuration results in
a parameter space involving roughly 200 variables.
Currently, only experienced scientists, who have de-
voted considerable time to mastering these adjustments,
perform the tuning to achieve optimal transmission effi-
ciencies. While the scientific output has been significant,
this manual approach poses limitations. Automating the
tuning process could greatly enhance the facility’s op-
erational efficiency and scientific productivity by reduc-
ing the time and effort required for beam adjustments.
Moreover, because this tuning must be repeated when-
ever the beam is lost or switched to a different ion species,
the demand on limited staff becomes even more pressing.
Implementing automation would not only alleviate these
challenges but also provide the flexibility needed to sup-
port a broader range of experiments and advancements
in nuclear science.
Given these technical challenges, the use AI applica-
tions, and in particular Machine Learning (ML) meth-
ods [11, 12], hold the potential to achieve complete au-
tomation of beam extraction, delivery, and optimization
of related instruments. The aim of the work presented
here is to automate radioactive beam tuning using ML
techniques. Specifically, the use of Bayesian Optimiza-
tion (BO) for control and tuning of beam elements. Al-
though the underlying theory of this optimization ap-
proach is not new [13], computational advances and open-
source software libraries [14–16] have only recently ma-
tured enough to consider practical applications.
Bayesian Optimization is most effective in problems
where the relation between variables is unknown or ex-
pensive to evaluate. A proxy model of probabilistic na-
ture, Gaussian Process (GP) [17], acts as a surrogate
to describe the functional relationship between param-
arXiv:2504.06469v1  [physics.acc-ph]  8 Apr 2025
