6
Hadronic molecules and multiquark states
one unit of angular momentum to the two states provided in Eq. (4) or by coupling the total S +
h states of Eqs. (6) and (7) with an angular
momentum of one to a total angular momentum of one. Finally the state given in Eq. (7) can be combined with L = 3 to a total angular
momentum of one. The ⃗L2-term pushes the vector state with L = 3 so far up, that it does not need to be considered any further. One thus
gets three additional parameters that can be fixed from the vector states. Alternatively one can include the parameter (κcq)¯3 in the fit and
see if a value consistent with that found for the S -wave states is found. This is the strategy followed in Ref. [27] and indeed, one of the fits
is consistent with the existing data as well as the spin coupling term within 2σ 2. The four vector states included in the fit were Y(4230),
Y(4320), Y(4390) and Y(4660), see Fig. 3. Once the parameters are fixed, the masses of other exotics with different quantum numbers can
be predicted, most strikingly the authors find two pseudoscalar states at about 4700 and 4270 MeV, respectively, and even three states with
quantum numbers forbidden in the naive quark model, namely a 0−−state at a similar mass as the Y(4230) and two near degenerate 1−+
states at about 4310 MeV.
As in the regular quark model, also in the compact tetraquark model radial excitations of the ground states should appear. For example
a natural candidate for a radial excitation of Zc(3900) is the Zc(4430) [28] aka Tc¯c1(3900)+ and Tc¯c1(4430)+, respectively, a state difficult to
understand in other approaches. Moreover, as in the standard quark model compact tetraquarks should fill complete SU(3) flavor multiplets,
with the amount of SU(3) breaking being driven by the strange quark mass Ms −Mu = 120 −150 MeV 3. In particular, as long as no quark
type dependence is included in the interaction hamiltonian, each isoscalar state is necessarily accompanied by a triplet of isovector states,
with very similar mass—in analogy of the near degeneracy of the isovector ρ and the isoscalar ω in the light quark sector. While this nicely
explains the large isospin violation in the decays of X(3872), it in effect leads to a larger number of states than observed in experiment so
far, although there are indications that the SU(3) multiplets start to fill up [32]—note, however, that the experimental evidence as of today
for the states that contain strangeness is rather weak. As a further refinement of the diquark–anti-diquark interaction in Ref. [29] an isospin
dependent contribution is discussed.
Recently LHCb discovered a very intriguing state in the D0D0π+ mass distribution, the Tcc(3875)+ with a minimal quark content of cc¯u ¯d.
In the tetraquark model such states were discussed qualitatively in Ref. [33]—more quantitative investigations can be found in Refs. [34, 35].
Contrary to the heavy-light diquarks discussed above, for this state the constituents need to be heavy-heavy and light-light diquarks. Now
the diquarks are subject to the Pauli principle. Therefore the charmed diquark needs to be in the spin one state. The light anti-diquark
appears as the good combination, spin 0, in the anti-symmetric flavor [3], while the bad, spin 1, anti-diquarks are in the symmetric flavor
[¯6], since still only the totally antisymmetric color [3] configuration is kept. Accordingly, the lightest tetraquark with the mentioned quark
content needs to have the quantum numbers JP = 1+ consistent with current experimental observations, although an amplitude analysis
is still missing. The mass of the Tcc(3875)+ basically coincides with the D∗+D0 threshold. However, if indeed the cc-diquark forms an
essential ingredient in this state one should expect the flavor partner of the Tcc(3875)+ with cc being replaced by bb to quite deeply bound,
simply since the heavier quark pair should sit closer together feeling the much stronger attraction provided by the one gluon exchange (the
increase in strength driven by the 1/r scaling of the potential vastly overcomes the decrease in the strong coupling αs which comes in since
the pertinent mass scale rises). Already in the 80ties it was stressed that as soon as the ratio of heavy to light quark masses is well beyond 10,
binding should occur for states of the kind discussed here [36, 37]. Note that these studies were performed within constituent quark models
and accordingly we here talk about ratios of constituent masses, which for light quarks are of the order of 300 MeV not the elementary
current quark masses of the order of a few MeV. Thus, based on those studies one should expect sizeable binding for the bb¯q¯q systems only.
By now there is a large number of studies for doubly heavy tetraquarks including phenomenological models [34–41] lattice QCD either
employing static potentials [42–45] or NRQCD for the b-quarks [46–51] as well as QCD sum rules [52–54] . They all agree that a Tbb
should be bound deeply in the I = 0 and JP = 1+ channel, although there is still a considerable spread in the predicted binding energies
relative to the lowest open charm threshold (BB∗), which range from near zero to 500 MeV—see Fig. 4.
3 Hadronic Molecules
Atomic nuclei are well understood as bound systems of nucleons, protons and neutrons. The lightest non-trivial nucleus is the deuteron,
a bound state of a single proton with a single neutron and a binding energy of only 2.2 MeV. A relatively strongly bound nucleus is the
α particle, made of two protons and two neutrons — is has a binding energy of 7 MeV per nucleon which translates into a separation
energy into two deuterons of 12 MeV. In addition there are bound systems of hyperons and nucleons, the so-called hypernuclei. Thus
also there exists some SU(3) structure of hadron-hadron bound systems. The hypertriton, which may be viewed as a bound system of a Λ
baryon and a deuteron, has a Λ separation energy of only 0.13 keV. We thus observe that nuclear binding energies span over two orders of
magnitude, however, always stay well below 100 MeV. We may use this as some guidance for what to expect for hadronic molecules in
general. Hadronic molecules are multi quark states whose substructure is given by color neutral hadrons. Thus they are the analogue of
atomic nuclei, only that their constituents are different hadrons than ground state baryons.
Hadronic molecules are a special realisation of states one may want to classify as two-hadron states: The corresponding poles are
generated through the hadron-hadron dynamics and not from e.g. gluon exchanges between quarks. The corresponding states may not only
2In this work two fitting schemes were applied, however, scheme I included the Y(4008) which seems not to be confirmed by the data. We thus here only quote the results
for scheme II.
3Note that quark masses in QCD depend on the renormalisation scale and scheme—what is meant here are effective mass parameters employed in the model.
