lateral position (M-mode scan). A high precision function generator (AFG3021C, Tektronix, 
Beaverton, OR, USA) is used to synchronize the timing between the mechanical excitation and 
the OCT acquisition. 
The excitation system consists of a function generator (model 4052, B&K Precision, Yorba 
Linda, CA, USA) and an amplifier (PDu150, PiezoDrive, Callaghan, New South Wales, 
Australia). A multi-frequency signal is generated in MATLAB, imported into the excitation 
system, and used to generate a synchronized multi-frequency excitation signal. This signal is 
then applied to a piezoelectric actuator, which induces multi-frequency shear waves within the 
sample. 
 
Fig. 2. Detailed schematic of the MFR-OCE system. 
4.2 Multi-frequency signal and synchronization process 
Synchronization is a critical aspect of multi-frequency shear wave elastography as it ensures 
that the OCT imaging system is synchronized not only with the main excitation signal but also 
with each individual frequency component. In conventional swept-source OCT, the 3D data 
acquisition process involves a combination of 2D lateral scanning of the laser beam on a 
sample’s surface within the field of view (B-mode scanning), and depth scanning along the 
beam propagation direction (axial scan), which is achieved by the sweeping of the laser 
wavelength. The acquired data is then used to form a 3D tomographic dataset. 
In MFR-OCE, each point on the 2D surface is scanned multiple times (multiple sweeps of 
the laser wavelength to capture sample motion, a so-called “M-mode scanning”. As the waves 
propagate during the scan, the axial position of tissue particles changes, introducing a Doppler 
phase shift across the time sampling. Therefore, analyzing the Doppler phase shift on the time-
series data acquired through M-mode scanning enables the estimation of SWS. In this study, 
100 spectra per M-mode scan and 100  100 lateral sampling points per B-mode scan were 
acquired and processed. 
Figure 3 illustrates the synchronization process in MFR-OCE scanning. The top axes 
represent B-mode scanning for spatial data acquisition, the middle axes depict mechanical 
excitation, and the bottom axes show M-mode scanning at each position. At the end of the scan, 
