4
We are interested in the large x regime, i.e., when x > xc
(classically forbidden region) such that V (x) > ϵ.
If
V (x) ≫ϵ, we see from Eq. (24) that to leading order
for large x, the wavefunction (up to inconsequential pref-
actors) decays as
ψϵ(x) ∝exp
"
−
√
2m
ℏ
Z x
0
p
V (x′) dx′
#
, .
(26)
Substituting V 9x) = α
p
ln |x| in (26), we get for x ≫xc
ψϵ(x) ∝exp
"
−
√
2m α
ℏ
(ln x)1/4 x
#
,
(27)
which, of course, is square integrable.
Hence the po-
tential V (x) = α
p
ln |x| is indeed ”confining”, and has
discrete eigenvalues.
Considerations of interactions: So far we have consid-
ered black holes as putative quantum objects and dis-
cussed which confining potentials could give rise to spec-
tra that in turn would be similar to Bekenstein-Hawking
entropy.
We have shown that there exist very shal-
low potentials growing as
√
ln r with the distance that
gives rise to such spectra via a high energy condensa-
tion mechanism. However, such shallow potentials lead
to states with wavefunctions that, although square inte-
grable, have a large spatial extension which contradicts
the idea of compact black holes. One way out could be
to relax the ansatz of noninteracting bosons, and to pos-
tulate that self-interactions could at the same time lead
to the right spectral degeneracy and the right spatial ex-
tent, both considered as functions of black hole mass.
Such a scenario was indeed suggested some time ago by
Dvali and Gomez[34], see also [35]. This approach has
however so far not been systematically investigated from
the point of view of analysis of operators. Within our
approach, since the relevant states that contribute to the
superexponential density of states via the high energy
condensation mechanism occur at very high energies, in-
teractions are unlikely to play any role there.
The size of internal space: The above discussion sup-
poses that the internal space of a black hole can be as-
similated to an object like an atom, figuratively that the
Schwarzschild radius of a black hole is analogous to the
Bohr radius. This does not have to be the case, as the
geometry of a black hole interior may be qualitatively dif-
ferent from the domain of ordinary space occluded by the
black hole. Indeed, the mathematical structure of space-
time inside a (classical) black hole is still an open problem
and the focus of a substantial literature, see e.g. [36–40].
Recently the possibility that the (classical) gravitational
dynamics inside a black hole being chaotic has been dis-
cussed [41–43] in specific models, in which case analytical
solutions are likely to remain elusive. The (semiclassical)
quantum structure of black hole interiors is also actively
investigated, see e.g. [44, 45].
The internal volume of black hole might hence be large,
often referred to as a ’bag-of-gold’ scenario[46], and, if so,
may accommodate many internal states without running
into the conceptual problem outlined above. It is how-
ever not known why the internal volume should then al-
ways be of just the amount of vastness required to match
Bekenstein-Hawking entropy, and in the recent literature
the issue is raised that it may even be too large; one
then has to explain why black hole entropy is not even
larger[47]. If a (classical) singularity is taken seriously
as an end point of (classical) evolution in the black hole
interior, one is further presumably not limited to inter-
nal spaces of finite dimension, but could also contemplate
infinite-dimensional internal spaces, for instance the lo-
cally tree-like structures favored in disordered systems
theory[48, 49], where the density of local ground states is
known to be an exponentially increasing function of en-
ergy [50] (eq. 20). In the context of (9) this corresponds
to the same scaling as in the limit α →∞. However, it
is not known how to get to a spectral function increasing
as exponential of a square in such a scenario.
Conclusion:
Motivated by the spectral degeneracy
of a black hole as a quantum object we have consid-
ered the general question which hermitian operators
can have spectral density growing with energy E as
∼exp[Const. E2].
We have shown that typically such
quickly increasing degeneracy and concomitant cumulant
state counting function lead to the phenomenon of high
energy condensation. We have further shown an explicit
family of Hamiltonian operators in finite dimensions (in-
cluding one dimension) with these properties. As we also
show, these examples lead to very extended states, and
therefore cannot be reasonable models of quantum black
holes, as their support would extend (very) far outside
the Schwarzschild radius.
We have briefly considered
these conclusions in the perspective of interacting bosons,
and have pointed out that to change the conclusions qual-
itatively the interactions would have to shrink the spatial
extent of the relevant states in a major way. We have
also commented on the possibility of different geometries
inside black holes which can correspond to these highly
degenerate spectra. On a general level, our work serves
to highlight what an unusual and indeed extreme math-
ematical object a quantum system must be to have the
Bekenstein-Hawking-Mukhanov energy spectrum.
Acknowledgement
EA thanks Prof V Mukhanov for discussions around
the ’bag-of-gold’ scenario.
SNM acknowledges ANR
Grant No. ANR- 23-CE30-0020-01 EDIPS.
