In the analysis leading to the M9 brane, supersymmetry plays a central role. Recently,
there has been a renewed interest in non-supersymmetric string theories in ten dimensions
(see e.g. [7–32]), but there has been little progress in similar questions in M-theory, due to
its non-perturbative nature. In this note, we will take a small step in this direction by asking
and partially answering the question of whether, if we drop supersymmetry, there may exist
additional, exotic end-of-the-world branes in M-theory.
Due to anomaly inflow constraints, any exotic end-of-the-world branes that may exist
must still have a massless, chiral spectrum, although this may be non-supersymmetric, and
this provides us with a handle to tackle the problem even in absence of a perturbative de-
scription. Specifically, we will work out the general consistency conditions imposed in the
chiral spectrum by anomaly inflow, but not require that the boundary gauge theory is super-
symmetric, and search for non-trivial solutions.
One might have thought that the answer to this question is known indirectly, since
exotic end-of-the-world branes for M theory are intrinsically connected to non-supersymmetric
heterotic strings in ten dimensions. Specifically, for any given end-of-the-world brane in M-
theory, one could take two of them and form an interval compactification1 (as one does in
the supersymmetric context [2, 3]). Then, upon shrinking the interval size, this would yield
perturbative heterotic strings, which are fully classified [7]. The problem with this argument
is that, since the exotic end of the world branes would be non-supersymmetric, one should
expect them to source a tension, in which case there could be a potential obstructing the limit
of zero interval size. The relationship between interval size and coupling could be altered due
to warping, leading to a heterotic-like string, but non-perturbative. Such strings may exist
or not, but if they do, they cannot be captured by a perturbative worldsheet classification.
Therefore, the question we ask here is quite general, and the exotic end-of-the-world branes
do not have to be directly related in a direct way to heterotic strings.
As described in the rest of the note, we solve the problem of anomaly inflow exhaustively
for a large class of simple gauge groups, under the simplifying assumption of a purely chiral
spectrum, and find no new boundary conditions for M-theory. We also perform a large search
of non-supersymmetric boundary conditions for the exceptional groups, and find a novel
solution with gauge group G2 and just three non-trivial matter representations. Anomaly
inflow leads to five conditions on the anomaly polynomial in this case, so the existence of a
solution involving only three charged matter fields is somewhat nontrivial. We do not know
whether it is of any physical significance, but find its existence interesting. We also uncovered
two more solutions, with fully chiral spectrum and gauge groups G2 and Sp(2) respectively,
where the anomaly polynomial factorizes (so that anomalies can be cancelled) but not in a
way compatible with M-theory; the solutions might perhaps be relevant for other corners of
the string Landscape.
The remainder of this paper has the following structure. In Section 2 we examine the
1We note in passing that the SO(16)2 string [33, 34] cannot possibly become an interval compactification
of M-theory at strong coupling in this way, since its anomaly polynomial does not have a form compatible
with M-theory anomaly inflow.
– 2 –
