TNP
True value variation
Default variation
Ratio of variations
Γq
2
±0.5
±1.0
0.50
γq
S1
±5.5
±2.0
2.75
γq
B1
±3.0
±1.0
3.00
I(c)
qq
±6.0
±1.0
6.00
I(c)
qg
±0.3
±1.0
0.30
S(c)
±6.0
±2.0
3.00
H(c)
±1.0
±1.0
1.00
Table 1.
Different approaches for setting the TNP ranges at NLL′. The column labelled ‘true
value variation’ shows the θ2 values when these are set using the NNLL′ ingredients, whilst the
‘default’ variations are the ones of ref. [40]. In the final column we give the ratio of the ‘true’
variations to the default ones.
the next order), and it is also interesting to compare these variations to the ‘default’ ones
discussed below equations (4.5), (4.6) and (4.7).
This comparison is shown in table 1, where the TNP ranges set by the true NNLL′
coefficients are denoted by ‘true value variation’. One noteworthy aspect is that the ‘true’
variation of the I(c)
ij matching coefficient TNPs is different from ±1; this is perhaps expected
as the approach of taking these to be independent of z is somewhat of an oversimplification.
However, we also observe that the TNP variations for the soft boundary constant and the
non-cusp anomalous dimensions, γq
S1, γq
B1 and S(c), are ≃3 times larger than the default
prescriptions. For the anomalous dimensions, this is caused by the fact that the jet radius
clustering corrections at O(α2
s) are quite large (as was previously noted in the context of pTj
in ref. [59]). For the soft boundary constant and anomalous dimensions, it was found that
for the “global” piece and the clustering corrections individually (i.e. SG/γG and ∆S/∆γ
in ref. [44]), their size corresponded fairly well to the default variations of equations (4.5)
and (4.7). Thus, if one were to take an approach with separate TNPs for the global and
clustering pieces, one would not see such a strong enhancement of the ‘true’ variation over
the default one.
Figure 6 shows the breakdown of the NLL′ TNP uncertainty prediction (using the ‘true
value variations’ from table 1) as well as the comparison with the NLL′ scale variation
theory uncertainties. We first note that the TNPs for the soft ingredients S(c) and γS1
dominate the TNP uncertainty in the resummation region; in the right hand panel of figure
6 we include a curve that only takes account of these TNPs (‘soft TNP’), and we see that
it captures the bulk of the total TNP uncertainty. The MaxDev uncertainty lies closer to
the TNP uncertainty than the standard one does, and the MaxDev and TNP uncertainties
have a similar shape, but the TNP uncertainty is still substantially larger than either of
the scale uncertainties. This is expected; we know that the MaxDev procedure will still
underestimate the uncertainty at NLL′ due to the anomalously small effect of soft scale
variations discussed in section 4.1.
– 13 –
