Spatially Resolved Optical Responses
of a High-Kinetic-Inductance Microwave Resonator
Rento Hirotsuru,1 Hodaka Kurokawa,2 Kazuyo Takaki,3 Hirotaka Terai,2,3 and Hideo Kosaka1,2
1Department of Physics, Graduate School of Engineering Science,
Yokohama National University, 79-5 Tokiwadai, Hodogaya, Yokohama, 240-8501, Japan
2Quantum Information Research Center, Institute of Advanced Sciences,
Yokohama National University, 79-5 Tokiwadai, Hodogaya, Yokohama, 240-8501, Japan
and
3National Institute of Information and Communications Technology,
588-2 Iwaoka, Nishi-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 651-2492, Japan
Understanding the optical response of a high-kinetic-inductance microwave resonator is crucial for
applications ranging from single-photon detection to quantum transduction between microwave and
optical domains, which is gaining significant attention for scaling up quantum computers. However,
interactions between the pump light and the superconducting resonator often induce unintended
resonance frequency shifts and linewidth broadening. In this study, we measure the local optical
response of a NbTiN nanowire resonator using a laser-scanning microwave spectroscopy system in-
tegrated with a dilution refrigerator. The optical response of the resonator shows correlation with
the resonance modes and position, which is attributed to the two-level system around the resonator.
These findings not only contribute to the design and understanding of quantum transducers and
single-photon detectors, but also to the understandings of catastrophic high-energy particle irradi-
ation events that generate unintended phonons in quantum devices.
Bridging light and microwaves, separated by an energy
difference of five orders of magnitude, is significant not
only for microwave-based single-photon detectors [1, 2]
but also in the context of quantum information process-
ing [3–7]. A superconducting quantum computer, which
operates in the microwave regime and excels in integra-
tion and controllability [8, 9], could be connected using
photons, which are highly resistant to thermal noise and
exhibit minimal propagation loss. Achieving microwave-
optical quantum copackaging would significantly expand
the potential of both quantum computing and quantum
communication [10–14]. To realize the optical–microwave
links, a microwave resonator, which confines and en-
hances microwave fields, serves as an essential compo-
nent.
The
development
of
high-kinetic-inductance
mi-
crowave resonators has become a focus of intensive re-
search [15–19]. Large kinetic inductance, Lk, not only
enables miniaturization of the resonator but also in-
creases the zero-point fluctuation voltage, Vzpf. A large
Vzpf enhances interactions between single microwave pho-
tons and matter, making them critical for quantum
applications based on cavity quantum electrodynamics
[5, 7, 15, 16, 20–23]. Recently, these properties have re-
ceived global attention for their potential in microwave-
to-optical quantum transducers, which convert single mi-
crowave photons to optical photons [4, 5, 21, 24]. How-
ever, challenges arise from pump light leakage or scat-
tered light absorbed by the superconductors during quan-
tum conversion, leading to unintended degradation of res-
onator performance [13, 25, 26]. Precise understanding of
the optical response of the microwave resonator is crucial
for improving the quantum transducers.
In this study, we investigate the effects of optical illu-
mination on a high-Lk microwave resonator, especially fo-
cusing on illumination position dependence using a home-
built laser-scanning microwave spectroscopy system inte-
grated into a dilution refrigerator.
Our results reveal
that degradation of the quality factor, Q, and shifts in
resonance frequency caused by local optical illumination
differ significantly depending on both the resonator mode
and the illumination position. Additionally, we demon-
strate that the local electric field strength interacting the
two-level systems (TLS) contributes significantly to the
optical response. These findings provide critical insight
for the design and operation of quantum transducers and
superconducting single-photon detectors utilizing high-
Lk resonators.
Furthermore, the developed technique
can be applied for studying effects of high-energy par-
ticle irradiation on a superconducting qubit [27], which
is catastrophic for a quantum processor [28–34].
RESULTS
Microwave resonator characterization
The high-Lk resonator comprises a loop structure with
a 5-µm gap fabricated from a 10-nm-thick, 150-nm-wide,
and 1.5-mm-long NbTiN nanowire (Fig. 1(a)) (see Meth-
ods for details on fabrication).
Two 5 µm×5 µm pad
structures are incorporated at the gap for optical align-
ment. Figure 1(b) shows the resonator transmission spec-
trum (S21), revealing resonance dips corresponding to
the first to fifth modes between 0–12 GHz, with the
fundamental mode at 2.4 GHz. Comparisons with elec-
tromagnetic field simulations estimate Lk ∼0.66 µH (see
Supplementary Methods for details on simulation). The
chip hosts two additional resonators sharing the same
feedline, leading to observation of more than six dips in
the spectrum. At low probe microwave powers, 1/Q in-
creases (Fig. 1(c)) owing to TLS losses [35]. In the fol-
arXiv:2504.05899v1  [quant-ph]  8 Apr 2025
