Here, δ is a constant chosen such that the communication estimator (E) defined as [13; 95]
E := λ2
2 Im
 Z +∞
−∞
dτA
Z +∞
−∞
dτBχ(τA)χ(τB)⟨0α|[: ¯ψ(x)ψ(x) :, : ¯ψ(x′)ψ(x′) :]|0α⟩

(80)
is minimized. However, taking a very large δ also reduces the magnitude of correlation measures. Hence, we need to
optimize a minimum value of δ for which the E is close to zero. We calculate the mutual information and concurrence
for this configuration and then repeat the process for various values of the separation between detectors d(rA, rB) while
keeping Rs and other parameters constant.
A static observer at infinity does not experience any flux of radiation in the Boulware vacua. However, at a finite
distance from the horizon, due to the curvature of spacetime, the vacuum polarization contributes to the stress-energy
tensor [96; 61]. In contrast to the scenario with an infinite switching duration, ∆τ, or large energy gap Ωwhere the
excitation rate is zero, a static detector in the Boulware vacuum during a finite proper time ∆τ experiences transient
excitations resulting from the switching process [97].
Therefore, one can also get a nonzero transition rate in the
Boulware vacuum. By substituting the pullbacks of the two-point functions W HHI
ψ,c
shown in (18), W Unruh
ψ,c
shown in (26),
and W Boulware
ψ,s
shown in (33) along the trajectory of a static detector in Eqs. (61), (62) for Lij and M, and further using
(74), (76) for concurrence and mutual information, we obtain the numerical plots of the correlation measures displayed
in Fig. 6, where we have considered the case when one detector is positioned in close proximity to the horizon, and we
undertake entanglement harvesting with the second detector held static at various proper separations. Analyzing the
results in plots shown in Fig. 6, it is observed that the mutual information, as well as the concurrence in all three vacua,
follow the same trend for smaller separation between detectors. One can understand it as all three vacua have similar
entanglement properties at small scales. However, for larger separation between detectors, the mutual information as
well as the concurrence becomes maximum at a substantial proper separation in the Boulware vacuum state, while it
is minimum in the Hartle-Hawking-Israel (HHI) state. The absence of Hawking radiation for a static detector in the
Boulware state, coupled with the fact that we are comparing the vacuum correlations of different states at the same
proper distance, where the gravitational redshift, as well as other parameters, remain identical, implies that at sufficiently
large distances between detectors, the presence of Hawking radiation in the Unruh and HHI states diminish the total
vacuum correlation as well as the entanglement as observed from the vantage point of static detectors 9. However, as
we decrease the proper distance between the Unruh-DeWitt detectors while maintaining detector A near the horizon,
there is a specific point at which the mutual information in the HHI state begins to dominate and eventually becomes
equivalent to the Unruh state, and finally, at very small separations, all states follow the same trend. Additionally, if
detector A is positioned at a different radial coordinate, the point at which the mutual information in the HHI state
starts to dominate and eventually becomes equivalent to the other two vacua shifts accordingly. These observations
suggest that in the vicinity of the black hole horizon, the energy flux and energy density of Hawking radiation have a
detrimental effect on vacuum correlations, causing their degradation.
The observations made in the preceding paragraph, based on UDW formalism, are also consistent with the resolvent
technique prediction in section 2.4 (see the bottom panel of Fig. 2). In particular, the ordering of mutual information in
all three states matches. We noted in section 2.4 (and Fig. 2) that as we decrease the separation between disjoint intervals,
there exist specific points where the correlation measure reaches its maximum and then decays again. This feature can
also be seen in the entanglement harvesting with UDW in Fig. 6. We observe two peaks in the mutual information
plots displayed in the bottom panel of Fig. 2. This can be understood as the two disjoint intervals reaching a minimum
separation twice. The distance between these two peaks decreases as we move away from the horizon. Meanwhile, the
standard width of the correlation plots in Fig. 6 increases, indicating a sharper decay near the horizon. This behavior
is consistent across all three states, suggesting that these features are primarily due to vacuum polarization and the
gravitational redshift effect, as there is no Hawking radiation for a static observer in the Boulware state.
The results in the present subsection indicate that the presence of a horizon has a substantial impact on the vacuum
correlations of a quantum field. Nonetheless, we expect other factors, such as the separation distance between detectors,
the energy gap, relative velocity, the proper distance from the horizon, and spacetime curvature, to be relevant as well. To
examine the dependence of this effect on the distance from the horizon, the following two subsections focus on positioning
two Unruh-DeWitt detectors at a fixed separation distance at the time of the peak of switching, denoted as dAB, and
explore the entanglement dynamics across various distances from the black hole horizon along various trajectories.
9Here, one should recall that the Unruh state has only outgoing flux of Hawking radiation, while HHI state has both outgoing as well as
ingoing radiation. This explains why the Unruh state correlations are in the middle.
21
