2
tion of the time-dependent Hartree approximation22 to
various quadratic effective molecular potentials. A one-
to-one correspondence links each TGED method to its
single-surface thawed Gaussian wavepacket dynamics
(TGWD) analog in the limit of uncoupled electronic
states.
Here, we concentrate on the single-Hessian TGED,
the nonadiabatic mean-field analog of the single-Hessian
TGWD, where the Hessian of the effective potential along
the nuclear trajectory is kept constant23.
We use the
quadratic vibronic coupling Hamiltonian to parameter-
ize the potential energy surfaces for different scenarios
and evaluate the performance of TGED. First, we present
numerical results for a system in which the TGED is ex-
act and highlight its advantages over both the TGWD
and Ehrenfest dynamics. Next, we explain why single-
trajectory mean-field methods completely fail to cap-
ture electronic population transfer near conical intersec-
tions between electronic states belonging to different ir-
reducible representations of the molecular point group,
using pyrazine as a case study. Importantly, most conical
intersections studied in the literature fall into this cate-
gory because their locations can be predicted using group
theory. Finally, we show that TGED is useful for study-
ing nonadiabatic dynamics near conical intersections be-
tween electronic states of the same symmetry, which have
been largely overlooked so far. In particular, conical in-
tersections of asymmetric molecules (which belong to the
C1 point group) always fall into this category. We evalu-
ate the performance of TGED in a system modeling such
a conical intersection and demonstrate that the semiclas-
sical mean-field trajectory provides a good description of
the crossing and recrossing of the intersection.
II.
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
The systems used in this study are parameterized with
the quadratic vibronic coupling Hamiltonian, which is
often used to model potential energy surfaces of real
molecules in the vicinity of conical intersections. In this
section, we briefly review how this Hamiltonian is con-
structed and provide the equations of motion of TGED
in the diabatic representation, which conveniently avoids
the complexities associated with the geometric phase24
and the divergence of derivative couplings at conical in-
tersections.
A.
The quadratic vibronic coupling Hamiltonian
The construction of the quadratic vibronic coupling
Hamiltonian model25–27 starts with a reference nuclear
Hamiltonian
ˆH0 = ˆTN + ˆV0 = −1
2
D
X
i=1
ℏωi
∂2
∂q2
i
+ 1
2
D
X
i=1
ℏωiq2
i ,
(1)
expressed as a sum of the nuclear kinetic energy TN and
a quadratic expansion V0 of the potential energy sur-
face of a reference electronic state about a reference po-
sition taken to be at q = (0, . . . , 0). We shall consider
the reference state to be the ground electronic state and
the reference position to be the minimum of the elec-
tronic ground-state surface, which is also the location of
the Franck-Condon point. Each dimensionless mass- and
frequency-scaled coordinate qi is associated with mass
mi, force constant ki, and frequency ωi =
p
ki/mi. In
the quadratic vibronic coupling model, the full molecu-
lar Hamiltonian describing a system with S coupled elec-
tronic states takes the form
ˆH = ˆH01S + W(ˆq),
(2)
where 1S is the S × S unit matrix.
The off-diagonal
elements of W(q),
Wmn(q) = W 0
mn +
D
X
i=1
λimnqi,
m ̸= n,
(3)
linearly couple different electronic states m and n, en-
abling transfer of electronic population. Importantly, the
constant, zeroth-order term W 0
mn vanishes when the elec-
tronic states m and n transform according to different
irreducible representations28. The diagonal elements,
Wmm(q) = Em +
D
X
i=1
κimqi +
X
ij
gijmqiqj,
(4)
add three modifications to the harmonic reference po-
tential V0(q) to define the mth electronic surface. The
first term shifts the mth electronic surface vertically by
Em.
The second term shifts the mth surface horizon-
tally by ∆qi = −κim/ℏωi, which also leads to a nonzero
gradient at the Franck-Condon point. Finally, the last
term, which is neglected in the linear vibronic coupling
Hamiltonian29, induces changes in the vibrational fre-
quencies (“mode distortion”) when i = j and rotation of
the normal coordinates (“Duschinsky effect”30 or “mode
mixing”) when i ̸= j. The quadratic vibronic coupling
Hamiltonian is commonly employed to simulate nonadi-
abatic dynamics involving conical intersections in poly-
atomic molecules. When restricted to a single surface,
the model reduces to the global harmonic approxima-
tion, where the TGWD and the TGED become equiva-
lent and exact. This makes the quadratic vibronic cou-
pling Hamiltonian a useful model for exploring the fac-
tors that determine the success or failure of the TGED
method.
B.
Equations of motion of the TGED
In the time-dependent Hartree approximation, the
molecular wavefunction is written as the Hartree product
Ψ(t) = ψ(t) · ct,
(5)
