Entropy 2024, 26, 612
49 of 84
There is a striking distinction between the pN system and the (N,R) systems for the
chaotic class of motions. Unlike the latter two, the pN exhibits an additional area of chaos
in the pretzel region. This feature will become evident in the next subsection.
6.4. Poincaré Plots
Poincaré sections for each of the N, pN, and R systems can be constructed by plotting
the square of the angular momentum p2
θ, against the radial momentum pR (both scaled
to be dimensionless as per (181)) of the hex-particle each time it crosses a bisector. Since
all bisectors are equivalent in the equal mass case, all crossings can be plotted on the
same surface of section. The plots then indicate regions of chaos, as well as periodicity
and quasi-periodicity.
Since the Hamiltonian is time-independent, the total energy is a constant of the motion,
and the phase space is a three-dimensional hypersurface in four dimensions for each system.
The system is said to be integrable if an additional constant of the motion exists, in which
case its trajectories are restricted to two-dimensional surfaces in the available phase space.
The types of motion that integrable systems can exhibit are either periodic or quasi-
periodic. Periodic (1-dimensional) orbits have trajectories that always appear as lines or
dots on the Poincaré section, since by deﬁnition, they comprise the intersection of two
two-dimensional surfaces. By contrast, the extra degree of freedom for a non-integrable
system permits orbits to visit all regions of phase space. In this case, the system typically
displays strongly chaotic behavior and the associated trajectories appear as ﬁlled in areas
on the Poincaré plot.
Small perturbations of an integrable system admit small regions of chaos, though most
of its orbits remain conﬁned to two-dimensional surfaces. The chaotic regions grow as
the perturbation increases in magnitude and eventually become connected areas on the
Poincaré section, a phenomenon known as the Kolmogorov, Arnold, and Moser (KAM)
transition [119–122]. For sufﬁciently large perturbations, systems typically become almost
fully ergodic [123], though islands of regularity may persist for quite some time prior to
this and typically have an intricate fractal structure.
The Poincaré plots for the N, R, and pN systems appear, respectively, in Figures 31–33,
using the same conventions as in [3], up to an overall normalization for each section.
The energy conservation relation (176), which is
p2
R + p2
θ ≤2
3η
(186)
determines the outer boundary of each plot, where the presence of η reﬂects the different
normalizations for each system. When the potential energy is zero, equality in (186) holds,
corresponding to the hex-particle being at the origin. Any departure from the origin reduces
the values of (pR, pθ) and so yields the phase-space limit.
Figure 31 for the N system reproduces the results for the wedge problem [3]. Here,
H −3mc2 is normalized to unity and the RHS of (186) is 1. In the equal mass case, the
three-body problem corresponds to motion of a body falling toward a wedge whose sides
are each at angles 30o relative to the vertical axis. The energy constraint after an A-collision
has taken place yields another boundary

pR −2
√
3|pθ|
2
≤1 −p2
θ
(187)
whose satisfaction yields all points in phase space that have undergone an A-collision
(the A-region). Points violating (187) are those for which a B-collision has taken place (the
B-region). Since the interaction is gravitational, collisions with the third particle cannot
ultimately be avoided. Consequently, the A-region has no ﬁxed points and any point in
the A-region will inevitably venture into the B-region. However, ﬁxed points can occur
in a subset of the B-region: here, B-collisions are inﬁnitely repeated, corresponding to the
annulus orbits.
