Based on the earlier analysis, it is evident that the system’s resource distribution is highly
uneven. To further investigate the relationship between resource availability, cooperation
fraction, and the advantageous environment, as enabled by µ, across the entire system and
within both games, as well as to mitigate resource inequality among individuals, we divide
the population into ten groups, ranked from highest to lowest, based on individual resource
levels.
Fig. 12(a) and Fig. 12(b) illustrate the relationship between cooperation fraction and
resource levels across different resource intervals, as well as the individual resource rank-plot
for different values of µ. The corresponding results for ΥSDG and ΥPDG are presented in
Fig. A5((a)–(b)) and Fig. A5((c)–(d)) (Appendix). From Fig. 12, Fig. A5(a), and Fig. A5(c),
it is evident that, whether in the entire system or within ΥSDG and ΥPDG, for the same
resource interval, the cooperation fraction corresponding to µ = 0 is the lowest. As µ in-
creases, cooperation levels improve. Moreover, for a fixed µ, the cooperation fraction in
ΥSDG is consistently the highest, while the cooperation fraction in ΥPDG remains the low-
est. The individual resource rank-plot in the entire system, ΥSDG, and ΥPDG for different
values of µ is shown in Fig. 12(b), Fig. A5(b), and Fig. A5(d), respectively. As µ increases,
the disparity in individual resource distribution narrows, further confirming that µ enhances
cooperation while simultaneously reducing resource inequality. To further promote social
fairness and narrow the inequality gap, we introduce a minimum resource guarantee, rep-
resented by ξ. Under the combined effect of µ = 0.5 and ξ = 0.1, the purple bar chart in
Fig. 12(a), Fig. A5(a), and Fig. A5(c) illustrates the cooperation fraction for each resource-
based division. Compared to the case of only µ = 0.5 (gray bar chart), the cooperation
fraction increases significantly in higher resource intervals, both at the system level and
within ΥSDG and ΥPDG. Once the system stabilizes, the distribution of individual resources
is represented by the purple line in Fig. 12(b), Fig. A5(b), and Fig. A5(d). Compared to
other values of µ, the number of individuals with higher resources decreases, and the thresh-
old at which the purple line disappears is further elevated. This confirms that, whether
in the entire system or within ΥSDG and ΥPDG, the combined effect of µ and ξ enhances
cooperation and mitigates resource inequality among individuals.
Finally, to test the robustness of our multi-game framework with adaptive control mech-
anism and limited resources, we analyze the impact of µ on cooperation levels in different
network structures. Specifically, we examine the cooperation fraction as a function of b in a
28
