Entropy 2024, 26, 612
40 of 84
and a discrete mapping can be constructed that describes the particle’s angular and radial
velocities each time it collides with one of the edges. The systems are nearly identical
in the equal mass case since a crossing between the two equal mass particles cannot be
distinguished from an elastic collision between them.
The interesting dynamics of the system arises due to these crossings, or alternatively,
due to the non-smoothness of the potential along the bisectors. Two types of motion can
be distinguished [3]: A-motion, in which the hex-particle crosses a single bisector twice in
succession (the same pair of particles cross twice in a row) and B-motion, corresponding
to the hex-particle crossing two successive sextant boundaries (one particle crosses each
of its compatriots in succession). Any given motion is characterized by a symbol sequence,
a sequence of letters A and B, with a ﬁnite exponent n denoting n-repetitions and an
overbar denoting an inﬁnite repeated sequence. For example, the expression A2B3 denotes
three A-motions (two adjacent particles cross twice in a row twice in succession) followed
by three B-motions (one particle crosses the other two in succession, which then cross each
other). The expression (AnBm)p denotes the motion AnBm repeated p times, and (AnBm)
denotes inﬁnitely many repeats of this motion. There is an ambiguity in classifying either
the ﬁnal or the initial crossing since whether or not a motion is of A-type or B-type is
contingent upon the previous crossing; this ambiguity can be resolved by taking the initial
crossing of any sequence of motions as being unlabeled.
Since the same initial conditions for the N, pN, and R systems do not yield the
same conserved energy H, comparison of these cases necessitates a choice: one can either
compare at ﬁxed values of the energy (FE conditions), modifying the initial conditions as
appropriate (as required by the conservation laws for each system), or else ﬁx the initial
conditions, comparing trajectories at differing values of H (ﬁxed-momenta (FM) conditions).
Numerically, it is useful to rescale
pi = Mtotc ˆpi
zi =
4
κMtotc2 ˆzi
(181)
in which case, the equations of motion become
∂η
∂ˆpi
=
1
c
∂H
∂pi
=
4
κMtotc3
dˆzi
dt = dˆzi
dˆt
(182)
∂η
∂ˆzi
=
(
4
κM2
totc4 )∂H
∂zi
= −
4
κMtotc3
d ˆpi
dt = −d ˆpi
dˆt
(183)
where Mtot = 3m is the total mass of the system, t =
4
κMtotc3 ˆt, and ˆzi and ˆpi are the respective
dimensionless positions and momenta. The quantities Mi and Li likewise rescale
Mi
=
Mtotc2
q
ˆpi2 + ˆmi2 + ˆpi

= Mtotc2 ˆMi
(184)
Li
=
Mtotc2
 
η + 1 −
q
ˆpi2 + ˆmi2 −ϵ(∑
j
ˆpjsji)
!
= Mtotc2 ˆLi
(185)
where η + 1 = H/Mtotc2, ˆmi = ( mi
Mtot ).
One consideration in describing the motion is that the proper time (97) differs for each
particle, even in the equal mass case. The simplest choice (but not the only one) is to work
with the coordinate time t.
The plots in this section were obtained numerically [30,116], with a time step in
the numerical code having a value ˆt = 1. Absolute and relative error tolerances of
ϵabs = ϵrel = 10−8 were imposed so that the estimated error in each of the dynam-
ical variables ρ(i), λ(i), pρ(i), and pλ(i) at each step i in the numerical integration is
ϵ(i) ≤max(ϵrel|y(i)|, ϵabs).
