large gauge symmetry. Indeed, the constant shift (6.3) introduces a nonvanishing source:
h′′
ij + 2a′
a h′
ij −2
5
a′
a
2
(hij −ϵij) = 0.
(6.7)
In the absence of symmetry, the IR graviton modes are no longer gauge-dependent, and the physics
depends on ϵij.
Before the radiation-dominated era, hij is free, and the symmetry should be
restored. This requirement sets the boundary condition:
ϵij = hij(xR).
(6.8)
With this choice, the superhorizon hij remains constant, eliminating the tachyonic instability on
superhorizon scales.
Now, let us derive the effective interaction Hamiltonian after imposing the boundary condi-
tion (6.8). Solving the linear dynamics during the radiation-dominated era gives massless evolution
h(s)
k (x) = u(x −x0)h(s)
k (x0),
(6.9)
where
u(x) ≡sin x
x
,
(6.10)
and hk(x0) is the amplitude at the initial time. In our discussion, we take x0 = xR. While u(x)
represents the graviton mode function, its imaginary part is suppressed for xR = kτR →0. Thus,
when considering superhorizon modes at reheating, we may neglect the imaginary part. Then, the
effective mass after gauge fixing (6.7) is recast into γm2
eff with
γ ≡1 −u−1.
(6.11)
Consequently, we simply replace α with γα in Sec. 3.5. Since γ →0 in the superhorizon limit, γ
acts as an IR regulator, effectively eliminating the secular term. After removing the secular term,
the stimulated emission rate is at the percent level, consistent with calculations in the Minkowski
background, as illustrated in Fig. 5.
7
Conclusions
In this paper, we considered the evolution of the graviton number operator in a thermal radiation
background modeled by a scalar field. The crucial assumption was that the graviton quantum state
is in a squeezed vacuum state at the initial time. This quantum state cannot be described by a
classical distribution function in phase space, as the concept of particle number does not uniquely
specify the state.
Then, we derived the Heisenberg equation averaged over a general quantum
state—the quantum state-averaged field equation of motion—rather than relying on the standard
Boltzmann equation.
The advantage of this approach is that it allows us to derive the equation of motion applicable
to a nonlinear regime, similar to the Boltzmann equation. This could potentially enable partial
resummation of the loop calculations in the quantum field theory approach based on the in-in
formalism. Compared to previous analyses based on perturbation theory, our calculations indicate
that the behavior of the system can be more accurately captured in this framework.
Depending on the initial squeezed state, the graviton number can either increase or decrease.
This phenomenon, known as cosmological stimulated emission, was pointed out in Ref. [22] based
on perturbation theory. Like stimulated emission in QED, stronger emission is expected for more IR
– 17 –
