8
SbH4PbBr2I has a VBM of 3.4400 eV and a CBM
of 5.0579 eV, which translates into a band gap of
1.6179 eV. On substituting iodide in place of addi-
tion in SbH4PbBrI2, the VBM decreases to 3.1270 eV
and the CBM to 4.6416 eV, reducing the band gap to
1.5146 eV. Remarkably, the effective electron mass of
0.360 in SbH4PbBr2I decreases markedly to 0.147 in
SbH4PbBrI2, although the hole effective mass neither
practically varies (0.175 vs.
0.158).
All these suggest
SbH4PbBrI2 to exhibit improved mobility and charge
transport with improved qualities over others for opto-
electronic application.
The combined structural and electronic studies demon-
strate that substitution of Br−with I−induces a mod-
erate lattice expansion, Pb–I and H–I bond lengthening,
and alteration of the network of hydrogen bonding. Con-
currently, substitution of the organic MA+ cation with
the inorganic SbH+
4 cation results in a higher density of
perovskite framework and shorter Pb–halide bonds along
with significant effects on the electronic density of states.
These modifications result in smaller band gaps and mod-
ified effective masses of charge carriers and hence impact
the optical absorption and charge transport properties
of the materials. This tunability of both structure and
electronic properties is suggestive of being able to tai-
lor these perovskites for improved performance in photo-
voltaic and other optoelectronic applications.
IV.
CONCLUSION
In this study, the structural and electronic proper-
ties of hybrid perovskite materials, namely the compar-
isons between MAPbBrxI1−x and SbH4PbBrxI1−x sys-
tems, are explicitly investigated by first-principles DFT
calculations with van der Waals corrections. The results
show that substituting the conventional MA+ cation with
SbH+
4 can improve the electronic properties and tighten
the structure in a way that increases the structural sta-
bility.
The addition of the SbH+
4 cation can provide lower
lattice parameters and shorter Pb–halogen bond lengths,
leading to the production of more stable and denser crys-
tals. Substitution with SbH+
4 also results in an increase
in the valence band maximum and a reduced band gap.
Of the investigated compounds, SbH4PbI3 is particularly
promising with an optimum band gap of approximately
1.37 eV, which is quite close to the ideal band gap for
single-junction solar cells. The optimum band gap, in-
creased charge carrier mobilities, and reduced recombina-
tion losses implied by effective mass calculations suggest
that SbH4PbI3 could be a good alternative material can-
didate to conventional MAPbI3 for high-efficiency pho-
tovoltaic applications.
It is known that the incorporation of Br−ions into
the inorganic cage of PbI−
3 increases structural stabil-
ity.
The calculations performed in this study indicate
that SbH4PbBrI2 is one of the important candidates, as
it can provide additional structural stability to the elec-
tronic values of iodide by incorporating bromide. Elec-
tronically, SbH4PbBrI2 has a suitable band gap of ap-
proximately 1.51 eV, balanced between MAPbI3 and
SbH4PbI3, and has suitable charge carrier dynamics.
Therefore, SbH4PbBrI2 is a strong candidate for pho-
tovoltaic devices with a compromise between structural
stability and optimal electronic properties.
Moreover, controlled halide substitution, i.e., replac-
ing iodide ions with bromide ions, is a valuable method
to achieve maximum material stability at the expense
of electronic performance. However, adding Br−to the
MAPbI3 structure increases the band gap from about
1.55 eV to 1.90 eV. In this case, the stability increases
but the efficiency decreases. In SbH4PbBrI2, the SbH+
4
cation can tolerate the band gap to lower levels.
For
example, the band gap of SbH4PbBrI2 is about 1.51 eV.
In conclusion, the extensive theoretical investigation
presented here strongly supports the use of SbH+
4 sub-
stitution as a practical method to develop perovskite
materials with improved stability and optimal electronic
properties. In particular, SbH4PbI3 and SbH4PbBrI2 are
found to be leading candidates for real solar energy ap-
plications, worthy of future experimental validation to
fully realize their potential and make them commercially
acceptable.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The numerical calculations reported in this paper were
fully performed at TUBITAK ULAKBIM, High Perfor-
mance and Grid Computing Center (TRUBA resources).
∗veysel3@gmail.com
1 Giles E Eperon, Samuel D Stranks, Christopher Menelaou,
Michael B Johnston, Laura M Herz, and Henry J Snaith.
Formamidinium lead trihalide:
a broadly tunable per-
ovskite for efficient planar heterojunction solar cells. En-
ergy & Environmental Science, 7(3):982–988, 2014.
2 Jun Hong Noh, Sang Hyuk Im, Jin Hyuck Heo, Tarak Nath
Mandal, and Sang Il Seok. Chemical management for col-
orful, efficient, and stable inorganic–organic hybrid nanos-
tructured solar cells. Nano Letters, 13(4):1764–1769, 2013.
3 Martin A Green, Anita Ho-Baillie, and Henry J Snaith.
The emergence of perovskite solar cells. Nature Photonics,
8(7):506–514, 2014.
4 National Renewable Energy Laboratory. Best research-cell
efficiency chart, 2025. Accessed: March 5, 2025.
5 Marina R. Filip, Giles E. Eperon, Henry J. Snaith, and
Feliciano Giustino. Steric engineering of metal-halide per-
ovskites with tunable optical band gaps. Nature Commu-
