things may become worse due to the existence of high conductivity. We will show that a
signiﬁcant amount of primordial magnetic ﬁelds can be generated in the radiation domi-
nated epoch without the back-reaction problem, provided that the scalar ﬁeld experiences
a tachyonic growth phase. Thus, our formalism provides a viable mechanism for generating
large scale magnetic ﬁeld without all problems mentioned above.
We organize the paper as follows.
We present our model in Sec.
2.
The general
formalism of induced magnetic ﬁeld is discussed in Sec. 3. In Sec. 4, we analyze the power
spectrum of magnetic ﬁeld when the scalar ﬁeld is tachyonically ampliﬁed. We explicitly
calculate the magnetic ﬁeld when the magneto-genesis takes place before and after the
electron-positron annihilation in Sec. 5 and Sec. 6 respectively. We show that the seed
magnetic ﬁeld from the interaction with the scalar ﬁeld can be compatible to observations
and conclude in Sec. 7.
Throughout this manuscript, the scalar ﬁeld φ takes mass dimension, and the ﬁne
structure constant is dimensionless such that the vector potential Aµ has mass dimension.
The normal and conformal magnetic ﬁeld shall carry [M]2 dimension. The conformal time
is denoted by τ. Unless speciﬁed, a prime shall denote the diﬀerentiation with respect to
τ.
2
Our Model
We work with the following action
S =
Z
d4x√−g
"
M2
p
2 R −1
2 (Dµφ)† Dµφ −V (φ, χ) + Lχ −1
4FµνF µν + Lbg
#
.
(2.1)
with Dµ ≡∂µ −i̺Aµ and R/2 the Einstein-Hilbert action.
The parameter ̺ is the
eﬀective coupling constant between the scalar ﬁeld and the U(1) gauge ﬁeld. The term Lχ
represents the Lagrangian of an auxiliary scalar ﬁeld χ, which we shall explain in Sec. 4.2.
The complex scalar ﬁeld φ is coupled to the auxiliary ﬁeld χ via the interaction
V (φ, χ) = λ2Mpχ|φ|2 .
(2.2)
The background geometry is described by the ﬂat FLRW metric
ds2 = −dt2 + a(t)2dxidxi = a(τ)2(−dτ 2 + dxidxi) ,
(2.3)
where t is the cosmic time and τ ≡
R
dt/a the conformal time. As pointed out by [30],
magneto-genesis scenarios above the electroweak scale are strongly restricted by the baryon
isocurvature problem. In light of this result, we will work in the radiation-dominated (RD)
epoch throughout this paper. The scale factor and the Hubble parameter H ≡˙a/a are
parametrized as follows:
a(τ) = ae
 τ
τe

, H(τ) = Hinf
τ 2
e
τ 2 , τ > τe > 0 ,
(2.4)
– 3 –
