26
Figure 16 Left: Phase of the initial state containing two same-
sign vortices. Right: Zoomed-in view of the central region at
˜z = 120. The red and green curves represent the trajectories
of the two vortices as a function of ˜z. The data were obtained
in a rubidium vapor.
I. Electronic feedback loop
As discussed in Section VI.H, using the dimensionless
form of the NLSE enables us to interpret light propa-
gation in a nonlinear medium as an effective temporal
evolution. However, the maximum evolution ˜z = z/zNL
remains limited by the physical length L of the medium
and the value of the nonlinear length zNL.
While, in
principle, one could extend L to increase the effective
propagation time, a more fundamental constraint arises
from absorption: as light travels through the medium, its
intensity decreases exponentially, eventually limiting the
length L.
To overcome these limitations, Fleischer et al. (2003)
proposed a digital feedback loop technique. The concept
involves capturing both the intensity and phase of the
optical field at the output of the medium, and using a
SLM, to recreate this exact same field at the input (us-
ing the technique described in Subsection VI.A. A pair of
SLMs can also be used for independent control of ampli-
tude and phase (see for instance Ferreira et al. (2024b)).
By iterating this process, one can artificially extend the
effective propagation length, enabling the observation of
longer dynamics without being worried by absorption.
This technique was recently implemented successfully
by Ferreira et al. (2024b) to study the evolution of a
planar dark soliton. As shown in Fig. 17, the feedback
loop was repeated six times, effectively multiplying the
observable evolution time by a factor of six compared to
the propagation in a single-pass photorefractive crystal.
A similar technique is used in optical fiber with a recir-
culating loop instead of a SLM (Copie et al., 2023).
However, the electronic feedback approach faces a ma-
jor challenge due to the accumulation of noise in the mea-
sured and reconstructed fields (see Section VI.A and Sec-
tion VI.C). Since each loop reuses the previous output,
any imperfections or measurement noise are reinjected
and amplified with each iteration.
This accumulation
quickly leads to instabilities in the dynamics, currently
limiting the method to fewer than ten iterations in prac-
tice.
Figure 17 Figure adapted from (Ferreira et al., 2024b). Ex-
perimental feedback loop to observe the snake instability in a
dark soliton stripe in 2D. From left to right: intensity images
after 1,2,5,6 loops. Copyright (2025) by the American Physi-
cal Society.
Despite this limitation, the electronic feedback loop
represents an interesting tool to explore nonlinear optical
dynamics beyond the physical constraints of the medium.
For example, it could be used to simulate a periodic mod-
ulation of the system by changing the parameters of the
nonlinearity between each iteration and therefore simu-
late Floquet-like physics.
J. Modern tools for numerical simulations of the NLSE
Numerous effects that are observed in the experi-
ments go beyond the perturbative analytical treatment
described before.
This limits the available analytical
tools for understanding the experimental results even in
the mean field approximation. Progress with optimized
solver on the CPU (Stagg, 2016) or more modern special-
ized graphical processing units (GPU) (Aladjidi et al.,
2024) allows for an efficient implementation of numerical
schemes.
To numerically solve the NLSE a typical approach is
to use split-step spectral methods (Javanainen and Ru-
ostekoski, 2006). Space and time are discretized, with
uniform adimensional spacing δx, δy and δz, with the
integrated equation reading:
E(z + δz) = E(z)eiδz(D+N)E(z).
(111)
• D is the kinetic energy operator, best applied in
Fourier space where ∇2 transforms into a multi-
plication by −(kδr)2 (or −sin(kδr)2, see (Sunaina
et al., 2018)).
• N is the potential operator. It also contains the
nonlinear term in case of the NLSE.
The D and N operators do not commute, and it is
not possible to multiply the two exponentials to get an
exact result.
Instead an approximate solution can be
used (Javanainen and Ruostekoski, 2006):
eiδz(D+N) = ei δzN
2 eiδzDei δzN
2
+ O(δz3).
(112)
