2 
energy, are called Einstein phonons. A more realistic situation arises when, along with 
these elementary interactions, disorder effects are also introduced into the system, 
either in a correlated or an uncorrelated manner. Correlated disorder, which has ad-
vantages such as avoiding rigorous configuration averaging, is more suitable than 
random disorder. Among several possible forms of correlated disorder, the AAH 
model stands out because of its exceptional features, such as a nonzero transition 
point from a metallic to an insulating phase, a tunable phase factor, experimental real-
izability, and more [12,13,14]. To highlight the specific role of disorder, we compare 
our results with those of a disorder-free system. 
 
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of lead-conductor nano-junction, where a 1D conductor, 
subject to electron-electron and electron-phonon interactions, is connected to two 
perfect semi-infinite 1D leads, the source and the drain.  
 
The central focus of our work is to investigate the combined effects of AAH modu-
lation, e-e interaction, and e-ph coupling on the transmission line shape and spin po-
larization (SP). To study the transport behavior, the chosen 1D chain is clamped be-
tween two contact leads (see Fig. 1), commonly referred to as source and drain leads, 
and the results are obtained using the well-known Green’s function formalism [2,15]. 
The key aspects of our analysis are: (a) the appearance of antiferromagnetic ordering 
of magnetization in the half-filled Hubbard chain, which can be utilized to explore 
different anomalous signatures; (b) reduction of the effective bandwidths of the full 
energy window and the individual sub-bands; (c) atypical modification of different 
energy sub-bands due to the interplay between e-e and e-ph interactions in the pres-
ence of finite correlation among constituent atoms; and (d) observation of a high de-
gree of spin polarization in the presence of disorder. Our analysis may provide a suit-
able route for achieving a high degree of spin polarization in different kinds of corre-
lated, interacting quantum systems. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the junction setup, 
tight-binding (TB) Hamiltonian, and the required mathematical tools for the calcula-
tions. Detailed descriptions of the results are given in Section 3. Finally, in Section 4, 
we conclude our findings. 
