we look at the modularity question of DHR(A•). In Section 5, we look at the Witt triviality of
DHR(A•). Finally, in Section 6, we give a construction of abstract spin chain generalizing that
of fusion spin chains. Our model is based on a variation of the Longo–Roberts recognition for
a construction of bimodules from 2-categories, and provides an example of abstract spin chains
without any homogeneity for the underlying lattice. In Appendix A, we look at the question of
duality, and show that if an object X ∈DHR(A•) is dualizable as an A-correspondence, then
its dual object also belongs to DHR(A•).
Acknowledgments. This project started at Topological Quantum Computation meeting at ICMS,
Edinburgh, in October 2023. We thank the organizers for setting up a productive environment
that stimulated our discussion. L.H. is supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences
Research Council (EP/X026647/1). M.Y. is partially supported by The Research Council of
Norway [project 300837]. D.J. and M.Y. are supported by The Research Council of Norway -
project 324944. C.J. is supported by NSF Grant DMS- 2247202.
2. Abstract spin chains
In this section, we brieﬂy review deﬁnitions and notations which we will make use of in the
main body of work.
Let I denote the set of discrete intervals in Z, partially ordered with inclusion.
This is
contained in the poset P(Z) of all subsets of Z with inclusion. For F ⊆Z, we will denote its
complement by F c. Furthermore, for any subset F, we will denote its R neighborhood by F +R.
Recall that any poset can naturally be viewed as a category, with a unique morphism I →J
precisely when I ≤J. Let C∗-algfd denote the category of ﬁnite-dimensional C∗-algebras whose
morphisms are unital inclusions. Then we have the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 2.1. An abstract spin chain is a functor A• : I →C∗-algfd such that for any intervals
I ∩J = ∅, [AI, AJ] = 0 in AK for I ∪J ⊂K.
Associated to an abstract spin chain is the quasi-local C∗-algebra A = limI AI. This is a
unital AF C∗-algebra.
Since we have assumed our connecting maps are inclusions, we can
identify each AI as a subalgebra of A, with I ⊆J implying AI ⊆AJ as a C∗-subalgebra.
For any subset F ⊆Z, we can deﬁne the subalgebra AF ⊆A by
AF = C∗-alg { x ∈AG | G ⊆F } .
We now introduce some useful properties abstract spin systems can have, which we view as
“regularity” conditions. Similar to the situation for conformal nets, there are many regularity
conditions. In the theorems below we will use combinations of these properties as hypotheses,
so it will be convenient to give them names. Many are extensions of familiar properties from
the theory of conformal nets [GF93].
Condition 2.2 (Weak algebraic Haag duality). There are K, R ≥0 such that for every
interval I of length at least K, A′
Ic ∩A ⊂AI+R. If we can choose R = 0, we say A satisﬁes
algebraic Haag duality.
Condition 2.3 (Covering property). There is an L > 0 such that if I, J are intervals whose
intersection contains an interval of length L, then AI∪J = AI ∨AJ.
Condition 2.4 (Strong simplicity). The quasi-local algebra A is simple with unique trace.
Condition 2.5. The centers of the half-line algebras A(−∞,a] and A[a,∞) are 1-dimensional for
all a ∈Z.
4
