radiator. The lower impact parameter is chosen to be the Bohr radius of the shell, and the
upper one is the Debye length. The trace (Tr) operation is performed over all the states of the
upper level. The line proﬁle can be expressed as a sum of Voigt functions (see Eq. (16) in
Ref.136).
OPAS computations
The latest major developments of the OPAS code57;33 concern the line shape modelling and the
description of the free-free component of the spectral opacity.
Fluctuating electric ﬁelds produced by the free electrons and the slow-moving ions in hot dense
plasmas are known to have an important inﬂuence on the line proﬁles. In order to take the Stark
effect into account on both the bound states and radiative data of partially ionized atoms and as-
suming that the perturbing electric ﬁeld induced by the ions in the plasma can be described using
the quasi-static approximation, we developed a model to calculate relativistic atomic structure
in an external static electric ﬁeld. This approach takes into account conﬁguration interactions
in a very general way. N-electron eigenfunctions are deduced from the diagonalization of the
Dirac hamiltonian to which is added the interaction with the electric ﬁeld. Eigenfunctions are
expanded in terms of the Slater determinant using a Slater states expansion technique adapted
from Eissner and Nussbaumer138. The one-electron wavefunctions are Dirac spinors resulting
from the Dirac equation in an effective central potential139. Depending on the electric ﬁeld,
transition energies and line strengths are then calculated. The resulting spectrum is computed
assuming that each line is dressed by a Voigt proﬁle including Doppler, natural, and electron
impact broadenings. This model is applied, in the present work, for hydrogen-like and helium-
like ions. For the other ionic stages, a statistical ionic Stark broadening is applied using a model
proposed by Rozsnyai131. Following Iglesias and co-workers, a Gaussian cutoff is applied to
the Voigt proﬁle in order to remove its unphysical far wing behavior140. The electric ﬁelds
44
