F. Rigamonti et al.: The perturbed BLR of PG 1302-102
Fig. 2. Best-fit result of Model 1 on the ESPRESSO data. The top panel shows the data in gray smoothed with a Gaussian Kernel (σ ≃0.07Å), the
best-fit model (black line), and all the emission components identified by different colors: Hγ in gold, Hβ in red, [OIII] in cyan, Fe in light-blue,
very broad Hβ in brown, and the continuum in dark blue. The vertical dashed lines indicate, from left to right, the rest-frame emission wavelength
of the Hγ, [OIII]λ4363.2Å, Hβ, and [OIII]λ4958.9Å, λ5006.8Å. The bottom panel represents the residuals defined as (data-model)/error, and the
horizontal dashed black line at the zero level of residuals is plotted to guide the eyes.
we found quite similar parameters. This suggests that the two
emission regions, and possibly all the Balmer lines, share simi-
lar dynamics (FWHMHβ ≃FWHMHγ) and are spatially coherent
(ξc,Hβ ≃ξc,Hγ), with the Hγ emission region being slightly more
compact than the Hβ (σξc,Hβ ≳σξc,Hγ).
The specific features of the resulting emission profile can be
better understood by inspecting Fig. 4, where we show the pro-
jected emissivity distribution of the Hβ (see Fig. B.1 for the Hγ)
and the map of the BLR Doppler shift. The left column shows
the projected emissivity profile together with a zoomed version
in the central region. The emissivity steeply decreases after the
first 1000 gravitational radii as a consequence of the exponential
cut-off and the ξ−1 decline. Interestingly, the spiral perturbation
is extremely thin in terms of azimuthal width (δ = 0.0085) al-
though very intense (log10 A = 4.22) suggesting a strong pertur-
bation of the BLR compared to the underlying disk. The right
side of the plot shows the Doppler shift of each BLR element,
which, as is expected, decreases following the Keplerian law.
The spiral perturbation encompasses the region of the BLR that
has a positive Doppler shift, explaining why the emission profile
is redshifted. The innermost region, characterized by the high-
est Doppler factor but lower flux16, is responsible for modeling
the excess observer at λ ≃5000Å. Conversely, the emissivity at
larger radii, where the Doppler shift is less significant and the
flux emitted from the perturbation becomes less important com-
pared to that from the BLR disk, accounts for the shape of the
emission around the bulk of the line (i.e., λ ≃4861Å).
4. Discussion
The ESPRESSO spectrum of PG 1302-102 clearly revealed the
presence of asymmetric emission profiles (in this case skewed
toward redder wavelengths) for the broad component of the
Balmer lines. This feature was already detected in previous
works (e.g., Boroson & Green 1992; Jackson et al. 1992; Gra-
ham et al. 2015b) although at a much lower spectral resolution
compared to the ESPRESSO data presented here. Also, we de-
tected an excess at λ ≃5000Å possibly associated with a very
redshifted and very broad component originating from the Hβ.
16 The emissivity is higher but the area is smaller.
Article number, page 7 of 13
