4
Figure 3. Evolution of the topological states for sliding of the half-crystals. a. The wave-vector resolved electronic
density of states ρblue
J
on the blue sublattice of layer J at fixed points during the sliding process as a function of the dimensionless
parameter λ, starting from the AB|AB junction (λ = 0 and also λ = 3 as the sliding structure is periodic), through the AB|BC
(λ = 1) to the AB|CA junction (λ = 2). b. Evolution of the electronic states at various wave vectors as a function of λ.
requires passing through a topologically trivial junction
region.
Similar analysis can be performed for all other junc-
tions. For the AB|CA junction, the left and right half-
crystals and the junction region belong to the same topo-
logical class, hence no junction states arise; this is ex-
pected given that the two half-crystals in this case form
a perfect infinite rhombohedral crystal.
The AB|BC
and AB|AC junctions break both chiral and particle-
hole symmetry and therefore belong to the AI topological
class, also trivial in one dimension [5]. For the AB|BC
junction, hybridization of the edge states across the junc-
tion and the requirement that they occupy only the blue
(red) sites on the left (right) of the junction, results in, at
q = 0, two states (half a state per valley and spin) on four
atomic sites. For the AB|AC junction, due to the mirror
symmetry, the blue site on layer J hosts four states (one
per valley per spin) shared by both half-crystals. The
remaining states must be split equally between the two
sides and so the blue and red sites on layers J −1 and
J + 1 each host two states (half a state per valley and
spin). Finally, the AB|BA junction preserves all the sym-
metries of the rhombohedral bulk and so also belongs to
the BDI class, hence no topological states arise at the
junction.
B.
Topological transitions in sliding crystals
The three junctions AB|CA, AB|BC and AB|AB (see
Fig. 1a) are related to one another by in-plane trans-
lational shifts of one carbon-carbon bond-length; the
AB|AC and AB|BA junctions are similarly related. This
enables the possibility of moving continuously between
the topologically trivial and non-trivial phases in a sin-
gle system, by sliding one rhombohedral graphite crys-
tal with respect to the other in the plane of the inter-
face. Describing such sliding necessitates going beyond
the nearest-neighbour SSH model, in order to account
for changes of electronic couplings as the half-crystals are
moved away from the junction configurations considered
so far and the distances between atomic sites at the inter-
face change. To explore the qualitative effects we adopt a
simple distant-dependent interlayer hopping (see Meth-
ods and Supplementary Note 5 for more details). These
interactions are included at the junction and throughout
both half-crystals, effectively leading to the inclusion of
skew interlayer hoppings in our description of rhombo-
hedral graphite [30]. Finally, we parametrize the sliding
configurations with dimensionless λ such that λa is the
in-plane translation of the right half-crystal in the bond
direction.
Fig. 3a shows the evolution of the low-energy density of
states starting from AB|AB (λ = 0), through to AB|BC
(λ = 1), AB|CA (λ = 2) and back to AB|AB (λ = 3).
Additional results for intermediate values of λ are given
in Supplementary Note 6, along with results for the slid-
ing process from AB|AC to AB|BA. Comparison of the
top-left panel with Fig. 1b shows that inclusion of further
interlayer couplings introduces dispersion of the junction
state, and lifts its degeneracy at |q| ̸= 0. This difference
arises because all interlayer couplings other than the di-
rect vertical one introduce terms that are modulated by
the in-plane wave vector via fq.
Hence, while the ex-
tension to effective one-dimensional models can still be
performed for each q, an effective q-dependent on-site
