9
FIG. 6.
Impact of ancilla qubit error rate on the mean final training accuracy, under the environmental noise model with
error probability ranging from p = 0.001 −0.01. Each subplot shows the variation in mean final training accuracy with the
number of rounds of syndrome extraction, for a specific combination of ancilla and physical qubit error probabilities. The
ancilla error rates are expressed as a fraction of the physical error rates, denoted by the fraction fanc. The standard deviation
in the meaning final training accuracies, each calculated from 10 training runs, is shown by the shaded regions.
able and the existence of a threshold error rate for ancilla
qubits should generalise to other combinations of QML
algorithms and QEC codes. All QML algorithms contain
rotation gates, and when implemented with QEC codes
where ancilla qubits are needed for logically encoding
rotation gates, resulting in the entanglement of ancilla
and physical qubits, we can expect error propagation be-
tween the ancilla and physical qubit registers. If the QEC
code cannot correct the full range of complex errors that
may arise from such propagation, its effectiveness will
be limited in noisy environments, leading to a maximum
achievable training accuracy and a threshold error rate.
Additionally, these results could potentially be relevant
for implementing certain non-QML algorithms with QEC
codes. This is because many QEC codes require ancilla
qubits to logically encode rotation gates (and other non-
Clifford gates), and since no known code can fully address
the full spectrum of possible errors in practice, these im-
plementations could also theoretically suffer from errors
propagating from ancilla qubits to physical qubits.
Our findings also highlight the need for additional con-
siderations when applying techniques to achieve fault-
tolerant implementations of QML algorithms.
Fault-
tolerant quantum machine learning may only be achiev-
able with QEC if additional error mitigation techniques
are used with it. For example, performing rotations with
error mitigation instead of as logical operations (such as
with zero-noise extrapolation [65] or dynamical gate error
correction [66]), and using flag qubits normally applied
to syndrome qubits [67, 68] in the ancilla register to min-
imise errors before they propagate, may help minimise
uncorrectable errors.
C.
State Fidelities
We next present our results showing the effect that
noise and the implementation of error detection have on
the state fidelities of physical and ancilla qubits, and use
these results to further explain our training accuracy re-
sults above. All state fidelities (F) that we present in this
subsection were calculated using the following definition:
F(ρ, σ) = |⟨ψρ|ψσ⟩|2,
(7)
where ρ and σ represent the two pure quantum states we
seek to compare (since we use pure states to represent
