4 
 
distinct stacking configurations in tetralayer graphene (Fig. 1a). Bernal stacking (or 
ABAB) and rhombohedral stacking (or ABCA) are centrosymmetric, recently attracting 
a lot of research attention in exploring the effect of strong electron correlations [45-47]. 
On the other hand, the ABAC and ABCB stackings stand out by themselves with broken 
out-of-plane inversion and mirror symmetries, rendering them with spontaneous but 
opposite electric polarizations out-of-plane (Fig. 1a). They are the thinnest possible 
polar stacking orders in moiréless graphene multilayers, whose stackings are mutually 
transformable by mirror operation [37, 39-41, 48]. 
Our DFT calculations find that the ABAC and ABCB stackings shown in Fig. 1a 
carry spontaneous electric polarizations downwards and upwards, respectively. Figures 
1b and 1c show the calculated layer-projected band structure and charge density 
distribution for ABAC stacking arrangement (Fig. 1a), while those for ABCB are shown 
in Figs. 1d and 1e. The vertical polarization could be clarified by the fact that the charge 
density distribution in Figs. 1c and 1e (also see the calculated partial Löwdin charge in 
Fig. S1) show greatest charge imbalance between the second layer (L2) and the third 
layer (L3). For ABAC stacking, there are more holes residing at L3 than L2 (Fig. 1c & 
Fig. S1), which means that the polarization direction is pointing downward (pointing to 
the positively charged layer). In contrast, more holes occupy L2 in ABCB stacking, 
implying an upward direction of polarization (Fig. 1e & Fig. S1). The electric 
polarization directions are experimentally verified by our KPFM measurements to be 
discussed later. The calculated layer-projected band structure and charge density 
distribution for ABCB show layer-inverted behavior in comparison to those of ABAC, 
being consistent with the symmetry requirement. 
 Our tetralayer graphene in this study is prepared onto a SiO2/Si substrate with 
285 nm SiO2 by mechanical exfoliation. The thickness of the flake is first identified by 
the optical contrast with an optical microscope and subsequently verified using atomic 
force microscopy (AFM) and SNOM. We use a gate-tunable SNOM to visualize the 
stacking orders and DW sliding of tetralayer graphene in this study. Figure 1f 
schematically shows the setup of our gate-tunable SNOM. In brief, a 10.6 µm infrared 
laser is focused onto the apex of the gold-coated conductive AFM tip during the sample 
scanning, which works as a localized optical antenna to generate and detect the near-
field signal at the sample surface.  
Figure 1g shows the AFM topography of a typical tetralayer graphene, that is 
