4
SPIN CORRELATIONS AND NUMERICAL
COMPARISONS
To derive more quantitative information about the spin
correlations, we employ an empirical model that allows
us to extract correlations between kagome moments sep-
arately from correlations involving impurity moments.
Our approach assumes
Smag(q, ω) ≈α(ω)|F(q)|2
 
1 + 2
n
X
i=1
ρi(ω)fi(q)
!
, (1)
where |F(q)|2 is the square magnetic form factor, and
fi(q) is defined by a sum over equal-length bonds with
label i between Cu2+ ions that exists in di distinct di-
rections {ri1, . . . , ridi}: fi(q) = (1/di) Pdi
n=1 cos(q·rin).
This means we assume a Fourier transform encodes the
momentum-dependent scattering at a given energy. α(ω)
and all ρi(ω)’s for included bonds are parameters es-
timated from fits to the data.
α(ω) gives the energy
dependence of the overall scattering intensity and esti-
mates the momentum-integrated dynamic structure fac-
tor S(ω), since the integral of fi(q) over all q is zero
for any bond. Parameters ρi for each bond are propor-
tional both to the bond density and the average spin-
spin correlation over the bond – see Supplementary In-
formation for further details. The bond density’s energy
independence means ρi(ω) is proportional to the energy-
dependent spin-spin correlation, i.e. ρi ∝| ⟨SS′⟩i |. We
estimate α and ρi from our data at each energy, with
standard errors, using weighted least squares linear re-
gressions; see Methods for details.
Figure 4 shows results from fitting Equation 1 to the
magnetic scattering data. Panel (a) illustrates kagome
plane projections of the six bonds used in the fitting,
which are the shortest six in Zn-barlowite. These include
the first three kagome-plane nearest-neighbors – labeled
“kkn1-3” – the shortest two impurity-to-kagome bonds,
“ikn1-2,” and the bond between neighboring impurities,
“iin1.” The models in Figure 1 are made from equation
1 including these bonds and their isolated fi(q) contri-
butions are shown in Figure 9 in Extended Data. Panel
(b) of Figure 4 shows the fitted α(ω) ≈S(ω) at low and
elevated temperatures.
A highlight of the data analysis is the ability to iso-
late and extract the kagome-kagome spin correlations.
Figure 4(c, d) report fitted |ρi| correlation parameters
for the three shortest intrinsic kagome bond correlations
for T=1.7 K and T=40 K. Over both temperatures and
all energies, these fitted parameters indicate strong an-
tiferromagnetic (AFM) spin correlations over nearest-
neighbor kagome bonds, consistent with the known dom-
inant nearest-neighbor AFM interactions. Moreover, we
extract reliable correlations over both second and third
nearest-neighbors which are weaker and ferromagnetic
(FM). This combination of further neighbor correlations
differ from those expected in q=0 and
√
3 ×
√
3 or-
dered states in AFM kagome magnets [35]. The nearest-
FIG. 4.
Extracted pair-wise spin correlations over
energy and temperature. (a) Illustration of bond direc-
tions over which we report estimated correlation signals. Red
circles indicate impurities with ± indicating their c-axis dis-
placements from the kagome plane.
(b) Fitted parameter
α (ω) ≈S(ω) for T=1.7 K and T=40 K with standard errors.
(c, d) Fitted relative correlation parameter ρ(ω) for three
nearest kagome-kagome bonds for T=1.7 K and T=40 K.
Here, AFM correlations are denoted with a “−” symbol and
FM with a “+” symbol.
(e) Fitted ρ(ω) for three nearest
impurity-involved bonds for T=1.7 K data. (f) DMRG re-
sults for second and third nearest-neighbor correlations. Red
region indicates parameter space where both are positive, con-
sistent with fitted ρ(ω) signs. Yellow region indicates param-
eter combinations that most closely match ℏω=[1.3, 1.7] meV
neutron data as described in the text. Reported errors in (b-
e) reflect standard errors from parameter fits. See Methods
and Supplementary Information for details.
neighbor kagome correlations stay relatively flat with in-
creasing energy before rising above ∼1 meV, concomitant
with the further neighbor correlations weakly decreasing.
The energy dependence is more subdued in the elevated
T=40 K dataset.
Figure 4(e) plots the fitted ρi correlation parameters
for impurity-involved correlations at T=1.7 K. The im-
purity correlations decrease almost monotonically with
energy and are only significant below ∼1.5 meV, consis-
tent with the weakly coupled nature of the interlayer im-
purties [11, 13]. At T = 40 K (not shown), only the near-
est impurity-kagome correlation is significant and also
decreases monotonically. Exact coefficient comparisons
with herbertsmithite are reported in I in Extended Data.
