A&A proofs: manuscript no. main
Since the disentangled spectra show no contribution from the
Be star in these lines, we assumed that they originate solely from
the narrow-lined star. Furthermore, as the flux ratio is not ex-
pected to vary substantially across the wavelength range (see
Sect. 6.1.2), the EW ratios should remain unaffected by the
adopted flux ratio and can be directly measured from the ob-
served spectra without rescaling. A detailed overview plot of all
measured observed and model EW ratios can be found in Ap-
pendix F, see Fig. F.1. In Fig. 6, the mean absolute percentage
error (MAPE) between the EW ratios measured from the ob-
served and model spectra is plotted as a function of the model’s
effective temperature and surface gravity. For a log g value of
2.25, MAPE is minimised at an effective temperature of 13.5 kK.
Higher surface gravity would imply higher temperature and vice
versa.
The primary diagnostic for the surface gravity of the narrow-
lined B star is the profile of the Balmer line wings. For a fixed
temperature, we determined the value of log g for which the
model best matches the observed line wings. We focused on the
Balmer lines Hγ and Hδ, where the Be star emission is weak-
est. We employed an iterative approach to determine the opti-
mal combinations of temperature and surface gravity. This in-
volved: Measuring EW ratios for Si and Fe lines in the observed
spectra, comparing these ratios to those in model spectra to esti-
mate the temperature, adjusting the surface gravity to best match
the Balmer line wings and repeating the process to refine the
temperature and gravity estimates. We find that model spectra
with a temperature of Teff = 13.5 ± 0.5 kK and surface gravity
log g = 2.25±0.25 best reproduce the observations. These results
are consistent with the previously determined spectral type B5Ib
(Navarro et al. 2012). Fig. 7 shows the disentangled spectrum
of the narrow-lined star overplotted with the best-fitting PoWR
model. The disentangled spectrum has been scaled for its flux
contribution, and the model spectra are rotationally broadened
(see Sect. 6.1.3).
6.1.2. Continuum light ratio
Spectral disentangling can separate the normalised spectra into
the contributions of individual stars but does not constrain their
continuum flux ratio. To estimate the flux contribution of the
narrow-lined star, we scaled the disentangled spectrum to match
the Balmer line depths of the model spectra. Specifically, we
used the Hγ and Hδ absorption lines and determined the flux ra-
tio by averaging the scaling factors required to match their equiv-
alent widths in the model and disentangled spectra. This yields a
light contribution of 60% for the narrow-lined star. The inferred
flux ratio varies by approximately 8% when varying temperature
and surface gravity within their uncertainties, which we adopt as
the uncertainty in the flux ratio.
The inferred flux ratio is remarkably insensitive to the as-
sumed hydrogen abundance, as the depth of the Balmer lines re-
mains nearly unchanged across a broad range of plausible values
(see Appendix D). While the flux ratio varies slightly with wave-
length, our SED fit (Sect. 7.1) shows that this variation is less
than 3% within the 4000–7000 Å range. For the spectral analy-
sis, we adopt a flux ratio of 60% for the narrow-lined B star and
40% for the Be companion. Changes in this ratio impact the in-
ferred stellar parameters – e.g., a lower flux contribution for the
narrow-lined star would result in smaller radius, luminosity, and
10
11
12
13
14
15
Teff  [kK]
10
1
100
EW ratios MAPE
stripped star
log g =  2.0
log g =  2.25
log g =  2.5
log g =  2.75
log g =  3.0
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
Teff  [kK]
10
1
EW ratios MAPE
Be star
log g =  3.5
log g =  3.75
log g =  4.0
log g =  4.25
log g =  4.5
log g =  4.75
Fig. 6: Temperature determination of the narrow-lined stripped B
star (top) and broad-lined Be star (bottom) from ionisation equi-
librium. Markers indicate the MAPE values averaged over all
measured EW ratios. For the narrow-lined star, this comprises
EW ratios of Si III over Si II lines and Fe III over Fe II lines. For
the Be star, results are shown for the EW ratio of Mg II over He I
lines. Values for model spectra of varying surface gravities are
indicated with different colours (see legends). With an estimated
value of log g in the range 2.0 to 2.5 for the narrow-lined star, the
best fit in terms of minimal MAPE is achieved for effective tem-
peratures between 13 and 14 kK. For the Be star with estimated
surface gravity in the range 3.5 to 4.5, the best fit is found for
effective temperatures between 16 and 19 kK.
mass estimates, and vice versa. However, moderate variations
(≲10%) have no significant impact on the results. 2
6.1.3. Rotational velocity and macroturbulence
We determined the rotational velocities of both stars by fitting
rotationally broadened models to individual absorption lines in
the disentangled spectra. For the narrow-lined B-type star, we
used the Mg II 4481 Å, Si II 4128, 4131 Å and Si III 4552, 4567,
4574 Å absorption lines. The PoWR model spectra were con-
volved with a rotational kernel, varying the value of vrot sin i, and
a radial-tangential kernel, with varying values of the macroturbu-
lent velocity vmac (Gray 1977, 2005). The numerical implemen-
2For instance, increasing the B star’s contribution by 10% alters the
final mass estimate by only +0.1 M⊙(∼10%), well within the reported
uncertainties.
Article number, page 8 of 28
