6 m
6 m
OF
DF
Offensive player
Defensive player
Figure 5: Experimental setup of a ball possession training.
other discrepancies between the model and actual dynamics in ball possession game.
However, it is often
unclear to what extent simulated dynamics should resemble reality, because the aim of modelling is extraction
of the essential elements, rather than duplication of the reality. In this work, our criterion for plausibility was
based on the average number of passes and OF area. The possible next step would be to revise the model to
reproduce the distribution of the number of passes, not only the average. Another limitation of our study is the
choice of parameter values. In the simulated dataset for the sensitivity analysis, we chose the value ranges of
parameters manually. Our decision could have affected the result. For instance, a parameter that exhibited a
monotonic effect in our analysis might have demonstrated a non-monotonic effect if one had opted for a wider
value range. However, there is no, at least practical, point in considering parameter values that are infeasible in
reality. If a certain amount of empirical data about focal teams are available, it should be possible to determine
appropriate value ranges through data analysis. We should highlight that these limitations should be borne in
mind, especially when interpreting the result of the sensitivity analysis (Fig. 4).
We conclude by referring to three directions for future research. Firstly, data assimilation between a model
and the empirical data would be a natural next step, which we aim to work on. In particular, after revising the
model to overcome the limitations mentioned above, we aim to characterise the high- and low-level teams by
values of model parameters and make comparison between them, which would allow us to empirically analyse
determinants of high performance in ball possession. For several parameters such as T, m, and Le, empirically
measured values can be used. For parameters that cannot be directly measured, including β, ke, and kf, we need
to conduct parameter estimation. Once the differences between the high- and low-level teams are quantified, we
should be able to design an experiment to verify the predictions. A caveat is that our approach does not help us
in modifying parameter values of actual teams: even though our study suggests an effect of pass accuracy on ball
possession, how to improve pass accuracy of the low-level team is beyond the scope of our research. Secondly,
future studies can work on incorporating insights from sports science, especially performance analysis in football,
into dynamical models. This corresponds to the first of the three difficulties for computational modelling we
summarised above. Although translation of hypotheses expressed in natural languages into mathematical or
computational formulations would be challenging, it would create novel opportunities to quantitatively verify
knowledge from the existing literature. Finally, our modelling approach is applicable to other settings regarding
team effectiveness. Although a model may take a completely different form, the basic procedure would be
the same: define state variables which are as close to raw data as possible, describe their temporal evolution
by mathematical models, and discuss influences of model parameters on team effectiveness through sensitivity
analysis.
10
