ρ
B
T
A
R
x
a
z
c
s
y
b
Figure 11: rDI-QKD Protocol: Alice (A) and Bob (B) aim to establish a secret key over a long distance using the routed
Bell setting. The relay (R) receives an input s ∈0, 1 and, based on its value, sends the particle from the source to either
the nearby device T (s = 0) or the distant device B (s = 1).
to the Pauli operators σz and σx. In this case, Eq. (78) becomes equivalent to a steering scenario in which
Bob’s states are remotely prepared by A1 measurements, i.e., the assemblage ρA1|θ admits a LHV model
of the form ρA1|θ = P
λ p(a1|θ, λ)ρλ. If one can show that ρA1|θ does not admit such a model, then it
exhibits steering and thus belongs to the set Mqqq. Consequently, the violation of any steering inequality
certifies that the full correlations are genuinely quantum. The complete proof of this theorem in [250]
uses such steering inequalities to derive Eq. (103).
If S0 = 2
√
2, and A1 perform all real projective qubit measurements of the form cθσz + sθσx, then
C = T = ηl where ηl is the transmission rate of the LP link (see section 6.2). Putting these together,
there is a violation of the inequality (103) that happens when
C = ηl > 2
π sin (πηl
2 ),
(104)
which can be satisfied for any ηl > 0. As a result, the routed Bell inequality expressed in 6 can be violated
for arbitrary transmission ηl > 0, offering a dramatic advantage in terms of robustness to loss compared
to standard Bell tests. Even when the source and detectors are not ideal but sufficiently reliable, quantum
nonlocal correlations can still be established for arbitrarily low transmission, provided that the number
of measurement settings on A1 (nA1) satisfies condition nA1 > 1
ηl .
rDI-OKD: DI-QKD based on the routed Bell test. The routed Bell scenario introduced in 3.8.2 exhibits
features that enhance its applicability to DI-QKD and, in certain cases, provides advantages over standard
Bell tests. For example, the BB84 correlations, which can be generated from a maximally entangled two-
qubit state by performing measurements in the σx and σz bases, can be reproduced classically in a
standard Bell setup which makes these correlations unsuitable for standard DI-QKD. However, their
quantum nature can be demonstrated in a routed Bell scenario by performing random CHSH tests in
the (A, T) configuration. Consider the case in 9 where A and T are two devices close to the source and
the device B is located far from the source and the purpose is to establish a key between A and B. As
in standard DI-QKD, all components including the relay R are untrusted. The only assumption is that
they obey certain no-signaling constraints preventing them from signaling arbitrarily to each other.
Unlike standard DI-QKD, some particles emitted from the source are routed to the testing device T
instead of B. The output of these cases always contributes to parameter estimation and can not be used
to generate a key.
The rDI-QKD protocol introduced in [251] as follows: in each round of the protocol, Alice generates
independent random variable Xi ∈X and si ∈{0, 1} and feed them to her device A and the relay R,
respectively. Based on the value of si, two cases can occur:
1. si = 0: Bob’s quantum particle is routed to T, in this case, Alice generates a random variable Z
and feeds it to T. She records the output variable Ai and publicly announces Si.
2. si = 1 : Bob’s quantum particle is routed to B where Bob generates a random variable Yi ∈Y,
feeds it on his device, and records the output Bi.
After all rounds, Alice and Bob check the date for which si = 0 to see if they violate a routed Bell
inequality. On the other hand, they agree on a subset of the rounds to generate the raw key. Finally, if the
test of violating a routed Bell inequality is passed, they apply error correction and privacy amplification
36
