9
Fig. 9.
Spectrum of: (a) the induced currents on the impedance layer, and
(b) the scattered electric ﬁeld at a plane λ/20 above the RIS. The cases
of beamsteering at 45◦and beamforming into a sector pattern with a 45◦
beamwidth are examined. The spectrum for the beamforming case exhibits
higher-intensity surface waves that facilitate the amplitude tapering along the
RIS aperture.
y
x
Fig. 10. Photograph of the top layer of the fabricated RIS prototype. Inset:
Magniﬁed photograph of the unit cells at the bottom-right corner.
resembles the plane-wave assumed in the optimization and
simulations. On the other hand, an identical receiving horn
antenna captures the reﬂected power from the RIS at different
angles θ by rotating at a constant radius R2 = 2.5m from the
RIS center. Measurements are taken through a VNA connected
to both antennas and recording the S21(θ) coefﬁcient. For the
beamsteering case, measurements are taken every 1◦close to
the expected peak (i.e., within a ±20◦range) and every 2.5◦
elsewhere. On the other hand, for the sector patterns demon-
strating the beamforming capabilities, measurements are taken
every 2.5◦for the whole pattern. The S21(θ) values for each
case are processed according to the procedure described in the
Appendix A in order to extract the directivity pattern and the
total, illumination and power efﬁciency of the RIS.
A measurement in the absence of the RIS was performed to
assess the noise ﬂoor of the setup. In this case, the measured
Fig. 11. Bi-static measurement setup consisting of the RIS on the stage, the
illuminating horn antenna at a ﬁxed angle and the rotating receiving horn
antenna.
power originates from reﬂections by non-absorptive surfaces
in the chamber (e.g., table, ﬂoor) and from direct transmission
between the antennas. For all angles, the noise ﬂoor was
29dB to 32dB below the measured peak of the beamsteering
patterns, and 24dB to 26dB below the peak of the sector
patterns. Therefore, the key characteristics of the radiation
patterns (i.e., maximum directivity, beamwidth, major side
lobes) are measured credibly, whereas some nulls or minor
lobes may be affected by scattering unrelated to the RIS.
B. Experimental Characterization of Varactors
It is paramount to characterize experimentally the varactors
at f = 5GHz, which is the intended frequency of operation
for the RIS. This is both because the spice model from
the manufacturer is not referring explicitly to the operating
frequency and also because there is a variation of the var-
actors’ capacitance for a given voltage due to manufacturing
uncertainties. To extract the capacitance for a given voltage,
all the bias voltage lines of the RIS are set to a common
voltage level Vc. The specular reﬂection from an incident wave
from −15◦is measured for different levels of the common DC
bias Vc in the range of 0V to 10V with a step of 0.2V. The
measured RIS response as a function of frequency is shown
for selected voltage levels in Fig. 12, where it is evident that
the resonance frequency shifts as a result of the change in
the bias voltage and the corresponding capacitance of the
varactors. By simulating a single unit cell in Ansys HFSS
for different capacitance values in the range [0.2, 1]pF, the
resonance frequency for different capacitances is determined.
Then, through a comparison of the resonance frequency be-
tween the simulated data for different capacitances and the
measured data for different voltages, a correspondance is
established between the DC bias voltage and the effective
capacitance. The relevant result is given in Fig. 13 together
with the theoretical curve extracted from the spice model
and simulated in Keysight Advanced Design System (ADS).
In general, the matching is satisfactory and the capacitance
range of [0.2, 1]pF is achieved within the limitations of the
USB-controllers that provide an output voltage up to 10V.
For all experiments, the experimentally-extracted curve in
