160
NNLO polarized PDFs with MHOU
where the metric that probes the second moment of the PDF distribution is given by
φ2
χ2p = ⟨χ2
p [T (∆ffit) , D]⟩rep −χ2
p [⟨T (∆ffit)⟩rep, D] .
(5.20)
Eq. (5.20) measures the PDF uncertainties on the scale of the data uncertainties, the preferred
extrapolation to the non-fitted p-th fold is the one with the largest uncertainties, ie. with small
values of Eq. (5.19).
In summary, given a set of successful models and their corresponding L
(χ2
pdf)
hopt , we then select
the best one as follows. We evaluate the standard deviation, Σχ2, of χ2(k)
PDF,k over the replicas
corresponding to the fit minimizing Eq. (5.16). We use this value to define a selection range:
R :
hˆθ
⋆, ˆθ
⋆+ Σχ2
i
,
with
ˆθ
⋆= arg min
ˆθ∈ˆΘ

L
(χ2
pdf)
hopt
ˆθ

.
(5.21)
We select the sought-for optimal set of hyperparameters as the one yielding to the lowest value
of L(φ2)
hopt within the range R. 1 The specific values and the found optimal hyperparameter for
our polarized fits are listed in the following paragraph.
Hyperparameters for NNPDFPOL2.0.
We perform a scan of ntrials = 200 possible configura-
tions, distributed across four A100 Nvidia GPUs. We opt for Nrep = 60 replicas and nfolds = 4.
The dataset partitions are chosen such that each fold is representative of the global dataset in
terms of both kinematic coverage and process types. We consider hyperoptimization of different
parameters: the NN architecture, the type of optimizer, the clipnorm and the value of the
learning rate, which are varied as reported in Table 5.4. The distribution of the loss estimators
L(χ2)
hopt for each of these trial models is displayed in Fig. 5.4. Many model exhibit a similar
value of the loss function, closer to the minimum, indicating that there exists many different
methodology configuration leading to equally performing fits. If this proves the flexibility of our
fitting methodology, it also implies that an accurate hyperoptimization is essential to determine
methodological PDF uncertainties in our framework. On contrary, the spread of the second
momentum estimator L(φ2)
hopt is more pronounced suggesting that some of these models, despite
achieving good description of the data, do not generalize in a conservative way, leading to a
poor description of the unseen fold. Our selection criteria, based on both estimators aim to
balance the presence of equally performing hyperparameter configuration selecting the optimal
model leading to the largest PDF uncertainties given the available data.
1Let us note that, other model selection criteria are possible. For example, for each final PDF replica one can choose
a different model among the ones in R, or weight their probability to according to L(φ2)
hopt. We plan to investigate
the effect of these choices in future studies.
