the gamma ray coincidence identification and nearly fixed energy sum. The πE5 beamline appears
to have the necessary properties for this measurement.
3
Imaging system
The PIONEER imaging system consists of the ATAR and the TRACKER. ATAR is a key en-
hancement over earlier experiments and crucial for achieving its precision goal in Re/µ. ATAR will
define the pion stop region and suppress decay in flight and accidental positrons from muon decay to
allow the experiment to run at its high beam rate. It is indispensable for suppressing the dominant
π →µ →e chain by more than six orders of magnitude to directly measure the tail of the π →eν
positrons in the calorimeter response. ATAR is using an emerging detector technology known as low
gain avalanche diodes (LGADs) [27], which are thin silicon detectors with a highly doped gain layer.
Our research program aims to develop this technology into a unique 5-D tracking device featuring
precision time information (0.2 ns time and 2 ns pulse-pair resolution), precision 3-D tracking at the
100 µm scale and good energy resolution. The system will employ 48 individual LGAD strip sensors
alternating in X and Y direction, each with an area of 20×20 mm2 area and a thickness of 120 µm,
stacked with minimal dead material in between planes. In total, 4800 channels will be read out
with a large dynamic range (several hundred) and minimal cross-talk. To reduce the dead material
between ATAR and the calorimeter, the unamplified signal will be carried by roughly 15 cm-long
low-mass flexible circuit boards from the sensor to outside the active region. The readout board
using the FAST chip for amplification will be sitting at the edge of the calorimeter acceptance
region. A fast digitizer system will fully digitize all the channels. Two digitizer options are taken
into consideration: the HD-SOC from NALU Scientific and the SAMPIC from IJCLab.
An ATAR demonstrator is planned to be built by mid-2026 and tested by the end of 2026 at
PSI. The updated demonstrator will then be tested at TRIUMF in 2027. The demonstrator will
be fabricated using TI-LGADs (trench-isolated) sensors from an ongoing common FBK production,
FAST2 or FAST3 chips from INFN Torino, and a combination of the Sampic and HD-SOC digitizers.
It will consist of 16 detector planes with a limited lateral size and around 500 total channels, roughly
10 % of the final ATAR. The sensor and readout preparation and assembly will be exercised in 2025;
a prototype composed of a few detector planes is foreseen to be tested at TRIUMF and CENPA
by the summer of 2025. Together with the ATAR demonstrator, a TRACKER demonstrator is
foreseen to be built in the same timescale.
The TRACKER will determine the positron impact location on the CALO and identify pile-up
events. It is designed for high hit detection efficiency (greater than 99%) and nanosecond-level time
resolution. The collaboration is exploring two potential technologies for the tracker: a low-mass
Micro Resistive Groove (µRGroove) detector and a silicon pixel detector. A tracker demonstrator
is foreseen alongside the ATAR demonstrator.
The µRGroove option can have σT < 5 ns and σX < 50 µm, while maintaining a radiation
length less than 1.0% of the total radiation length. It is planned to have a unique bullet-shaped
geometry with the analog signal to be fed to the front-end cards using flexible cables. Tests with
µRGroove prototype detectors and simulation and design studies will be continued to finalize the
design, followed by the procurement and assembly of the demonstrator. The second option would
be composed of depleted monolithic active-pixel sensors (DMAPS). DMAPS can be built very thin
(thickness < 100 µm), have a very good spatial resolution (σX < 50 µm), and can be made fast
(σT < 1 ns). A tracker built from such sensors would have a cylindrical shape, with or without a
flat end-cap. DMAPSs are being developed by PSI [28] with a focus on smaller experiments such as
PIONEER. The first small prototype was delivered at the beginning of 2025, and a second larger
6
