Chernoff Information Bottleneck for Covert Quantum Target Sensing
Giuseppe Ortolano1,2, Ivano Ruo-Berchera3, and Leonardo Banchi1,2
1 Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Universit`a di Firenze,
Via G. Sansone 1, I-50019 Sesto Fiorentino (FI), Italy
2 Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Firenze,
via G. Sansone 1, I-50019 Sesto Fiorentino (FI), Italy and
3Quantum metrology and nano technologies division,
INRiM, Strada delle Cacce 91, 10153 Torino, Italy
Target sensing is a fundamental task with many practical applications, e.g. in LiDaR and radar
systems. Quantum strategies with entangled states can achieve better sensing accuracies with the
same probe energy, yet it is often simpler to use classical probes with higher energy than to take
advantage of the quantum regime. Recently, it has been shown that useful quantum advantage can
be achieved in covert situations, where sensing has to be performed while also avoiding detection
by an adversary: here increasing energy is not a viable stratagem, as it facilitates the adversary. In
this paper we introduce a general framework to assess and quantify quantum advantage in covert
situations. This is based on extending the information bottleneck principle, originally developed
for communication and machine learning applications, to decision problems via the Chernoff infor-
mation, with the ultimate goal of quantitatively optimizing the trade-off between covertness and
sensing ability. In this context we show how quantum resources, namely entangled photonic probes
paired with photon counting, greatly outperform classical coherent transmitters in target detection
and ranging, while also maintaining a chosen level of covertness. Our work highlights the great
potential of integrating quantum sensing in LiDAR systems to enhance the covert performance.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Quantum sensing [1–3] is a highly active field of re-
search that in recent years has offered many promising
protocols with great potential for technological applica-
tions [4–6]. Among those are quantum ranging [7–9] and
detection [10–14], which have attracted a great amount of
interest and have been investigated in great detail since
the original proposal of quantum illumination [15, 16].
This is due to the potentially groundbreaking advances
that quantum resources can offer to LiDaR and radar sys-
tems [17], and the consequent widespread applications.
In the path to practical implementations some critical-
ities remain open. Quantum information inspired proto-
cols exploit a sequence of two modes, named signal and
idler, in an entangled state, where the signal’s modes are
addressed to the target region while the idler’s modes are
retained locally for a final joint measurement with the
back-reflected signal. One restriction is that the quan-
tum advantage is found in a range of parameters which
is seldom the one used in practical scenarios, namely the
very low energy of the single mode irradiated towards
the target and, at the same time a high thermal back-
ground mixing with the signal. As a consequence, a large
time-bandwidth product, i.e. large number of modes of
the quantum source, is needed to achieve a meaningful
signal-to-noise ratio, while in the classical case this is not
a requirement [18, 19].
A more natural application of quantum schemes can
be found in covert sensing, which has just recently been
explored [20–23]. Covert sensing explores the situation
where probing has to be performed while avoiding detec-
tion by an adversarial party. The requirement of covert-
ness prevents the probing party from arbitrarily increas-
ing the energy to reach a better performance, meaning
that an energy constraint is inherent to the problem.
Aside from the aforementioned constraints, quantum
target sensing also requires a technologically demanding
quantum memory to store the idler modes and phase-
sensitive joint measurements.
Some of those require-
ments can be strongly relaxed if the quantum advan-
tage is sought at a fixed type of measurement. In the
optical regime, phase sensitive measurements are not ef-
ficient in realistic contexts of remote sensing, affected by
speckle noise from rough target, diffusing media and tur-
bulence [24]. In fact, time-of-flight evaluations through
intensity/photon counting measurements are nowadays
the state of the art for Lidar applications, also prompted
by the development of picoseconds time-resolved single-
photon detectors [25, 26]. In this case, one could simply
avoid to involve quantum memories or unpractical inter-
ferometric setups.
Motivated by the above challenges, here we develop a
general approach to covert sensing based on the concept
of Chernoff information bottleneck. The information bot-
tleneck was historically introduced via entropic quantities
and has a long history of applications [27]. In its standard
formulation with two correlated random variables X, Y ,
the information bottleneck method aims to find the best
compression of X that still allows for an accurate recon-
struction of Y , thus quantitatively introducing a trade-
off between compression and accuracy.
Quantum gen-
eralizations of the information bottleneck principle have
been applied to diverse problems, ranging from quan-
tum communication [28] to quantum machine learning
[29, 30]. Here we consider a different formulation based
on the Chernoff information that is more suited to deci-
sion problems, with the goal of quantitatively optimizing
arXiv:2504.06217v1  [quant-ph]  8 Apr 2025
