Entropy 2024, 26, 612
69 of 84
Multiple collisions can occur. In the three-body system, this happens when the hex
particle crosses the origin, corresponding to all three bodies meeting at the same point at
some instant of time. The analog of this in the four-body case occurs when the box particle
crosses the line of intersection of any two bisecting planes of the three-simplexes. There are
two kinds of these three-body collisions described by {σ13, σ23}. There are also two kinds
of four-body collisions described by {σ14, σ1232}. The former corresponds to all four bodies
meeting at a single point, equivalent to the box particle crossing the origin. The latter
occurs when one pair of particles crosses at one point and the other pair cross at a different
point at the same time, corresponding to the box particle crossing one of the three lines
connecting the opposite vertices of the pyramids in the simplex (see Figure 51).
7.3. Equal Mass Trajectories
It can be straightforwardly shown that, if one of the box-particle’s position and momen-
tum coordinates are initially zero, they will remain zero throughout the motion, and that all
the phenomena seen in the three-body case in the previous section are recovered [124]. The
more interesting situation is when the box particle exhibits motion in all spatial directions.
A comparison is shown in Figure 53, where (α, pα) remains ﬁxed in the upper plots,
but in the lower plots either α (lower left) or pα (lower right) deviates from zero. The motion
in the α direction simply perturbs the patterns in the upper ﬁgures, effectively giving a
“thickness” to the original hex-particle patterns.
Figure 53. Annulus (left) and pretzel (right) orbits for the non-relativistic four-body system for
500 time steps and
H
Mtot = 2. For the upper plots, the initial conditions are ρ = 0, α = 0, pρ = 0.5,
pβ = 0, pα = 0 (left) and ρ = 1, α = 0, pρ = 0, pβ = 0, pα = 0 (right), with β calculated so that
(202) initially is satisﬁed. The initial conditions for the lower plots are ρ = 0, α = 0.1, pρ = 0.5,
pβ = 0, pα = 0 (left) and ρ = 1, α = 0, pρ = 0, pβ = 0, pα = 0.1 (right). The respective Lyapunov
exponents are 1.214 × 10−2 (annulus, lower left) and 7.350 × 10−3 (pretzel, lower right). The small
square boxes in each diagram denote the initial conditions.
By carefully choosing the initial conditions, it is possible to obtain genuinely novel
periodic orbits in three dimensions, as shown in Figure 54. This trajectory has a pretzel form
when projected onto two of the planes (ρ, β) (upper left) and (ρ, α) (similar to upper left
panel), and has an annulus form when projected onto the third (β, α) plane (upper right).
The full three-dimensional orbit is shown in the lower left panel (with no perspective so
that the lines further away do not appear smaller). The motion here is (CB2CB2CB6)2CB6
