theory [48].
The kinetic equation is a statistical equation, relying on some sort of averaging. Observation-
ally, one is averaging over space, or over time (for instance, one measures the height of the ocean
at some time and does a Fourier decomposition to determine nk, and then repeats at multiple
later times) or experimentally, if one is creating the waves in a tank of water, one repeats the
experiment many times. Theoretically, the simplest averaging to do is to add a small amount of
Gaussian random forcing and dissipation at each wave number, thereby washing out initial con-
ditions and forcing the system into some nontrivial state, and then sending the variance of the
forcing and the dissipation to zero, while maintaining a finite ratio which is chosen self-consistently
to give a stationary state [49,50]. This can perhaps be viewed as imitating the noise inherent to
any experiment. 2 Another theoretical averaging is to choose the initial state to be a Gaussian
probability distribution, with an expectation value for the occupation number of mode k that is nk.
The different options for what is averaged over have no impact on the properties of the late-time
state [18].
The kinetic equation written in (A.1) is only valid to order λ2, coming from tree-level two-
to-two scattering processes. There are higher order in λ (loop) corrections, which were computed
in [50–52] for the classical wave case and in [18] for the quantum case. The KZ solution is valid
as long the higher-order corrections in the kinetic equation are subdominant. The strength of the
nonlinearity — the ratio of the interacting to free parts of the Hamiltonian evaluated in the state
— is a dimensionless quantity with scaling, ϵk ∼kD, where D is none other than the dimension of
the interaction, (3.7). Using (3.8) and (3.9) we see that if β > 3α (β > 2α), then the KZ direct
cascade (inverse cascade) is valid for small k and breaks down for large k. Likewise if β < 3α
(β < 2α), then the KZ direct cascade (inverse cascade) is valid for large k and breaks down for
small k. Of course, one is free to choose forcing and dissipation to both lie in the regions of weak
nonlinearity, so that the breakdown of KZ is never reached.
A.2. q-body interactions
Consider a generalization of the quartic interaction studied in the main body, (3.1), to a
q-body interaction,
Hint =
Z
qY
i=1
ddpi
(2π)d(2π)dδ(
q
X
i=1
⃗qi) λ12···q Ψ†
1 · · · Ψq ,
(A.3)
where we are agnostic as to the number of creation versus annihilation operators. Upon switching
to the Keldysh η, ψ fields, the dimension D of the interaction terms linear in η is,
D = (q−1)d + β + (q−1)∆ψ + ∆η −α = (q−2)d−γ
2
+ β −α ,
(A.4)
2One should not confuse these “auxiliary” forcing and dissipation with physical forcing and dissipation that are
added at small and large k, respectively, in order to create the far from equilibrium state.
20
