Although better fits – i.e., lower χ2 values and, nominally, lower uncertainties – could
be obtained by allowing small (i.e. few percent) variations in peak positions, widths,
and intensity ratios, we rejected this fitting strategy. Given the exceptionally large
parameter space, we preferred instead, and as noted above, to heavily constrain the
fits on the basis of the relevant physics/physical chemistry of the system. (As von
Neumann famously said, “With four parameters I can fit an elephant, and with five I
can make him wiggle his trunk.”[12].)
5 Comparison of photoemission spectra for bulk
and monolayer Ar@C60
There is a substantial shift in both C 1s and Ar 2p core-level binding energy (CLBE)
for Ar@C60 molecules that are bound in the first monolayer to the Ag(111) surface
as compared to the CLBE for endofullerenes in higher (physisorbed) layers. This BE
shift has also previously been observed for empty C60 on Ag(111)[15] (see below for a
detailed comparison). The main panel in Fig.S5 highlights the BE shift (but obscures
the difference in C1s lineshape for monolayer vs bulk Ar@C60 samples – we’ll return
to this soon.) Argon 2p photoemission spectra (inset to right in Fig.S5) show the
same 400 meV binding energy difference for monolayer versus bulk Ar@C60 samples
as observed for the C 1s data.
A bulk film of Ar@C60, sufficiently thick so that minimal Ag 3d emission from the
Ag(111) susbtrate is observed, yields the C 1s spectrum shown in the upper left inset
to Fig.S5. This, and the associated shake-up spectrum (also shown in Fig.S5), are
identical to the corresponding spectra for empty C60, both in terms of line shape and
binding energy.
5.1 Lineshape analysis: Doniach-Sunjic asymmetry
Although the position of the argon atom inside the endofullerene is unaffected by
the significant level of charge transfer from the Ag(111) surface into the cage at
the molecule-surface interface (see main paper), the Ar 2p photoemission spectrum
for a monolayer coverage of Ar@C60 on Ag(111) nonetheless shows the signature
asymmetry, i.e. the Doniach-Sunjic (D-S) lineshape[13], arising from excitation of
the conduction electron density of the underlying metal (Fig.S6). As also observed
by both Pedio et al.[15] and Gibson et al.[16] for 1ML of empty C60 on Ag(111),
the C 1s core-level spectrum is similarly highly asymmetric. (See below.) In other
words, while the encapsulated argon atom is unaffected by endofullerene adsorption
from the perspective of its intracage position, it is nonetheless highly sensitive to the
surrounding electrostatic and electrodynamic environment[17].
Notably, the asymmetry parameters for the D-S lineshapes are very similar – 0.243
± 0.007 (C 1s) and 0.28 ± 0.01 (Ar 2p), indicative of a common origin. (The fitting
is complicated somewhat by the presence of a small amount of endofullerene above
the first monolayer due to the sample preparation process, where a small “overshoot”
in coverage is difficult to avoid. However, the relatively large BE shift of 0.4 (±0.1)
7
