1
Introduction
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations follow the motion of chemical, physical, and biological
systems with atomic resolution. They provide valuable insights into the mechanism of com-
plex processes and allow quantitative estimates of thermodynamic and kinetic properties.
However, their inherent microscopic resolution dictates simulation time steps on the order
of a femtosecond, limiting their overall timescale to a few microseconds. Processes that oc-
cur on longer timescales, such as protein conformational transitions and crystal nucleation,
growth, and polymorphism, cannot be studied directly in standard MD simulations, and
require specialized enhanced sampling algorithms.1–5
Diﬀerent enhanced sampling methods were developed over the years, such as umbrella
sampling,6,7 replica-exchange,8 free-energy dynamics,9,10 Gaussian accelerated MD,11 on-
the-ﬂy probability enhanced sampling (OPES),12,13 milestoning,14,15 transition path sam-
pling,16,17 forward ﬂux sampling,18 transition interface sampling,19 weighted ensemble,20,21
and Metadynamics (MetaD).22–25 Many of them, and in particular MetaD and its vari-
ants,26–28 rely on identifying eﬃcient collective variables (CVs).
These are functions of
phase space variables that can distinguish between metastable states and describe the dy-
namics between them.29 Good CVs provide high accelerations and accurate estimations of
thermodynamic and kinetic properties but are very challenging to obtain.30 Despite much
progress in recent years,30–36 often only suboptimal CVs are available, leading to limited
accelerations and slow convergence.37–39
We recently developed a CV-free enhanced sampling method based on stochastic reset-
ting (SR):5,39–41 stopping the simulations at random times and restarting them, resampling
the initial conditions. It can expedite the sampling of rare events by an order of magnitude
when used as a standalone tool,5,40 and accelerate MetaD simulations by more than two
orders of magnitude.39 It enables the inference of unbiased kinetics from accelerated simu-
lations,5,39,41 even for non-exponential processes,40 and very recently inspired an improved
kinetics inference procedure for MetaD simulations without resetting.42
One of the most appealing features of SR as an enhanced sampling method is its in-
credible simplicity: standard resetting requires nothing more than stopping a simulation
and restarting it while continuing monitoring the overall simulation time. Resetting can be
implemented straightforwardly in existing codes, and combined with any other enhanced
sampling method. As trajectories with SR are composed of statistically independent seg-
ments, resetting is also highly parallelized.
Resetting is useful because it is based on a
rigorous theory, which allows predicting all the observables of the process under resetting
from trajectories without resetting. For instance, it provides a universal suﬃcient criterion
(which we describe in detail later) to test whether additional sampling of rare events can be
achieved through simulations with resetting, and the resulting speedup.
Here, we thoroughly review stochastic resetting for enhanced sampling. We ﬁrst deﬁne
what SR is in Section 2. We then summarize key results in the ﬁeld of SR in Section 3, which
give suﬃcient conditions to when a stochastic process will be accelerated by resetting. Next,
we discuss the applications of resetting as a standalone method and in combination with
MetaD to accelerate MD simulations. We also present the concept of informed resetting,
where we exploit information on reaction progress for greater speedups.41 Section 5 reviews
procedures to infer the unbiased kinetics of the system from accelerated simulations with
3
