arXiv:2504.06822v1  [hep-ph]  9 Apr 2025
Investigation of triply heavy spin-3/2 baryons in their ground and excited states
Z. Rajabi Najjara
1, ∗and K.
Azizia,b
1, †
1aDepartment of Physics, University of Tehran, North Karegar Avenue, Tehran 14395-547, Iran
bDepartment of Physics, Dogus University, Dudullu- ¨Umraniye, 34775 Istanbul, T¨urkiye
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
We calculate the masses and residues of triply heavy baryons with spin-3/2, including Ω∗
ccc, Ω∗
ccb, Ω∗
bbc and
Ω∗
bbb, using the QCD sum rules method. Our calculations primarily focus on obtaining the masses of the ﬁrst
three resonances, that is, the ground state (1S), the ﬁrst orbital excited state (1P), and the ﬁrst radial excited state
(2S), for the mentioned baryons. We additionally determine the residues of these baryons, which serve as key
parameters for studying their possible decay channels and interactions with other particles. To achieve higher
accuracy compared to previous studies, we consider nonperturbative operators up to eight mass dimensions.
We present our calculated outcomes in two distinct energy schemes, referred to as pole and MS. Given the
absence of experimental data for these states, we compare our results with previous theoretical calculations that
are reported in relevant studies employing various approaches. These results may provide valuable insights for
experimental groups searching for the triply heavy baryons.
I.
INTRODUCTION
One of the key topics in hadronic physics is the examination of the features of heavy baryons as predicted by the successful
quark model. Among the hadronic states containing singly, doubly and triply heavy charm or bottom quarks, singly heavy
baryons have been the focus of signiﬁcant investigation in the literature, both theoretically and experimentally, as outlined in
the summary tables issued by the Particle Data Group (PDG) [1]. Due to the discovery and subsequent conﬁrmation of Ξcc
by the SELEX and LHCb collaborations [2–5], the previous decade has been highly productive in the investigation of doubly
heavy baryon. These observations have sparked renewed theoretical and experimental investigations into the properties of heavy
baryons. However, no experimental evidence for triply heavy baryons has been observed so far. Baranov et. al. predicted that
the Ω∗
ccc might be undetectable in e+e−collisions, and the likelihood of observing the Ω∗
bbb is even more unlikely [6]. First
projections of the production cross-section for triply heavy baryons at the LHC were evaluated in Refs. [7–10]. In 2011, it was
projected that around 104 −105 events of some triply heavy baryons, namely Ω∗
ccc, Ω∗
ccb and Ωccb, could be accumulated with
an integrated luminosity of 10 fb−1 at the LHC [11]. The production rates of hadrons containing charm quark in high-energy
heavy-ion collisions are examined in Refs. [12–14]. In Ref. [15], the production of the Ω∗
ccc baryon in relativistic heavy-ion
collisions is studied, with a focus on thermal production and coalescence mechanisms. On this basis, there is a high probability
of observing triply charmed baryons at the LHC.
Theoretical studies of triply heavy baryons could open a new avenue for deepening our understanding of hadron structure, the
dynamics of the c and b quarks at the hadronic energy scale, and the symmetry of heavy quarks. They may also be utilized to
analyze the effects of perturbative and nonperturbative terms. As a result, these investigations can offer invaluable insights and
crucial data that will play a key role in guiding future experimental discoveries. In light of this, the broad range of theoretical
methods has been applied to study the features of baryons with three heavy quarks, which can exist in spin states of either 1/2
or 3/2, including Bag model [16, 17], lattice QCD [18–24], non-relativistic quark model [25–32], relativistic quark model [33–
36], Fadeev equation [37–42], Hyperspherical Harmonics method [43], QCD sum rules [44–49], Regge trajectories [50–55],
various potential models [56–64], etc. Among the various methods discussed, the QCD sum rule approach is regarded as a
highly efﬁcient nonperturbative formalism for predicting the properties of heavy hadrons [65–69]. Given that the predictions
from this method have been validated by numerous accelerator experiments globally, substantial research in the literature has
been dedicated to investigating the properties of multi-heavy-quark hadrons within the framework of QCD sum rules.
To date, theoretical investigations have primarily focused on the ground-state triply heavy baryons, particularly their masses,
while comparatively less attention has been given to their excited states. Therefore, to gain a comprehensive understanding of
the excitation spectrum, further in-depth theoretical investigations are necessary to thoroughly characterize the properties and
behaviors of the excited states of triply heavy baryons, which may exist in spin-1/2 or spin-3/2 conﬁgurations. Motivated by this
need, in Ref. [49], we investigated the spectral properties, including the masses and residues, of the ground state, along with the
ﬁrst orbitally and radially excited states of the triply heavy spin-1/2 baryons using the QCD sum rule approach. Building upon
the promising outcomes of previous studies, we aim to calculate the mass and residue parameters of triply heavy baryons with
spin-3/2 in the 1S, 1P, and 2S states, utilizing the QCD sum rule approach in both the pole and MS schemes for heavy quarks. In
∗rajabinajar8361@ut.ac.ir
† kazem.azizi@ut.ac.ir; Corresponding author
