Probing dipolar interactions between Rydberg atoms and ultracold polar molecules
Lingbang Zhu,1, 2, 3, ∗Jeshurun Luke,1, 2, 3, ∗Roy Shaham,1, 2, 3 Yi-Xiang Liu,1, 2, 3 and Kang-Kuen Ni1, 2, 3, †
1Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA
2Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA
3Harvard-MIT Center for Ultracold Atoms, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
We probe resonant dipolar interactions between ultracold 40K87Rb molecules and Rydberg 87Rb
atoms in an optically trapped ensemble. Through state-selective ionization detection of the KRb
molecules, we observe resonant energy transfer at 2.227 GHz from Rydberg atoms to molecules
under a tunable external electric field. We measure a broadening up to 3.5 MHz, for the Rb Rydberg
excitation spectrum, which matches a Monte Carlo simulation that describes a Rydberg atom and
neighboring molecules evolving under a dipole-dipole interacting Hamiltonian. The demonstrated
interspecies dipolar interaction is a key ingredient for hybrid Rydberg-polar molecule systems, where
the advantages of each system can be leveraged and combined.
Controlled interactions between quantum systems fa-
cilitate energy exchange and entanglement, which form
the basis for many demonstrations in quantum simula-
tion and information processing.
Most efforts to date
have focused on perfecting individual physical platforms,
leading to many advances. Combining different physical
platforms with unique properties, such as their coher-
ence time, electromagnetic spectrum coverage, and in-
teractions [1–4], can expand the realm of quantum ap-
plications, offer improved performance, and mitigate the
limitations of a single physical platform. Cold atoms and
molecules are one of the leading platforms as both have
been used to demonstrate gates [5–7], simulate Hamilto-
nians [8, 9], and prepare quantum phases [10–13]. Hybrid
systems of polar molecules and Rydberg atoms present
an intriguing avenue combining many coherent degrees
of freedom of molecules [14–17] and strong dipolar inter-
actions of Rydberg atoms whose dipole moments (da)
can reach 103 −104 times larger than those (dm) of
molecules [18].
Interspecies dipolar coupling (∝dadm/r3, where r
is the separation of the two species) is central to hy-
brid Rydberg-polar molecule systems and has motivated
many theoretical proposals. These include coherent con-
trol and non-destructive detection of polar molecules [19,
20], sympathetic and laser cooling of molecules [21–23],
simulation of spin-spin interactions [24] and central spin
model [25], and fast high-fidelity quantum gates [26, 27].
Experimentally, resonant dipolar energy transfer from
Rydberg atoms to polar molecules has been investi-
gated in free-moving beams [28–31].
In trapped sys-
tems, Rydberg blockade from non-resonant interactions
between a Rydberg atom and a polar molecule has been
achieved [32]. Combining these elements to realize reso-
nant dipolar interactions in trapped ultracold atoms and
molecules is a crucial step to unlocking the aforemen-
tioned applications.
In this work, we experimentally demonstrated reso-
nant dipolar interactions between Rydberg Rb atoms
and KRb molecules in an optical dipole trap (ODT)
and developed a quantitative model to explain our ob-
servations. We chose a pair of Rb Rydberg states that
closely matches the energy difference (2.227 GHz) of the
rotational ground and the first excited states of KRb
(Fig. 1(a)).
We observed resonant energy transfer be-
tween the atoms and the molecules by directly detect-
ing KRb in the rotational excited state. We tuned the
Rydberg atoms and KRb molecules into resonance us-
ing external electric and magnetic fields and measured
the broadening of the Rydberg excitation spectrum due
to interspecies interactions. To understand and quantify
this broadening, we modeled the Rydberg atom-molecule
interactions with a dipole-dipole Hamiltonian and per-
formed a Monte Carlo simulation. We found good agree-
ments between the computed excitation spectra and the
experimental observations.
We began our experiment by creating a mixture of
40K87Rb molecules and 87Rb atoms at a temperature of
∼400 nK following methods described in [33, 34]. The
molecules were prepared in a single hyperfine state of the
rovibronic ground state, and the Rb atoms were in the
lowest hyperfine state |F = 1, mF = 1⟩of the electronic
ground state. The atom-molecule mixture was confined
in a crossed-beam ODT formed by two 1064 nm laser
beams. Following the creation of the mixture, the mag-
netic field was ramped down from 543.5 to 10 G in 10 ms.
We allowed the field to stabilize for an additional 40 ms
before probing the system for interspecies interactions.
We initiated the interactions between atoms and
molecules with a Rydberg excitation pulse and probed
the outcomes via either molecule or Rydberg atom de-
tections, with relevant schemes and timings shown in
Fig. 1.
The ODT was switched off to keep the atom-
molecule cloud in the dark during the 3 µs excitation
pulse.
The excitation lasers drove the Rb atoms from
the ground state to the 98D5/2 Rydberg state with a
two-photon transition. Because the 98D5/2 state has a
Rydberg blockade radius (∼20 µm) comparable to the
cloud size, only a few Rydberg atoms were excited per
pulse, and their spatial distribution was sparse.
arXiv:2504.06977v1  [physics.atom-ph]  9 Apr 2025
