Torsion in two dimensions: autoparallels, symmetries, and applications to black holes
Jens Boos∗
Institute for Theoretical Physics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, D-76128 Karlsruhe, Germany
(Dated: April 8, 2025)
We explore spacetime torsion in a two-dimensional setting, wherein it corresponds to a vector
field. Without invoking field equations of a particular gravitational theory, we develop visualization
techniques for such torsion fields, consider a generalization of Killing vectors to the presence of
torsion, and find explicit representations of such Killing vectors (and their generalized algebra) in the
presence of constant torsion. We then utilize these structures to derive general properties of surface
gravities of static black holes whose near-horizon region features approximately constant torsion
fields. Under certain assumptions, the two-dimensional results can be lifted to four dimensions.
This paper is dedicated to the memory of Peter Baekler.
I.
INTRODUCTION
With tests of strong gravity reaching unprecedented
levels of increasing accuracy, it becomes all the more im-
portant to check for blind spots.
What are models of
gravity that can presently not be tested with existing
experiments?
What are, nevertheless, promising mod-
ified gravity theories argued from first principles?
In
this paper, we would like to address this set of questions
by focussing on post-Riemannian geometry with non-
vanishing torsion, with a particular application to the
near-horizon regions two-dimensional black holes as well
as spherically symmetric four-dimensional black holes.
Although general relativity has passed all observa-
tional tests to date [1], it is a fundamentally incom-
plete theory due to its perturbative nonrenormalizabil-
ity. Quadratic gravity does not have this shortcoming,
but instead features ghost-like instabilities. A possible
solution to this problem lies in extending the geometric
arena of gravity and allow for post-Riemannian quanti-
ties.
In a minimal modification, gauging the Poincar´e
group in flat spacetime leads to Poincar´e gauge gravity
[2]. Therein, a quadratic Lagrangian can be formulated
in terms of the curvature as well as the torsion tensor,
with a rich spectrum of theories allowing both for black
hole solutions and different particle spectra, with some
of them being ghost-free and stable [3–9].
However, the plethora of different choices of gravi-
tational Lagrangians obfuscates the emergence of new,
universal phenomena linked to the existence of space-
time torsion, in, say, black hole spacetimes. Moreover,
while curvature as a concept has been well-established at
the intuitive level, the same thing cannot be said about
spacetime torsion. To that end, we will consider here a
simplified scenario. First, we limit our considerations to
two dimensions (and, later, suitably generalized to spher-
ical symmetry in the four-dimensional sense).1 And sec-
∗jens.boos@kit.edu
1 Poincar´e gauge gravities in two dimensions have been explored in
[10], whereas the mathematical classification of two-dimensional
spaces with torsion is fairly recent [11]; see also [12].
ond, for the later part we will consider constant torsion
coefficients. And third, we consider such torsion fields in
the presence of a flat metric.
Restricting as these simplifications may appear, we will
demonstrate that they are sufficient to not only develop
different visualization techniques for torsion, but also
allow for the study of symmetries in post-Riemannian
geometries, with universal consequences for the surface
gravity of static, two-dimensional black holes, as well
as for the surface gravity of a certain class of four-
dimensional black holes.
This paper is organized as follows: in Sec. II we intro-
duce our notation and review basic definitions of space-
time torsion and related concepts. In Sec. III we will in-
troduce our model and discuss its geometric properties.
Sec. IV is devoted to the visualization of generic torsion
fields in two dimensions (both spacetime and purely spa-
tial), before we then focus on the case of constant torsion
in Sec. V, including a description of its Killing vectors,
suitably generalized. In Sec. VI we then apply the ex-
istence of the Killing vectors (i) to the near-horizon re-
gion of a two-dimensional static black hole and extract its
modified surface gravity, and (ii) to the four-dimensional
symmetry-reduced system of a static, spherically sym-
metric black hole. We summarize our findings in Sec. VII,
and list relevant next steps and open problems.
II.
PRELIMINARIES AND NOTATION
In a spacetime with curvature and torsion, the com-
mutator of covariant derivatives acting on a vector field
is related to the curvature tensor Rµνρσ and the torsion
tensor T µνλ via
[∇µ, ∇ν] V ρ = Rµν
ρ
αV α −T µν
α∇αV ρ .
(1)
The torsion tensor is a vector-valued 2-form, T µνλ =
−T νµλ, and, as such, has #(T) = n2(n −1)/2 indepen-
dent components in n spacetime dimensions. In the case
of interest for this paper we have n = 2, which equates
to #(T) = 2. This makes intuitive sense, since a 2-form
in two dimensions is dual to a scalar function, and hence
arXiv:2504.06013v1  [gr-qc]  8 Apr 2025
