arXiv:2504.05848v1  [quant-ph]  8 Apr 2025
Relativistic limits on the discretization and temporal resolution of a quantum clock
Tommaso Favalli1, ∗
1Universitá degli Studi di Trieste, Strada Costiera 11, I-34151 Trieste, Italy
We provide a brief discussion regarding relativistic limits on the discretization and temporal
resolution of time values in a quantum clock. Our clock is characterized by a time observable chosen
to be the complement of a bounded and discrete Hamiltonian which can have an equally-spaced or
a generic spectrum. In the ﬁrst case the time observable can be described by an Hermitian operator
and we ﬁnd a limit in the discretization for the time eigenvalues. Nevertheless, in both cases, the
time observable can be described by a POVM and, by increasing the number of time states, we can
arbitrarily reduce the bound on the minimum time quantum, demonstrating that we can safely take
the time values as continuous when the number of time states tends to inﬁnity. Finally, we ﬁnd
a limit for temporal resolution of our time observable when the clock is used (together with light
signals) in a relativistic framework for measuring spacetime distances.
I.
INTRODUCTION
It is well known that fundamental limits emerge in the
precision with which to measure space and time when
quantum mechanics and the theory of relativity are con-
sidered together [1–5] (see also [6–8]). Our purpose in this
work is to study the relativistic limits in the discretiza-
tion and temporal resolution of time values in a quantum
clock. A good deﬁnition of a clock can be found in the
work by Peres [9]:«A clock is a dynamical system which
passes through a succession of states at constant time
intervals». Our quantum clock is described by a quan-
tum time observable chosen to be the complement of a
bounded and discrete Hamiltonian which can have both
an equally-spaced or a generic spectrum.
Only in the
case of equally-spaced energy spectrum the time observ-
able can be described by an Hermitian operator while,
in general, it will be described by a POVM. This kind
of observable was introduced by Pegg in [10] (see also
[11, 12]). It generalizes the quantum clock proposed by
Salecker and Wigner (SW) in [13, 14], where the authors
used clocks and light signals in order to measure distances
between spacetime events. Pegg’s clock is, for example,
widely used as a possible choice of clock observable in the
Page and Wootters quantum time formalism [15, 16] (see
also [17–25] and references therein). As we will see in
the following, such observable can exhibit both discrete
and continuous time values, and we therefore ask whether
there is a fundamental limit in the spacing between dis-
crete time values of clock and whether time values can
be safely considered as continuous. Finally, although the
time values may be continuous, we ask what is the min-
imum resolvable interval between them when the clock
operates within the relativistic SW framework, that is,
what is the temporal resolution ∆t (in what follows, we
will often refer to ∆t also as temporal accuracy).
We perform our investigation ﬁrst considering the clock
with equally-spaced energy spectrum in Section II; then
we generalize the discussion for a clock with generic spec-
∗tommaso.favalli@units.it
trum in Section III. We emphasize that, since any real-
istic quantum clock is a system with ﬁnite size, the in-
troduction of unbounded Hamiltonians with continuous
spectrum would not be possible. This is the reason why
we choose to focus on bounded and discrete Hamilto-
nians in describing our quantum clock, also considering
that this may encourage experimental applications.
II.
CLOCK WITH EQUALLY-SPACED ENERGY
SPECTRUM
A.
The quantum clock
We introduce the clock in the case of equally-spaced
energy spectrum. The non-degenerate clock Hamiltonian
can be written as:
ˆH =
p
X
n=0
En |En⟩⟨En|
(1)
where
En = E0 + 2πℏ
T n
(2)
with n = 0, 1, ..., p and p+1 = d dimension of the Hilbert
space H of our clock system. The meaning of T will be-
come clear soon. Next, we introduce the time observable
by deﬁning z + 1 ≥p + 1 = d time states:
|τm⟩=
1
√p + 1
p
X
n=0
e−iℏ−1Enτm |En⟩
(3)
where
τm = τ0 +
T
z + 1m
(4)
with m = 0, 1, ..., z ≥p. The states (3) exhibit a cyclic
condition and the meaning of T is now clear: it represents
the time taken by the clock to return to its initial state.
We therefore consider three cases of interest:
