3
B.
DFM and supersymmetry reduction
For supersymmetric ﬁeld theories the reasoning is
slightly diﬀerent from the standard gauge theoretic
framework where the DFM naturally applies, in the sense
that one usually starts from a Lagrangian functional of
the ﬁelds – hence from some dynamical data – required
to be (quasi-)invariant (i.e., invariant up to a boundary
term) under susy transformations that generally close an
algebra only on-shell. Nonetheless, the DFM can still be
directly applied to this context, reducing susy and build-
ing susy-invariant ﬁelds. Unfortunately, in ﬁeld-theoretic
contexts dressings are often conﬂated with mere gauge-
ﬁxings, generating misconceptions regarding the physics
– cf. [26, 27, 29] for details.
As far as standard susy (as opposed to unconventional
susy [26]) is concerned, it was shown in [25] that the
“gauge-ﬁxing” conditions typically used to extract the
d.o.f.
of the Rarita-Schwinger (RS) spinor-vector and
gravitino ﬁelds – e.g., 12 oﬀ-shell d.o.f. in N = 1, D = 4
– are actually instances of the DFM. That is, solving
the dressing functional constraints actually realises those
ﬁelds as (self-dressed) relational variables. In both cases
of rigid susy and sugra, what is commonly imposed is the
so-called gamma-tracelessness condition on the fermionic
1-form ψα = ψα
µdx µ, namely γµψµ = 0 (for simplicity,
from now on we will omit all spinor indices). This con-
dition is rewritten for the new dressed variable ψu, i.e.
γµψu
µ = 0, obtained by applying the DFM rule of thumb,
and then explicitly solved for u, showing that it indeed
qualiﬁes as a dressing ﬁeld after verifying how it trans-
forms under susy. In this context, the dressing is ﬁeld-
dependent and non-local – and thus susy a substantive
symmetry [34]. In the RS case, in D spacetime dimen-
sions, one gets
γµψu
µ = γµ(ψµ + ∂µu) = 0
⇒
u[ψ] = −/∂
−1(γµψµ) = −D/∂
−1χ,
(6)
where χ := 1/D γµ ψµ carries spin-1/2.
The minimal
coupling of the RS ﬁeld with gravity is described via the
Lorentz spin connection ωab and the soldering 1-form ea
(the vierbein). It is obtained via covariantization,
∂µ 7→Dµ,
γµ 7→γaeaµ,
(7)
where Dµ is the Lorentz-covariant derivative and γa the
ﬂat space gamma-matrices. Then, in the simple N = 1,
D = 4 sugra case, we consider the gamma-tracelessness
constraint as a functional condition on
ψυ
µ := ψµ + ¯δυψ,
(8)
with ψ the gravitino ﬁeld. Solving explicitly for υ, one
obtains the ﬁeld-dependent perturbative dressing ﬁeld υ:
γµψυ
µ = γµ(ψµ + Dµυ) = 0
⇒
υ[ψ] = −/D
−1(γµψµ) = −D /D
−1χ.
(9)
One shall then dress also the other ﬁelds of the theory, if
any, as well as the Lagrangian – see [25, 26].
III.
OFF-SHELL SUSY VIA MANIFEST
INVARIANCE
There are many approaches to supersymmetric ﬁeld
theory, among which superspace formulations hold a
prominent place, as they allow for a more geometric un-
derstanding of susy. What all these approaches have in
common, however, regarding the issue of the on-shell clo-
sure of susy transformations on the ﬁelds, is the inclusion
of auxiliary ﬁelds in the theory – either a ﬁnite or inﬁ-
nite number of them [16]. This enlarge the ﬁeld space
of the original theory and modiﬁes the susy transforma-
tions s.t. the Lagrangian is kept (quasi-)invariant and the
(new) susy transformations close a superalgebra oﬀ-shell,
without implementing the equations of motion.
Here we adopt a diﬀerent perspective: Using the DFM,
we construct susy-invariant, variables – which one may
call susy singlets, to borrow a group-theoretic term –
namely relational variables that are invariant under the
susy transformations leaving (quasi-)invariant the bare
Lagrangian under consideration. As we will see, apply-
ing the dressing procedure to a bare Lagrangian naturally
yields a susy-invariant theory; however, one could also
choose to construct a new theory entirely from scratch,
deﬁned in terms of the dressed variables, and quasi-
invariant under the residual symmetries.
This process leads to a reshuﬄing of the d.o.f., susy is
eﬀectively reduced, and the need for auxiliary ﬁelds dis-
appears, as the issue of on-shell closure of the susy alge-
bra is circumvented. That said, the matching of bosonic
and fermionic d.o.f. may still pose challenges. In Section
IV, we suggest possible strategies to address this issue.
One such approach could involve reintroducing auxiliary
ﬁelds solely to balance the d.o.f., which can then also be
dressed – since all ﬁelds must be dressed when reducing
a symmetry.
In the following, we formalize our approach to the chal-
lenge. The perturbative dressing will be the one we are
primarily interested in, particularly because susy trans-
formations in standard supersymmetric ﬁeld theory are
typically given (or derived) at the inﬁnitesimal level. Our
approach is in principle applicable to any amount of susy
N and in any spacetime dimension D.
A.
Susy as an oﬀ-shell invariance via the DFM
We consider a generic supersymmetric ﬁeld theory with
ﬁeld content denoted by φ and Lagrangian L = L(φ)
quasi-invariant under inﬁnitesimal susy transformations
δεφ = f(ε; φ),
(10)
