2.2
Large-scale devices
A qubit can assume a dense infinity of states (all points in the Bloch sphere
represented in Figure 1) and is described by a complex-valued wave function,
ψ, usually encoded as a vector in an infinite-dimensional Hilbert space. Sim-
ulating a quantum circuit requires computing the transformations induced
by the circuit’s logical gates on ψ. Classical simulations become infeasible
when the number of interacting qubits in the circuit increases. The Quantum
Supremacy regime is defined by the set of tasks that can only be completed
in finite time by quantum devices, i.e. would have nearly infinite complexity
on a classical machine (Preskill, 2012). Current quantum computers are far
beyond this limit (DeCross et al., 2024). Intuitively, however, the boundary
has no physical meaning and depends only on the available (classical) com-
putational power compared with the circuit’s complexity, depth, and size,
i.e. the number of interacting qubits. This argument justifies
Assumption 2.1. A quantum system’s behavior may depend on its physical
features, the environment in which is run, and its initial state, but not on
whether it can be simulated on a classical machine.
The requirement informally guarantees we can extrapolate a device noise
characterization across the boundaries Quantum Supremacy regime. Under
Assumption 2.1 we can model the noisy output of a QC device as
ˆY ∼Y + εnoise(Z),
Z = ϕ(ˆY )
(3)
where Z ∈Z is a general set of features describing the device and can be
extracted from P ˆY through a suitable feature map, ϕ. If εnoise is smooth
enough Buritic´a and Engelke (2024), we can use ML to extrapolate the gap
between the ideal and noisy outputs of a classically intractable device by com-
paring the ideal and noisy outputs of smaller devices. In practice, knowing
or modeling the physical data-generating process underlying (3) is challeng-
ing, especially because εnoise depends on partly unpredictable interactions
between a quantum machine and the environment or the hardware defects.
In this sense, black-box ML systems like CP are ideal because they rely
on minimal assumptions and apply to any black-box input-output system.
Assuming εnoise(Z) = ε0g(Z), where ϵ0 depends on the quantum machines
where the circuit is run but not on the circuit size, we show how to adapt
a standard Split-CP algorithm to produce prediction intervals that are valid
even when calibration and test set do not come from the same distribution.
