2
F. CARAVENNA, R. SUN, AND N. ZYGOURAS
where ξpt, xq denotes space-time white noise. Dimension 2 is critical for the SHE as it
is the dimension where the singularity of the noise matches the smoothing effect of the
Laplacian and thus cannot be treated perturbatively. A comprehensive theory of singular
Stochastic PDEs (SPDEs) below their critical dimension (known as “subcritical SPDEs”)
exists thanks to the breakthrough theories of regularity structure [Hai14], paracontrolled
distributions [GIP15], renormalisation group theory [Kup16, Duc22], energy solutions [GJ14]
and the huge volume of work they have inspired. The endeavour of treating critical singular
SPDEs is only now starting to emerge [CSZ24, CT24], and the Critical 2D SHF is the first
example describing a non-trivial and non-Gaussian solution to a critical equation at its
phase transition point.
The Critical 2D SHF is an interesting object with a rich structure (see the recent review
[CSZ24]). However, its fine properties have not yet been explored. The purpose of this paper
is to initiate the study of its spatial characteristics. Consider the Critical 2D SHF Z ϑ
t pdxq
started from the Lebesgue measure Z ϑ
0 pdxq “ dx. We will prove the following results: For
every ϑ P R and t ą 0, almost surely,
‚ Z ϑ
t pdxq is singular with respect to the Lebesgue measure (Theorem 1.1);
‚ Z ϑ
t pdxq barely fails to be a function in the sense that it is in the negative Hölder
spaces C´ε for every ε ą 0 (Theorem 1.5), and hence contains no atoms.
Moreover, we show that
‚ Z ϑ
t pdxq converges in law to the 0 measure as t Ñ 8, in the sense that the mass
assigned to any finite ball converges to 0 in probability (Theorem 1.4).
The almost surely singularity of Z ϑ
t pdxq is a consequence of the result that:
‚ The mass density
1
|Bpx,δq|Z ϑ
t pBpx, δqq on a ball Bpx, δq of shrinking radius δ Ó 0
converges to a log-normal limit, if the disorder strength parameter ϑ “ ϑpδq Ñ ´8
at a suitable rate (Theorem 1.2).
This is obtained by proving an analogous result (Theorem 1.8) for the averaged partition
function of the directed polymer model in the so-called quasi-critical regime, which was
introduced in [CCR23] as an interpolation between the sub-critical and critical regimes
of the 2D directed polymer model. We remark that the directed polymer model is a very
interesting and important disordered system on its own [Com17, Zyg24], and the Critical 2D
SHF was first constructed in [CSZ23a] as the unique limit of 2D directed polymer partition
functions in the critical regime.
The proof of Theorem 1.8 constitutes the bulk of this paper and is accomplished via an
approximate multiplicative, multi-scale decomposition of the polymer partition function, see
(4.7), followed by applying the martingale central limit theorem. Along the way, we derive a
general hypercontractive bound on the higher moments of the averaged polymer partition
function in terms of its second moment (Theorem 1.11), valid in both the quasi-critical and
critical regimes.
For the rest of the introduction, we will first recall the construction and basic properties
of the Critical 2D Stochastic Heat Flow. Our main results for the Critical 2D SHF and
the directed polymer model will then be stated in Section 1.2 and 1.3 respectively. In
Section 1.4, we will formulate the hypercontractive moment bound mentioned above. Lastly
in Section 1.5, we explain how limiting properties of the Critical 2D SHF as the disorder
