7
Given that our experimental observations can be ex-
plained without incorporating Floquet sidebands, we
may ask under which conditions the Floquet sidebands
would be more visible. Additional numerical simulations
using Floquet theory with different superconducting co-
herence lengths ξs provide some insight.
Two exam-
ples with ξs=712 nm and ξs=89 nm are shown in Fig.
5.
Fig. 5(a) displays details of the simulation data of
Fig. 3(c) with ξs=712 nm, close to the estimated value
for our system in the clean limit. Fig. 5 (b) shows the
local DOS (LDOS) as a function of VJ and the energy
of the tunneling electron with smaller coherence length
ξs=89 nm, comparable to the width of the weak link
InAs, WN. In Fig. 5(a) with large ξs, the Floquet gap
due to the hybridization between different Floquet side-
bands is weakly visible, as indicated by the non-zero
LDOS inside the gap (red boxes in Fig. 5 (a)).
Some
states inside the Floquet gap traverse it without hy-
bridization. With a reduction of the coherence length to
ξs =89 nm, no obvious unhybridized states are observed
inside the gap, as shown by vanishing LDOS inside the
gap, see Fig. 5(b). The Floquet drive, arising from the
time-dependent pairing term, mixes the electron and hole
components so that the subgap states hybridize strongly.
When ξs ≈WN, the Josephson junction approaches the
long junction limit, and more sub-gap states are present
compared to the case of the short junction (WN < ξs).
Therefore, a stronger Floquet hybridization may be ex-
pected. Our analysis indicates that a decrease (increase)
in the superconducting coherence length (the width of
InAs weak link, WN) promotes the formation of a Flo-
quet hybridization gap. However, it must be noted that if
the junction becomes too long, the Andreev bound state
level spacing may fall below the spectral resolution of
the tunneling probe, preventing observation of the Flo-
quet hybridization gap. Additionally, the necessary co-
herent coupling between Andreev bound states and the
drive [13] (assumed in our numerical simulations) may
become harder to reach in a long junction due to a larger
number of relaxation channels for Andreev bound states.
IV.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In summary, we have investigated the evolution of the
density of states in a current-driven planar Josephson
junction using tunneling spectroscopy performed with a
normal lead at the end of a junction fabricated on a gate-
tunable epi-Al/InAs 2DEG heterostructure. We studied
the dispersion of four conductance peaks as a function of
the Josephson voltage VJ generated across the Joseph-
son junction by an applied DC current and as a function
of the in-plane magnetic field B∥. Our experimental re-
sults are not fully consistent with a numerical simulation
based on Floquet theory. We therefore compare our re-
sults with a simple 3-terminal model that assumes that
the normal tunnel probe couples directly to the two su-
perconducting leads. The tunneling conductance calcu-
lated from this model matches our tunneling data well.
Therefore, we attribute our experimental observations to
a strong coupling between the tunnel probe and the two
SC leads located within the superconducting coherence
length from each other in our experimental geometry.
To further explore Floquet physics with voltage-biased
Josephson junctions in hybrid Al/InAs heterostructures,
our simulations suggest increasing the width of the bare
InAs region, WN, to be larger than the superconducting
coherence length in the proximitized region. In this case,
features associated with Floquet physics should be visi-
ble within the gap region predicted by the three-terminal
model.
This region is defined between P2 and P3 in
Fig. 3(d) and is associated with the BCS gap in the SC
leads, an energy scale larger than the one predicted for
Floquet features. Moreover, the hybridization gap is ex-
pected to appear at low driving frequencies when the en-
ergy scale related to superconductivity is reduced [10, 11].
This condition may enlarge the parameter space avail-
able for Floquet engineering in hybrid structures. To do
so, the width of the bare InAs, WN, needs to be on the
same order of magnitude as the superconducting coher-
ence length, ξs (long junction regime). Numerical simu-
lation using Floquet theory also indicates that increasing
the ratio WN/ξs to the order one will enhance the Flo-
quet hybridization gap, as shown in Fig. 5. However, if
the energy scale of the Floquet hybridization gap is too
small, tunneling spectroscopy may not be able to resolve
distinct features in the presence of finite temperatures.
To increase the likely phase space for experimental ob-
servation, a larger BCS gap superconductor, e.g., lead,
may be chosen as the parent superconductor.
Beyond exploiting the intrinsic AC Josephson effect as
the drive mechanism, alternative external drives such as
oscillating the top gate voltage [23], or shining electro-
magnetic radiation [12] may also be employed to intro-
duce a time-periodic term into the junction. Compared
to the AC Josephson effect, external drives may offer bet-
ter control through independent tuning of frequency and
amplitude. Of course, the strength of coupling is criti-
cal, as weak coupling necessitates a high-power drive that
may heat the experimental environment, as reported in
Ref. [12].
V.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was primarily led and supported by the
U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, National
Quantum Information Science Research Centers, Quan-
tum Science Center (TdP, JIV, MJM) and additionally
supported by Microsoft Quantum (TZ, TL, MJM).
