10
the quantum states instead of mixed states).
We use
the error-free physical and ancilla states at the end of
the logically-encoded circuit, just before measurement,
as the ideal states to compare all other states to.
We report only the absolute values of fidelities in this
study. This is because we used probabilities to calculate
expectation values during the training process, so any
negative amplitudes just before measurement disappear
and do not impact training.
1.
State Fidelity Distributions
To determine state fidelity distributions under varying
error rates and levels of error detection, we simulated the
logically-encoded circuit with 4000 shots, using each of
the four possible inputs as initial states for 1000 shots
each.
The analysis revealed roughly bimodal distribu-
tions, with peaks at 1.0 and 0.0 and a small proportion
of intermediate fidelities1.
The distributions remain approximately bimodal for
all error rates, with higher error rates producing more fi-
delities near 0 (and between 0 and 1), and fewer fidelities
close to 1. As shown in Figure 7, applying error detection
improves the proportion of fidelities near 1 by removing
the states with errors from the distribution. The near-
bimodality of the distributions suggests that errors in
physical or ancilla qubits will often yield states orthogo-
nal to the correct state, which we suggest is due to the
nature of the errors consisting of only bitflips and phase-
flips. Bitflips in particular are far more likely to create
orthogonal states from flipping at least one of the qubits
in the system. For example, if the physical qubit state
was originally forming the logical |00⟩L state, the only
non-orthogonal state that can result from bitflips is the
original state itself. Additionally, rotation gates will pre-
serve the orthogonality of the errored state relative to the
correct state, as rotations are unitary operations. Phase
flips will have a smaller and less predictable impact on
state fidelities, but in theory could create both orthogo-
nal and non-orthogonal states, adding to the number of
states with fidelities near 0 and introducing states with
fidelities between 0 and 1. Both bitflips and phase flips
occurring on ancilla qubits will spread to the physical
qubits without necessarily preserving orthogonality, lead-
ing to physical qubit states with intermediate fidelities
(and vice versa).
1 In the following discussions, we will occasionally use the Gaussian
mean and standard deviation to characterise the fidelity distribu-
tion, as higher proportions of fidelities at or near 0 are sufficiently
captured by the mean (through a reduction in the mean) and
standard deviation (through an increase in the spread). It is this
bimodality at the two extremes that produces the greater vari-
ability (and consequently, non-monotonicity) in the final training
accuracies in Figures 5 and 6 at the highest ancilla error rates,
as higher error rates produce more (physical and ancilla) states
with fidelities near 0. Example distributions for physical state
fidelities with p = 0.01 and fanc = 1 are illustrated in Figure 7.
2.
Pauli Error Rates and State Fidelities
Table I presents the mean fidelities (and standard de-
viations) for ancilla and physical qubits under differing
Pauli Error Rates and without error correction, calcu-
lated from the previously mentioned 4000-shot simula-
tions. Since the fidelity distributions are non-Gaussian,
we report both the mean (and standard deviation2) and
the fraction of fidelities below 0.02 or above 0.98. Addi-
tionally, we provide the corresponding mean final training
accuracies (with standard deviations) calculated from 10
independent training runs, each initiated with a unique
random seed.
Our results reveal several noteworthy trends and ob-
servations. Firstly, ancilla and physical qubit fidelities
are primarily affected by their own Pauli Error Rates,
but are slightly impacted by the error rate of the other
qubit register. For example, when the physical error rate
is non-zero and the ancilla error rate is zero, the an-
cilla fidelities still fall below 1.0, as physical qubit errors
can propagate to ancilla qubits through the CNOT gates.
We observe this also in the gate noise model, when the
physical and ancilla error rate is 0.001, the proportion of
fidelities where Fanc > 0.98 is 0.91 (with ¯Fanc = 0.93),
but when the physical error rate is increased to 0.010
while keeping ancilla error rate the same, the proportion
of fidelities with Fanc > 0.98 is reduced to 0.65 (with
¯Fanc = 0.89). Increasing the ancilla error fraction also
reduces the physical state fidelities, despite no change in
physical error rates.
Secondly, the mean final training accuracy is not es-
pecially robust to reductions in the physical state fideli-
ties, which matches with our earlier observation that the
training accuracies are impacted by even low levels of
noise. To achieve an accuracy above 0.95, the mean phys-
ical state fidelity needs to be at or higher than roughly
0.953, corresponding to approximately 93−94% of states
with F > 0.98 and 3 −4% with F < 0.02. Apart from
reducing the mean training accuracy, errors will also in-
crease its standard deviation by increasing the number of
very low fidelity states that occur during training. The
training accuracies follow a much more Gaussian distri-
bution than the fidelities, as many states are used to
train the model, which tends to average out the impact
of errors on training.
We expect to find that under both noise models, the
training accuracy should follow the physical state fideli-
ties at the end of the circuit very closely, as it is the phys-
ical state that is fed to the algorithm for optimisation.
However, our results slightly deviate from this expecta-
tion.
For example, in the environmental noise model,
2 The standard deviations imply fidelity ranges that exceed the
maximum value of 1, which is due to the non-Gaussianity of the
fidelity distributions.
3 The fidelity requirements for reaching high accuracies are depen-
dent on the model and application; some implementations may
not require such high fidelities.
