2 
 
Main text 
Achieving energy-efficient and high-speed magnetization switching is essential for enabling 
next-generation spintronic logic and memory technologies1–4. Among existing mechanisms, 
spin transfer torques (STT) switching in magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs) has been widely 
used in magnetic random access memory (MRAM)5–8. However, STT-based switching faces 
challenges in reaching sub-nanosecond magnetization switching due to an incubation delay 
associated with the collinear alignment of reference and free layer magnetization9–14. Various 
strategies, such as introducing non-collinear spin polarizers or double polarizer configurations, 
have been proposed to enhance the initial torque and reduce the switching time23. While these 
approaches can shorten switching times to below 250 ps, they often suffer from non-
deterministic dynamics and still rely on high current densities. Spin–orbit torque (SOT) 
switching, based on 3-terminal architectures, can achieve sub-nanosecond speeds, but it 
requires a charge current, a separate write path and often suffers from increased device footprint, 
higher energy cost, and post-pulse switching dynamics that limit timing precision20–23. These 
challenges have motivated the development of compact, 2-terminal switching schemes that 
combine speed, determinism, and pure voltage-driven operation. 
To overcome the energy and speed limitations of current-driven mechanisms, voltage-
controlled switching strategies have attracted growing interest. Among them, voltage-
controlled magnetic anisotropy (VCMA) reduces switching energy by modulating interfacial 
anisotropy but typically requires an external magnetic field or additional current to achieve 
deterministic bipolar switching24–30. An alternative mechanism, voltage-controlled exchange 
coupling (VCEC), offers a fundamentally different approach by tuning the interlayer exchange 
interaction between magnetic layers via electric fields, enabling deterministic bipolar switching 
without large current densities. Magneto-ionic effects first demonstrated voltage-tunable 
coupling via ionic motion31,32, but switching speed can be limited by ion diffusion. In contrast, 
Bruno33 theoretically proposed an electronic pathway for controlling exchange coupling via 
spin-dependent interfacial reflectivity. This mechanism was recently demonstrated in MgO-
based systems34–37, representing a voltage-driven alternative to STT switching in two-terminal 
device38. However, to date, VCEC has only been demonstrated under quasi-static conditions 
with constant voltage, leaving its suitability for nanosecond, deterministic switching 
unexplored. 
In this work, we design, deposit, and pattern a multilayer FM1/NM/FM2/MgO/FM3 structure.  
In this configuration, FM2/MgO/FM3 forms a pMTJ, while FM2 is antiferromagnetically 
coupled to FM1 through the NM spacer, forming a synthetic antiferromagnet (SAF). This 
architecture allows us to investigate VCEC by monitoring the effective field induced on the 
free layer (FM₂) under applied voltage. We demonstrate the presence of a VCEC-induced 
bipolar effective magnetic field and confirm its existence on the nanosecond timescale. 
Although VCEC is theoretically capable of bipolar switching, we focus on antiparallel-to-
parallel (AP→P) switching, as strong VCMA suppresses the reverse transition in our device. 
With the assistance of VCMA, the AP→P switching speed reaches as low as 87.5 ps. We 
