A plausible mechanism for the electric field-induced thiol-ene reaction is described in Fig. 1b. 
ZnO nanoparticles serve as an inverse piezo-electrochemical mediator to induce the formation of 
thiyl radicals for a thiol-ene reaction18,19. Our previous work with mechanically-promoted 
polymerizations through the piezochemical effect had shown the unique property of piezoelectric, 
specifically ZnO, nanoparticles to promote the thiol-ene reaction through a combination of both 
surface chemistry and piezochemical activation. To confirm that the current reaction setup 
occurred through a comparable mechanism, albeit using E-field as stimuli, we performed the 
control experiments without ZnO nanoparticles, or even replacing the ZnO with several different 
types of piezoelectric nanoparticles (PZT, BaTiO3 and BiFeO3) or photoelectric TiO2 
nanoparticles. In all cases, no reaction was detected, indicating that the presence of ZnO 
nanoparticles was essential for reactivity (Supplementary Fig. 4, Supplementary Table 1)12,20. We 
hypothesized that since the reactivity originated from the surface of nanoparticles the interaction 
between thiol and ZnO would be vital for this chemistry to proceed.  
To confirm that thiol adsorption onto ZnO nanoparticle surface is a critical element of piezo-
mediated reactivity, we compared XPS samples of different particle (ZnO/BaTiO3) mixed with an 
EDT solution (2.0 M in DMF). The particles were first stirred with EDT solution for 3 h and then 
thoroughly washed by ethanol to remove unattached EDT molecules. The particles were eventually 
dried and characterized by XPS. (Supplementary Fig. 5). Compared to pure ZnO, in ZnO mixed 
with EDT both the Zn 2p and Zn 3d peaks exhibited a noticeable shift towards lower binding 
energy by approximately 0.7 eV. This result matches a previous study of thiol adsorption on Zn 
showing a nearly identical peak shift towards lower binding energy21,22. Also, the presence of a 
strong S 2p peak of thiol treated ZnO in the XPS indicates that the proton was dissociated from 
the thiol and that EDT bonded to a Zn site at the surface of ZnO. For BaTiO3, we observed no such 
shifts. Further characterization of zeta potential also confirmed our hypothesis, wherein we 
measured the zeta potential under various electric fields under direct current (from 2×103 V/m to 
2×104 V/m) since negative surface charges of ZnO could be responsible for our previously reported 
mechanically mediated thiol-ene reaction (Supplementary Table 2). The results suggested that the 
change of electric field led to very little change of surface charges. We also tested piezoelectric 
silane-coated ZnO nanoparticles (1 wt %, ~ 0.2 nm coating) with a similar zeta potential of -22.6 
mV. At the same concentration and electric field, no reactivity was observed (Supplementary Fig. 
3).12,23 The above results provide strong evidence that the binding of EDT directly to the surface 
of ZnO promotes the energy transfer from ZnO to the S and provides a piece of the mechanism for 
privileged electric-field mediated reactivity of ZnO.  
To further explore how the electric field affects the ZnO, cyclic voltammetry was conducted to 
evaluate the possibility of any redox transformation involving Zn. A soluble zinc salt in DMF, 
Zn(BF4)2, was also measured for comparison. No redox peaks were observed within the range from 
-1.2 to 1.0 V before and after 3 h of applying the electric field (Supplementary Fig. 6, blue and red 
lines). The CV curve of Zn(BF4)2 showed a redox peak of Zn/Zn2+ reaction at -0.49 V, however, 
that peak is absent in the CV curves of the thiol-ene mixture, thus indicating there is no soluble 
Zn2+ present in it, either before or after the application of the electric field.  
While a complete mechanistic study will be the focus of future reports, we performed several 
preliminary control experiments to answer the most outstanding questions. The first question was 
if the ZnO generated a radical equivalent during transduction. To test this, we added 4-
methoxyphenol (MEHQ) as a free radical scavenger up to 0.60 mM and observed the inhibition of 
polythioether formation, indicating that the polymerization was mediated by a radical transfer 
