arXiv:2504.05997v1  [quant-ph]  8 Apr 2025
Note on the Universality of Parameterized IQP Circuits with Hidden Units for Generating
Probability Distributions
Andrii Kurkin,1,2, 3 Kevin Shen,1,2, 3 Susanne Pielawa,3 Hao Wang,1, 2 and Vedran Dunjko1,2
1⟨aQaL⟩Applied Quantum Algorithms, Leiden University, The Netherlands
2LIACS, Leiden University, Niels Bohrweg 1, 2333 CA, Leiden, The Netherlands
3BMW Group, 80788 M¨unchen, Germany
(Dated: April 9, 2025)
In a series of recent works, an interesting quantum generative model based on parameterized instantaneous
polynomial quantum (IQP) circuits has emerged as they can be trained efﬁciently classically using any loss
function that depends only on the expectation values of observables of the model. The model is proven not to be
universal for generating arbitrary distributions, but it is suspected that marginals can be - much like Boltzmann
machines achieve universality by utilizing hidden (traced-out in quantum jargon) layers. In this short note, we
provide two simple proofs of this fact. The ﬁrst is near-trivial and asymptotic, and the second shows universality
can be achieved with a reasonable number of additional qubits.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recently, a promising quantum generative model has been proposed and demonstrated to be efﬁciently trainable at scale [1, 2].
The model is a type of Quantum Circuit Born Machine (QCBM) [3, 4], with the circuit speciﬁcally chosen as a parameterized
instance of Instantaneous Quantum Polynomial (IQP) circuit [5, 6]. The model prepares an n-qubit state from a parameterized
IQP circuit, and measuring each qubit in the computational basis will generate a bitstring of length n. We will call this model
IQP-QCBM.
In Ref. [1], it was shown that an IQP-QCBM with n qubits cannot represent arbitrary probability distributions over n-
bitstrings. Although the model provides 2n −1 complex phases, these are insufﬁcient for universality. However, the authors
pointed out a potential pathway toward universality: the model may be universal with additional qubits, i.e., by applying circuits
on m + n qubits and considering the marginal distributions on n qubits (tracing out the ﬁrst m qubits) [1].
In this short note, we provide two simple constructive proofs that IQP-QCBMs with additional qubits are indeed universal. In
Section II, we give deﬁnitions needed for the proof. In Section III, we present the main results. We close with a discussion in
Section IV.
II.
PRELIMINARIES
Deﬁnition 1 (Parameterized IQP-circuit [1, 2]). A parameterized IQP circuit on n qubits is a circuit with the following con-
struction:
(i) initialize in the state |0⊗n⟩,
(ii) apply a sequence of parameterized gates of the form exp(iθjXj), where Xj is a tensor product of Pauli X operators
acting on a subset of the qubits,
(iii) measure all qubits in the computational basis.
The model above is equivalent to a model where, in place of (ii), we consider a three-layer model where we ﬁrst apply a
layer of Hadamard gates, followed by arbitrary diagonal operators (with respect to the computational basis), and a ﬁnal layer of
Hadamard operators. In our derivations, we will be utilizing this representation.
Deﬁnition 2 (Parameterized IQP circuit with hidden units). A parameterized IQP circuit with hidden units is a parameterized
IQP circuit in which a chosen subset of qubits is traced out.
We have here adopted the terminology from the model of Boltzmann machines where analogously using additional neurons
that are traced out (marginalized), we obtain universality (see [7]).
Deﬁnition 3 (k-sparse distribution). Consider a probability distribution p on the discrete sample space X. p is said to be
k-sparse if p has nonzero probability mass for at most k outcomes, i.e.,
|{x ∈X|p(x) > 0}| ≤k
(1)
