1
Introduction
The discovery of a Higgs boson at the CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC) by ATLAS and
CMS Collaborations in 2012 [1] conﬁrms the Brout-Englert-Higgs mechanism of electroweak
symmetry breaking [2]. The measured properties of the observed Higgs boson are consistent
with the expectations of the Standard Model (SM) within the current experimental precision
[3]. However, an admixture of CP-odd components to the Higgs boson mass state is still possible
[4].
Despite that the SM works extremely well, it has problems that cannot be solved within it.
These include neutrino oscillations, matter–antimatter asymmetry, strong CP problem, and the
nature of dark matter, forcing us to consider SM as an eﬀective theory at low-energy. At higher
energies it may demonstrate new symmetries and include new ﬁelds, so the Higgs sector can
be nonminimal and besides the SM Higgs doublet can contain additional Higgs multiplets. In
the simplest SM extension the Higgs sector includes two SU(2) doublets (Two-Higgs Doublet
Model, 2HDM) [5] resulting in ﬁve physical Higgs states, two of them are charged H± and three
states are neutral, in the CP-conserving limit (CPC) they are CP-even h and H states and a
CP-odd state A; in a model with CP-violation (CPV) of the Higgs potential they are h1, h2, h3
states with indeﬁnite CP-parity [6].
In any beyond-the-SM theory (BSM), properties of the observed Higgs boson (within the
precision of experiment) must satisfy the Higgs alignment limit conditions [7]
m = 125 GeV,
g ≡yBSM/ySM ≃1,
(1)
where m is the mass of the observed Higgs boson, ySM, yBSM are its Yukawa couplings in the
SM and the BSM, correspondingly. Deviations from the SM predictions in the Higgs sector may
be observed in self-interactions of scalar ﬁelds, interactions with light quarks and leptons and
particle interactions with CP-violation which will be unambiguous evidence of the nonstandard
Higgs sector1 (see [8]).
Two approaches to the analysis of the Higgs alignment limit are developed: it can be achieved
either through the imposition of symmetries [9–11] or through ﬁne-tuning [8, 12–16]. The ﬁrst
approach is based on the analysis of possible symmetries that lead to the SM alignment limit
within the 2HDM. It is assumed that at some high mass scale a symmetry exists which ensures
naturally an alignment (or universalization) of the Higgs boson interactions with the SM par-
ticles (Natural SM-Higgs Alignment, NHAL). It was shown in [10] that for the CP-conserving
limit three types of symmetries are possible which guarantee NHAL without decoupling (sim-
plest symmetry of this sort is SO(5) and the corresponding model is known as the Maximally
Symmetric Two Higgs Doublet Model, MS-2HDM). In the case of CP violation, the number of
such symmetries increases [17]. At a smaller scale, the symmetry is softly broken, and there will
be some deviation from the alignment limit in the low-energy Higgs spectrum as a consequence
of the renormalization group eﬀects due to the hypercharge gauge coupling g′ and the third-
generation Yukawa couplings [10]. In the second approach, the nature of the alignment limit is
not investigated; instead, it is assumed that on the electroweak energy scale, the alignment limit
is precisely or approximately fulﬁlled presenting an inherently ﬁne-tuning example (an eﬀective
low-energy approach). The present analysis is carried out within the framework of the second
approach.
1The eﬀects of CP-violating interactions of the SM Higgs boson due to CKM-matrix are so tiny that the
observations of them are beyond the experimental possibilities.
2
