8
to cover the above-mentioned nc range with 4 staggered
intervals of 4 bins each. We set the sampling depth of
each interval to 50, thus maintaining coverage well below
the exhaustive limit.
The minimization of the QUBO
Hamiltonians, which involved 115 qubits, was performed
with the D-Wave hybrid classical-quantum sampler with
the default runtime of 3s. Although this was the mini-
mum runtime allowed, it consistently yielded one of the
ground states at each minimization trial.
The density of states reconstructed from the hybrid
sampling is presented in Fig. 3 alongside the ground truth
result, i.e., the statistical distribution of equivalent recon-
structions based on the uniform sampling of the exhaus-
tively enumerated states.
The comparison shows that
the reconstruction based on the hybrid classical-quantum
sampling is fully consistent with the ground truth refer-
ence. For instance, about half of the data points (4 out
of 7 bins) fall within the Q1-Q3 interquartile range.
The result provides a proof-of-concept demonstration
of the feasibility of using quantum optimization platforms
for intervalled sampling that are sufficiently uniform that
accurate reconstructions of the density of states can be
achieved.
With the constant improvements of quan-
tum platforms, our method could thus enable studying
QUBO-mapped physical models with significant speed
improvements over classical optimizers.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
We have introduced a general method to compute
expectation values of observables by reweighting mi-
crostates obtained by minimizing QUBO Hamiltonians
of physical models.
QUBO models are natively suited to sample systems
with fixed order parameters, e.g. microstates at a fixed
energy of the physical model, since their values can be
straightforwardly fixed with quadratic constraints in the
QUBO Hamiltonian. Our method enables computing ob-
servables in the conjugate ensembles, e.g. canonical av-
erages at fixed temperature. First, we turn the quadratic
constraints of the order parameters into quadratic re-
straints by introducing slack variables. In this way, the
QUBO-based sampling can be directed towards finite in-
tervals of the constrained order parameter. Next, we tar-
get an overlapping series of intervals that cover the entire
range of interest of the order parameter. The gathered
states are then processed with a generalized histogram
reweighting technique to optimally reconstruct the den-
sity of states, which is finally harnessed to compute the
sought expectation values in the conjugate ensembles.
The general formulation of our method makes it usable
with different conjugate ensembles, as we demonstrated
by using the method in two different contexts.
First, we validated the approach for the 2D Ising
model, for which the density of states is known exactly.
Using a 12×12 system, we demonstrated that the method
enables a bias-free reconstruction of the entire density of
states. By using multiple energy intervals, and sampling
negligible fraction of the entire configuration space, we
achieved an average relative reconstruction accuracy of
order 10−2 across the 42 orders of magnitudes spanned
by the density of states.
Finally, we explored the topological entanglement of
a melt of self-assembled semiflexible rings, which is rel-
evant across diverse contexts, from polymer physics to
synthetic supramolecular constructs and designed meta-
materials. The problem is challenging for conventional
sampling methods using real-space representations, and
no results have heretofore been established for ring melts
about how intra- and inter-ring entanglement vary with
the bending rigidity. By leveraging the available efficient
mapping to QUBO models and applying our reweight-
ing method to states sampled in multiple intervals of
the bending energy, we obtained the knotting and link-
ing probabilities for a broad range of bending rigidities,
the conjugate order parameter.
We thus established,
among other results, that the linking probability is non-
monotonic and can be maximized at a suitable value of
the bending rigidity. The result establishes, for the first
time, that the linking probability in systems of topolog-
ically unrestricted ring polymers has a non-monotonic
dependence on bending rigidity. Besides advancing the
characterization of dense polymer self-assemblies beyond
state-of-the-art real-space sampling methods, the find-
ings suggest new ways to optimize mechanical-bonding
in extended supramolecular assemblies, such as Olympic
gels.
In both these contexts, the uniform sampling of the
ground state manifold of the QUBO Hamiltonians was
performed using a parallel tempering scheme on a clas-
sical computer.
However, quantum optimization plat-
forms are the ideal avenue for our method because
they can afford increasing practical speedups as their
size and performance continues to improve.
To this
end, we used classical-quantum optimizers to sample
exhaustively-enumerable ring melts, and demonstrated
the feasibility of obtaining accurate reconstructions of
the density-of-states for computing canonical averages.
Our scheme can be extended in several directions,
both for formulation and applications. For instance, the
method can be generalized to reconstruct the density
of states that are functions of several order parameters,
W(µ1, µ2, ...). This would involve equipping the QUBO
Hamiltonian with a quadratic restraint for each parame-
ter and generalizing the self-consistent equations for W.
In addition, while the powers-of-two linear combination
of slack variables provides a natural uniform coverage
of the intervals, it may be more efficient to devise other
combination schemes designed to counteract the entropic
suppression arising from wide dynamic ranges of the den-
sity of states. In this case, the self-consistent equations
for W would need to be adjusted to take into account the
sampling biases introduced ad hoc. By the same token,
data from the intervalled QUBO sampling could be com-
bined with that from unconstrained sampling, performed
