Figure 3: (Left) For a fixed deformation (¯ϵ plane in grey), the tangent at the
two fixed points are drawn in red. Manifestly they have to be of opposite signs.
(Right) The merger point (αl, ϵl).
to the maximum of the curve Y , reached at αl i.e. Y (αl) = ϵl and beyond this point one
cannot define a Wilson-Fisher FP. In addition, the function ω should be non-Lipschitz at
this point otherwise (as we have shown in Fig.1) the solution of the SCR would behave
asymptotically as a straight line for α →∞which will not match our target β-function.
The zero of ω(ϵl) = 0 is scheme invariant and we may confirm this by performing a
scheme transformation α = G (˜α) and compute the ˜Y -function in the new scheme. The
details of the calculation can be found in appendix A where we show that ˜Y (˜α) = Y (α)
and therefore for any G, the maximum of ˜Y will be identical to the maximum of Y .
We conclude that the presence of an interacting FP in the undeformed theory requires
another critical exponent which is smoothly connected to this FP in the ϵ →0 limit. This
second critical exponent might be unknown in practice but nevertheless necessary condi-
tion for the existence of the non-Lipschitz point ω (ϵl) = 0 can, in principle, be checked for
the Wilson-Fisher branch. Also, non-Lipschitz behavior at the scheme-invariant merger
would preclude the reconstruction of the β-function from SCR along the entire RG flow
as we will see in explicit model in Sec.3.1.2.
2.3
Poles
The possible occurrence of a pole in ω needs to be treated with care. If the sign is the
same on both sides of the pole the resulting beta function can be analytically continued
and remains singled valued in α. However, it there a sign change across the pole the
beta function, if continued, becomes double-valued and therefore leads to non-physical
behavior. The same sign behavior is illustrated in Fig.4 while the sign-change is shown in
5. We will see, in the 3.2 section, how poles emerge at large Nf in gauge-fermion theories
as well as at large N in O(N) models .
3
Applications
We now illustrate the general features of the SCR we discussed in the previous section in
explicit examples. We start with the 4d gauge-fermion theories at the one and two-loop
level where we emphasize the role of the initial conditions for the SCR, the zeros of ω and
its non-Lipschitz behavior. Then we will turn to large N models to illustrate the impact
of the presence of poles in ω.
