7
the intensities we consider span the full range from per-
turbative ξ ≪1 to the non-perturbative ξ ≫1 in the
charge-field coupling, we calculate using the LCFA, the
LMA, and the direct evaluation of the full QED expres-
sions without local approximation.
A.
Monoenergetic photons
We consider two set-ups: i) the laser is circularly po-
larised and the photon polarisation is described using he-
licity eigenstates of the polarisation operator quantified
by the Γ3 Stokes parameter; ii) the laser is linearly po-
larised and the photon polarisation is described using a
linear polarisation basis and the Γ1 Stokes parameter.
First, the variation of concurrence with the created
electron and positron lightfront momentum (an approxi-
mate measure of their energy) is presented for an incident
photon with energy parameter η = 0.2 and laser intensity
ξ = 2. We see, the concurrence spectrum C(s) is symmet-
ric at s = 0.5 just like the probability spectrum dPb/ds,
which follows due to the underlying charge-parity con-
jugation (CP) symmetry of QED. In the central region
around s = 0.5, where the energy difference between the
pair particles is small (i.e. |s −t| →0), the electron and
positron are created with maximum value of concurrence
and probability. In contrast, as the difference in energy
parameter increases (i.e. |s −t| →1), the concurrence
decreases, as does the creation probabity as well.
Second, the energy parameter of the photon fixed at
η = 0.2 and the effect on the concurrence of varying the
laser intensity is calculated. Three regions of behaviour
can be identified. In the perturbative regime ξ ≪1, the
concurrence is independent of ξ. This is because in this
limit all non-zero elements of the unnormalised density
matrix are proportional to ξ2 and so too is the total prob-
ability that the density matrix is normalised with, hence
cancelling the dependence on ξ. Because pair-creation is
only energetically accessible at low ξ by absorbing a large
momentum from the variation of the pulse envelope, the
perturbative limit is not reproduced by the local approx-
imations.
(In experiments, the perturbative limit can
only realistically be reached when the energy parameter
η, which depends on the carrier frequency of the EM field,
satisfies η ≳2. In our direct QED calculations, the per-
turbative limit can be reached in another way, due to very
high frequency components being included from the pulse
envelope. However this is unrealistic since those compo-
nents would not be transmitted by optical elements in
a real experiment.) In the intermediate intensity regime
ξ ∼O(1) the formation length is of the order of a wave-
length, and so the LMA agrees very well with the full
QED calculation. In the high intensity regime ξ ≫1,
the formation length is sub-wavelength and the LCFA
becomes accurate.
Third, the intensity is fixed at ξ = 2 and the energy
parameter of the photon is varied, which changes the lin-
earity of the process. In the low-energy regime, which for
Figure 2. The electron-positron spin entanglement’s depen-
dence on the lightfront momentum of positron in a 4-cycle,
circularly polarised (c = +1) laser background with intensity
ξ = 2 that collides head-on with photons of energy parameter
η = 0.2. Fig. (a) contains the dependence of fully polarised
photons with Γ3 = ±1 and Fig. (b) for partially polarised
photons with −1 < Γ3 < 1. The probability spectra from
fully-polarised photons with Γ3 = ±1 are also given in (a)
using the right-hand vertical axis to indicate the dominant
region for pair-creation. The magenta dashed line in (b) in-
dicates a region in which C(s) = 0.
this value of ξ is identified from the results as η < 0.04,
(for a laser with frequency 1.55 eV, this corresponds to
photon energies lower than 3.3 GeV), pair-creation is lin-
ear. This is because the centre-of-mass energy is so low
that the non-perturbative contribution from absorbing
many laser photons required to reach the pair-creation
threshold is suppressed more strongly than the Linear
Breit-Wheeler (LBW) process that takes high frequen-
cies from the pulse envelope (see e.g. [89] for more de-
tail). As the photon energy is increased to an interme-
diate regime, the non-perturbative contribution becomes
dominant and the process is highly nonlinear.
As the
energy is further increased, eventually the high energy
regime is reached, in which only a few harmonics, i.e.
net number of laser photons, are required for pair cre-
ation to proceed. The threshold for pair-creation from
the nth harmonic to proceed is:
η > 2(1 + υξ2)
n
(23)
where υ = 1/2 for a linearly-polarised background and
υ = 1 for a circularly polarised background). The open-
ing of the n = 2 and n = 1 harmonics are normally par-
ticularly clear in spectra. Even though only one or two
laser photons are required for pair-creation to proceed
at these energies, since ξ ̸≪1 here, many laser photons
contribute and the harmonic is the net number of laser
photons. i.e. the process is still highly nonlinear.
Circularly polarised laser background -
The concur-
rence spectrum C(s) is plotted in Fig. 2 for pair-creation
