limited resources . Specifically, a coupling parameter µ to the agent’s social environment
is introduced into individuals’ payoffs, redefining their fitness when environmental payoffs
exceed individual payoffs. Using this model, we analyze the co-evolution of strategies and
the distribution of resources. First, we examine how limited resources and the advantageous
social environment influence the fraction of cooperation under various system scenarios.
Second, we explore the impact of the initial distribution of game-based subpopulations, and
the role of the sucker’s payoff in determining the fraction of cooperation. Next, we analyze
in detail the effects of the coupling parameter µ, the sucker’s payoff σ, and the temptation
to defect b on the cooperation fraction. Furthermore, to gain deeper insight into the evo-
lutionary dynamics in the various games, we investigate the relationship between strategy
proportions, evolutionary trajectories, and average fitness under several µ and σ. Addition-
ally, we examine how resource distribution behaves across the overall system, within the
different game-based subpopulation, and how impacts strategy adoption. We also assess the
impact of varying µ and σ on resource dynamics at both the system and individual levels.
Finally, to evaluate the robustness of our proposed advantageous environment mechanism,
we study the evolutionary dynamics of the advantageous environmental mechanism within
cooperative systems structured on small-world and random graph networks.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the proposed multi-game model,
with adaptive control based on the advantageous environment mechanism, and limited re-
source dynamics. Section III presents the main results and discussions. Finally, we summa-
rize our findings and conclusions in Section IV.
II.
MODEL
Our model consists of a set of players located on a regular square lattice of size N = L×L
with periodic boundary conditions and a von Neumann neighborhood (i.e., degree k = 4
for all players). Each site in the lattice represents a player, and connections between sites
denote interactive relationships.
At the initial stage, players are randomly assigned a game to play, and thus they are
divided into two subpopulations.
We denote by ΥPDG the set of players playing PDG,
comprising a fraction 1 −ω of the whole system, and by ΥSDG the set of players following
SDG, with a fraction ω. Following previous research [43], we use the so-called weak PDG
5
