Likewise the second to last term of Eq. (3.6) is of a purely non-Abelian nature. Work-
ing it out by just inserting the term given in Eq. (3.9) yields
SD(S1L
ct ) ⊃
Z
dDx δS1L
ct
δψiα
δS1L
ct
δRiα
∼Rccψ,
(3.11)
which corresponds to ﬁnite as well as UV divergent contributions to the breaking Green
function (∆· Γ)ψRcc. Including such terms is therefore vital for the UV ﬁniteness and
overall correctness of breaking Green functions.
Computational complexity
Apart from the obvious growth of the number of diagrams, due to gauge boson self-
interactions and ghost interactions there are signiﬁcant changes to the structure of possible
diagrams and to the set of relevant Green functions, compared both to the Abelian case
[21, 23] and to the non-Abelian one-loop case [15, 20].
First, as mentioned above, in the Abelian case there are no loop corrections to Green
functions with external sources. In the non-Abelian case there are. E.g. the one-loop
counterterm mentioned in Eq. (3.9) corresponds to the breaking Green function
(∆· Γ)ψRcc,
(3.12)
which is non-vanishing at the one-loop order.
At the two-loop level, there are addi-
tional non-vanishing Green functions with external sources contributing to the breaking
Eq. (3.7), namely
(∆· Γ)ρcc,
(∆· Γ)Gccρ,
(3.13)
(∆· Γ)ζccc.
The genuine two-loop diagrams for these Green functions involve an insertion of the tree-
level breaking vertex b∆and a fermion loop, which then couples to the external sources
via a second loop.
The same is true for Green functions whose external lines are made up of gauge bosons
or ghosts exclusively, such as
(∆· Γ)ccc,
(3.14)
which appears for the ﬁrst time at the two-loop level.
Another noteworthy consequence of interacting ghosts is that each line of the ∆-vertex
insertion can be fully internal to the diagram. As a consequence while at one-loop there
were only up to 4-point functions with non-vanishing contributions, now at two-loop even
5-point functions become relevant. For example the computationally most costly Green
function of the entire two-loop calculation is
(∆· Γ)cGGGG,
(3.15)
a ﬁve-point function with ﬁve open colour indices. This Green function must be computed
at the two-loop level and may provide a non-vanishing contribution. Indeed it is found to
9
