3
FIG. 3. Motion in periodically textured channels. (A) Illustrative sketches of periodically textured channel boundaries.
(B) Snapshots showing the motion of elongated particles with an aspect ratio of κ = 0.5 through textured channels of width
W/δ = 3.0. (Top row) For a texture wavelength of ∆x/δ = 2.0, the particle undergoes continuous rotation and lateral motion
along the channel. (Bottom row) For ∆x/δ = 1.6, the particle successfully aligns with the centerline, exhibiting neither rotation
nor lateral drift. (C) Orientation θ and lateral position λ as functions of the position x along the channel axis for the parameter
values used in panel (B). The solid blue line represents successful alignment, while the dashed red line corresponds to an
unsuccessful alignment case.
metric initial conditions (λ0= 0 and θ0= 0 or π
2 ), it con-
tinues to move through the channel with λ(t) ≃0 and
θ(t) ≃0 (or ≃π
2 ) within the numerical accuracy (Fig. 2A).
However, when the initial conditions are asymmetric
(λ0̸= 0 and/or θ0̸= 0 or
π
2 ), both λ(t) and θ(t) exhibit
continuous variations, potentially following a repeating
pattern depending on the channel geometry and initial
conditions of entering the channel; see Figs. 2A,B and
Suppl. Movie S1.
Additionally, Fig. 2C shows that in-
creasing the particle’s elongation κ extends the charac-
teristic length scale of ﬂow pattern repetition.
Never-
theless, the steady-state velocity and the particle’s tran-
sit time through the channel remain largely unaﬀected
by the choice of κ or the initial motion conditions (see
Suppl. Fig. S4).
Motion in periodically textured channels.— Since the
asymmetry of the particle in a ﬂow which has transla-
tional symmetry along the channel leads to continuous
lateral drift and rotation, a question arises as to whether
disrupting the longitudinal uniformity of the ﬂow can
help regulate the motion. Interestingly, we ﬁnd that in-
troducing textured patterns along the channel walls can
induce particle alignment with the centerline within a
speciﬁc range of parameters. To illustrate this concept,
we consider a simple setup where immobile disks of di-
ameter δ are arranged along the channel walls with a
texture wavelength ∆x (i.e., their center-to-center dis-
tance), as shown in Fig. 3A. The periodic texture gener-
ates localized high-velocity regions along the centerline
that repeatedly nudge the particle toward the center-
line, ultimately promoting alignment as it moves down-
stream. However, the eﬀectiveness of this setup in achiev-
ing alignment depends on the choices of the channel
width W and the texture wavelength ∆x. For example,
Figs. 3B,C show that reducing the wavelength of high-
velocity regions enhances the alignment success (see also
Suppl. Movies S2 and S3). We deﬁne successful alignment
as the particle’s center of mass suﬃciently approaching
the centerline (λ(t) →0) and its major axis aligning with
the centerline (θ(t) →± π
2 ). The eﬀective channel width
for inducing alignment ranges from the order of the par-
ticle size (to allow motion) up to several times the par-
ticle size. In extremely wide channels (W ≫D1 ≥D2),
the inﬂuence of boundary conditions on the channel ﬂow
becomes negligible.
Similarly, the texture wavelength
must remain comparable to the particle size to eﬀectively
FIG. 4.
Alignment phase diagram.
Successful (green
plus) and unsuccessful (red minus) alignment events plotted
in the (W/δ, ∆x/δ) plane for an elongated particle with a
major diameter of D1/δ = 2. The phase diagram is presented
separately for diﬀerent values of particle elongation κ.
