Chapter 6.
Conclusion and future prospects
This thesis collects and summarizes different works regarding the topic of Parton Distribution
Functions (PDFs). PDF uncertainties are currently among the dominant contributions to the
theoretical error of many LHC observables, such as Higgs boson production, Drell-Yan or strong
coupling constant measurements. Results of the same analysis, carried out with different
input PDFs, are often not fully consistent, and their combination is therefore non-trivial. Thus,
to achieve a better accuracy of theoretical predictions we need a deeper understanding of
both theoretical and methodological uncertainties arising during the determination of PDFs.
Moreover, the use of perturbative methods to compute Standard Model observables entails that
to reach higher precision we must include higher order corrections, among which QCD are
often the largest contribution.
The studies presented here aim to tackle both problems and include, as deliverables, different
new unpolarized and polarized PDF sets which will serve as a useful input for upcoming research
in the high energy physics phenomenology community.
Summary
To begin, in Chapters 1 and 2 we introduced, the theoretical and methodological framework of
NNPDF4.0, adopted for the following sections.
In Chapter 3 we have provided a first evidence of the intrinsic charm presence inside the proton,
carrying a total momentum fraction less than 1 %. The resulting fitted charm PDF displays a
characteristic valence-like shape, which is difficult to reconcile with a perturbatively generated
charm from quark and gluon splitting. By inverting PDF matching conditions we have isolated
the intrinsic charm component and analyzed its stability. Moreover, we have discussed the
possibility of finding a non-vanishing intrinsic charm asymmetry, although this is now beyond
the level of accuracy of the present PDF sets. Both studies take into account QCD higher
order corrections and are supplemented by a comparison with present and future LHC and EIC
observables, which can eventually discriminate this tiny effect.
In Chapter 4, we have shown how approximate N3LO corrections and their theoretical uncertain-
ties can be systematically included in a PDF fit, obtaining one of the most precise unpolarized
PDF determination currently available. In particular, we have considered QCD corrections to
DGLAP evolution and DIS coefficient functions which grasp the largest component of the full
N3LO corrections. The resulting PDF set can be used for a twofold purpose of complementing
169
