7
Figure 6. Probability density functions for the pairwise inter-
atomic distances. The pairwise distances for initial configura-
tions (blue, as described in App. A), for final configurations
after running the algorithm (gold) and for configurations fit-
ted to the final configurations (green, as described in App. A).
A method of creating initial configurations can then be
fitted so that it generates an equivalent distribution, as
described in App. A. This leads to random configura-
tions that will have interatomic distance distributions
similar to the final configurations and thus are more
fair to compare against.
We will call these the fitted
configurations, see Fig. 6.
Figure 7 shows the statistics on the multiple random
target Hamiltonians.
From Fig. 7a, we see that there
is a large decrease in error between the final and fitted
configurations. Figure 7b shows most clearly that over
many different initializations and many different Htarg,
our method can consistently find configurations leading
to lower energy errors. In many cases the initial configu-
rations do not reach chemical accuracy. However, for the
fitted and the final configurations, chemical accuracy is
reached in almost all cases, with the final configurations
often still outperforming the fitted ones by several orders
of magnitudes.
E.
Molecular Hamiltonians
Lastly, our method is tested for practical applications by
minimizing the energies of small molecules, where their
internal structure is varied. For this, molecular Hamil-
tonians are generated using the Psi4 quantum chemistry
library [38].
We consider LiH with varying distances
between Li and H, resulting in 4-qubit Hamiltonians.
CH4 in the 2D plane with varying distances between
the C and H atoms, resulting in 5-qubit Hamiltonians.
Lastly, BeH2 for varying distances between Be and the
two H’s resulting in a 6-qubit Hamiltonian.
The results are shown in Fig. 8. For all three molecules,
configurations are found that largely outperform their
fitted configuration counterparts.
It was found that
in order to solve the problems, the number of inner
iterations needed to be scaled with the number of qubits,
which has been reported before for pulse optimization
algorithms and VQAs in general [14, 39, 40]. However,
as mentioned in Sec. II, the position optimization does
not suffer from this, and the number of outer iterations
can be kept at Nout = 20. The CH4 and BeH2 ground
states also seem easier to find than the LiH ground
state.
A reason for this could be the fact that LiH
has a more entangled ground state than the other two
molecules [14].
In future work, it would be interest-
ing to quantify how well a configuration for one fixed
interatomic distance functions for another one close to it.
Figure 7. CBO results for 14 random target Hamiltonians, with 4 qubits, 20 agents and dipole-dipole interactions, repeated
20 times each. Nout = 20 outer iterations and Nin = 100 inner iterations. a) distribution of log errors for final configurations
(gold) and fitted configurations (green). b) Log errors for initial (blue), fitted (green) and final (gold) configurations, separated
for all 14 individual problem.
