2
I.
INTRODUCTION
Understanding the origin and the structure of the fla-
vor sector of the Standard Model (SM) is one of the
main open challenges of particle physics.
After many
years of tireless experimental and theoretical efforts, ad-
vancing our knowledge on flavor physics requires per-
forming very accurate (at the sub-percent level) stud-
ies of weak-interaction processes involving hadrons and
leptons. Among the many interesting processes, a very
important rˆole is played by the semileptonic decays of
QCD-stable pseudoscalar mesons, that couple the lep-
tonic and the hadronic flavor sectors and give access to
the matrix elements of the Cabibbo–Kobayashi–Maskawa
(CKM) matrix.
On the theoretical side, the exclusive semileptonic de-
cays of kaons and heavy (D(s), B(s)) pseudoscalar mesons
have been extensively studied, with the required non-
perturbative accuracy, by performing lattice QCD sim-
ulations. An updated picture of the level of theoretical
accuracy currently reached on different interesting pro-
cesses can be found in the latest edition of the FLAG
review [2].
In some cases, e.g. K 7→πℓ¯νℓdecays, the
sub-percent accuracy level has already been achieved,
by relying though on the isospin-symmetric approxima-
tion of QCD (isoQCD), and further progress can only
be made by performing challenging lattice QCD+QED
calculations.
In the present work and in the companion paper [1], we
face another long-standing challenge in the theoretical
study of flavor physics, namely the non-perturbative cal-
culation of inclusive semileptonic decay rates.
In par-
ticular, by performing state-of-the-art isoQCD lattice
simulations, we have calculated the decay rate and the
first two lepton-energy moments for the inclusive process
Ds 7→Xℓ¯νℓ, in which a negatively-charged Ds meson de-
cays into all possible (kinematically and flavor allowed)
hadronic states X, a lepton ℓ(in the approximation in
which it is massless) and the corresponding anti-neutrino
¯νℓ.
On the experimental side, depending upon the specific
process and the experimental setup, inclusive semilep-
tonic decay rates can be obtained by summing the decay
rates of all possible exclusive channels or measured di-
rectly by using tailored techniques. The latter is the case
of Ds 7→Xℓ¯νℓprocesses (see Refs. [3, 4] for more details)
that, therefore, provide independent information and dif-
ferent control on the experimental systematics w.r.t that
provided by the corresponding exclusive channels.
From a phenomenological perspective, our first-principles
lattice results are important because they allow one to
use the experimental information of Refs. [3, 4] to con-
strain the CKM matrix elements Vcs, Vcd. The study of
the phenomenological implications of our results is the
subject of the companion paper [1].
From a theoretical perspective, our results are important
because they show that inclusive semileptonic decays can
nowadays be studied from first-principles on the lattice.
This is a non-trivial result. Indeed, while the hadronic
form-factors parametrizing the decay rates of exclusive
processes involving QCD-stable hadrons in the external
states can be extracted by studying the asymptotic be-
havior at large Euclidean times of lattice correlators,
the lattice calculation of inclusive decay rates requires
radically different theoretical and numerical techniques.
Although the key ingredients were already present in
the more general, mathematically-oriented and forward-
looking Ref. [5] (see also Ref. [6] for a recent general-
ization), these techniques have been developed only re-
cently [7–11].
Together with other collaborators, some of us made a first
important step toward the demonstration of the numeri-
cal feasibility of lattice calculations of inclusive semilep-
tonic decay rates in Ref. [11].
In that work, by using
the methods of Refs. [8–10], we studied the inclusive pro-
cesses H 7→Xℓ¯νℓat unphysical values of the heavy-quark
mass of the decaying pseudoscalar meson H and com-
pared the lattice results, obtained at fixed lattice spacing
and fixed volume, with the analytical results obtained by
relying on quark-hadron duality and the Operator Prod-
uct Expansion (OPE). In fact, in the absence of first-
principles approaches, OPE techniques [12–16], that are
particularly well motivated in the case of the phenomeno-
logically very relevant B(s) inclusive decays, have been for
many years the only viable theoretical approach to heavy
meson inclusive semileptonic decays. Ref. [11] has shown
that in the regions of the parameters space where the
OPE was expected to be reliable, the lattice results were
in fairly nice agreement with the analytical predictions.
This preliminary study has thus highlighted the necessity
of a detailed investigation aiming at establishing whether
lattice calculations can now provide phenomenologically
relevant information on inclusive processes. This is the
main subject of the present work.
The problem of the lattice determination of inclusive
observables has already been addressed in the case of
other phenomenologically relevant processes, namely the
(energy-smeared) R-ratio [17] and the inclusive hadronic
decays of the τ lepton [18, 19], by producing first-
principles isoQCD lattice results at a level of accuracy
that can only be improved by including the neglected
isospin breaking effects.
At the same time, other lat-
tice groups [20–26] have started to face the challenge of
providing phenomenologically relevant lattice results for
