where Sµν is the Schouten tensor
Sµν = 1
2

Rµν −1
6R gµν

,
(3.6)
which plays the role of a compensator field of the Riemann tensor under Weyl rescalings
of the metric. In doing so, the Lagrangian is cast in the following form
W αβ
µν W µν
αβ = Rie2 −2Ric2 + 1
3R2 .
(3.7)
In the next subsection, the same combination of quadratic-curvature couplings in the bulk
leads to a symmetry enhancement in the codimension-2 functional from diffeomorphic to
Weyl invariance. This is understood by the fact that conical defects in Conformal Gravity
induce yet another Weyl invariant in two dimensions lower, for an arbitrary spacetime
geometry.
3.2
Weyl Invariance on conical defects
Weyl invariants are geometric objects that remain unchanged under Weyl rescalings of the
metric. The number of independent Weyl invariants increases with dimension, and their
explicit form is known only up to 8 dimensions [51–54]. In the bulk, they may be thought of
as a theory of modified, higher-derivative gravity. At the boundary of odd-dimensional AdS
gravity, conformal invariants appear in the type B conformal anomaly, whose coefficients
(central charges) provide a criterion for identifying the corresponding boundary CFT [].
In the same spirit, one may construct Weyl invariant objects defined in submanifolds,
which depend on both intrinsic and extrinsic quantities. In particular, in two-dimensional
submanifolds, there are two independent objects that transforms homogeneously under
local Weyl rescalings, which can be cast in the form
P A
abP ab
A ,
W ab
ab .
(3.8)
Here, P A
ab is the traceless part of the extrinsic curvature, defined by
P A
ab = KA
ab −1
2KAγab ,
(3.9)
and W ab
ab is the pullback of the Weyl tensor, which can be written as
W ab
ab = Rλµσρnλ
AnσAnµ
BnBρ −Rµρnµ
BnρB + 1
3R .
(3.10)
Notice that this basis consists on second-derivative quantities. As a consequence, only four-
derivative bulk objects, in the form of quadratic-curvature couplings, may be considered as
a starting point for LM method. The natural question is whether, for given values of α and
β in the QCG action (2.16), the resulting codimension-2 functional is a Weyl invariant.
In particular, when the scalar Gauss relation (A.12) is considered, then the action of
Eq. (2.22) can be decomposed as
LQCG [Σ] = −3 (4α + β) LC
QCG −2 (3α + β) LNC
QCG .
(3.11)
– 10 –
