European Strategy for Particle Physics – 2026 Update
PIONEER: a next generation rare pion decay experiment
PIONEER Collaboration
Abstract
PIONEER is a rapidly developing effort aimed to perform a pristine test of lepton flavour
universality (LFU) and of the unitarity of the first row of the CKM matrix by significantly
improving the measurements of rare decays of the charged pion. The experiment is approved
at the Paul Scherrer Institute (PSI). In Phase I, PIONEER aims to measure the charged-pion
branching ratio to electrons vs. muons Re/µ to 1 part in 104, improving the current experimental
result Re/µ (exp) = 1.2327(23) × 10−4 by a factor of 15. This precision on Re/µ will match the
theoretical accuracy of the SM prediction allowing for a test of LFU at an unprecedented level,
probing non-SM explanations of LFU violation through sensitivity to quantum effects of new
particles up to the PeV mass scale.
Phase II and III will aim to improve the experimental precision of the branching ratio of
pion beta decay, π+ →π0e+ν(γ), currently at 1.036(6) × 10−8, by a factor of three and six,
respectively. The improved measurements will be used to extract Vud in a theoretically pristine
manner. The ultimate precision of Vud is expected to reach the 0.05 % level, allowing for a
stringent test of CKM unitarity.
The PIONEER experiment will also improve the experimental limits by an order of mag-
nitude or more on a host of exotic decays that probe the effects of heavy neutrinos and dark
sector physics.
The conceptual design of PIONEER includes a 3π-sr 19 radiation length calorimeter, a
segmented low-gain avalanche diode (LGAD) stopping target, a positron tracker, and ultra-
fast electronics. Compared to the previous generation of rare pion decay experiments, the 5-D
(position, time, and energy) tracking capability of the LGAD-based active target allows for
excellent separation of π →eν signal from vast amount of π →µ →e background (π →µν
followed by µ →eνν).
The PIONEER collaboration consists of participants from both the nuclear and particle
physics communities including PIENU, PEN/PiBeta, and MEG/MEGII collaborations, as well
as experts in rare kaon decays, low-energy stopped muon experiments, the Muon g−2 experimen-
tal campaign, high energy collider physics, neutrino physics, and other areas. The collaboration
is engaged in R&D in several critical areas including i) beam studies, ii) LGAD-based active
target (sensor and readout electronics), iii) calorimetry (Noble gas and crystals), iv) DAQ, and
v) trigger. A detailed simulation framework is used to estimate sensitivity and systematics. The
collaboration is still developing and welcomes new members.
This input to the 2026 update of the European Strategy for Particle Physics Strategy de-
scribes the physics motivation and the conceptual design of the PIONEER experiment, and is
prepared based on the PIONEER proposal submitted to and approved with high priority by
the PSI program advisory committee (PAC). Using intense pion beams, and state-of-the-art in-
strumentation and computational resources, the PIONEER experiment is aiming to begin data
taking by the end of this decade
arXiv:2504.06375v1  [hep-ex]  8 Apr 2025
