14 
 
Conclusion 
For systems like quantum dots where the surface-to-volume ratio is high, the effects of interface 
could be imperative. Now, the solvent molecules remain oriented in the interface depending on 
the surface potential, making the region sensitive towards polarization. The surface potential along 
with the electrical double layer at the interface develops a static electric field which produces 
the NLOstatic response. Hence we may expect two types of responses, NLOoscillating, which is 
insensitive to the interface, and NLOstatic sensitive to the interface. The oriented molecules in the 
interface induce interference between the generated NLO response from different layers effectively 
causing a phase mismatch also. In our studies, we tried to find out the effect of the interface 
as a function of both ionic strength and phase mismatch in general. However, there could be 
particular variations in the interface effects with the change of shape, size, and composition of 
quantum dots. Our study reveals that for a range of ionic strength (10−6M < x < 10−3M), NLOstatic 
takes maxima when it can be dis-entangle from the usual four-wave mixing signal NLOoscillating. 
The advanced 2DES technique having control over the phase information can be used to detect 
the NLOstatic signal as well NLOoscillating, giving both interface and the bulk information for the 
system. Depending on the amount of phase mismatch ∆kz produced by the interface, one can 
expect the NLOstatic spatially close to the NLOoscillating signal in the box car geometry for the 
rephasing pulse sequence. The studies reflect distinct phase and intensity changes in the NLOstatic 
2DES spectra when there is a variation in ionic strength. We also anticipate for FWM the main 
contributing signal is NLOstatic especially in the low ionic strength, rather than NLOoscillating. The 
phase change originated due to NLOstatic contribution will provide the opportunity to identify 
different kinds of interface and the nature of the ions in the interface. We also foresee the use of 
deep learning in phase recognition will further enhance the field. 
