Realization and Calibration of Continuously Parameterized Two-Qubit Gates on a
Trapped-Ion Quantum Processor
Christopher G. Yale,1, ∗Ashlyn D. Burch,1, † Matthew N. H. Chow,1, 2, 3, ‡ Brandon P.
Ruzic,1 Daniel S. Lobser,1 Brian K. McFarland,1 Melissa C. Revelle,1 and Susan M. Clark1
1Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87123
2Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131, USA
3Center for Quantum Information and Control, CQuIC, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131, USA
(Dated: April 9, 2025)
Continuously parameterized two-qubit gates are a key feature of state-of-the-art trapped-ion quan-
tum processors as they have favorable error scalings and show distinct improvements in circuit per-
formance over more restricted maximally entangling gatesets. In this work, we provide a comprehen-
sive and pedagogical discussion on how to practically implement these continuously parameterized
Mølmer-Sørensen gates on the Quantum Scientific Computing Open User Testbed (QSCOUT), a
low-level trapped-ion processor. To generate the arbitrary entangling angles, θ, we simply scale the
amplitude of light used to generate the entanglement. However, doing so requires careful consid-
eration of amplifier saturation as well as the variable light shifts that result. As such, we describe
a method to calibrate and cancel the dominant fourth-order effects, followed by a dynamic vir-
tual phase advance during the gate to cancel any residual light shifts, and find a linear scaling
between θ and the residual light shift. Once, we have considered and calibrated these effects, we
demonstrate performance improvement with decreasing θ. Finally, we describe nuances of hardware
control to transform the XX-type interaction of the arbitrary-angle Mølmer-Sørensen gate into a
phase-agnostic and crosstalk-mitigating ZZ interaction.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Trapped-ion quantum computers have grown in size,
complexity,
and performance metrics over the past
decade, with flagship systems now exhibiting two-qubit
gate fidelities greater than 0.998 and register sizes in ex-
cess of 30 qubits [1, 2]. One of the workhorses of these
processors is the two-qubit entangling Mølmer-Sørensen
(MS) gate, proposed in 1999 [3, 4], and experimentally
demonstrated in 2003 [5]. It has now become the most
prevalent entangling operation available in many com-
mercial trapped-ion quantum processors [6–9] as well as
academic and national laboratory efforts [10–12].
The
two-qubit MS gate finds application in a wide array
of complex quantum algorithms for simulation and op-
timization protocols, but also has a potential role in
quantum networking applications [13], error correction
schemes [14], quantum metrology [15], and quantum ma-
chine learning [16].
While work has been done to im-
prove the effective implementation of this gate in experi-
ment [17–21], both stochastic and coherent errors still re-
main limitations to gate fidelity, and therefore it is vital
to understand how to best calibrate against error sources
that limit qubit coherence and gate operation times.
Here, we provide a pedagogical discussion of the cali-
bration of a two-qubit arbitrary-angle MS gate. In par-
ticular, we discuss pulse shaping and motional mode se-
∗These authors contributed equally; cgyale@sandia.gov
† These authors contributed equally; Present address: Oak Ridge
National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831, USA
‡ These authors contributed equally; Present address: HRL Lab-
oratory, LLC, Malibu, California 90265, USA
lection, the approach used to generate arbitrary amounts
of entanglement, and the impact and mitigations for light
shifts that arise during the interaction. The MS gate is
based on a transverse Ising-type interaction, where the
unitary for the gate may be written:
UMS(θ, ϕ) = exp

−iθ
2 (ˆσϕ,i ⊗ˆσϕ,j)

(1)
where θ is the rotation angle, i and j are ion-label indices,
and ˆσϕ = cos(ϕ)ˆσx + sin(ϕ)ˆσy is a rotation about the
equatorial Bloch-sphere axis defined by phase ϕ, where ˆσx
and ˆσy are the usual Pauli operators. The typical imple-
mentation of the gate is a maximally entangling Clifford
operation occurring at a θ = π
2 rotation, i.e. MS(π/2).
In many noisy intermediate-scale quantum, or NISQ,
computing applications, generating arbitrary amounts
of entanglement is favorable as gate error tends to de-
crease with decreasing gate angle [1, 6]. These variable-
angle gates, MS(θ) where θ ∈[0, π/2], are particu-
larly useful for decomposing arbitrary unitary operations
via Cartan’s KAK decomposition [22]. This decomposi-
tion means any arbitrary two-qubit SU(4) unitary can
either be broken down into three MS(π/2) or broken
into three MS(θ) [23–25]. Clear performance improve-
ments have been demonstrated when compiling circuits
via an arbitrary-angle entangling gateset rather than a
more limited gateset with only maximally entangling
gates [25].
The experiments detailed here are performed on
the
Quantum
Scientific
Computing
Open
User
Testbed
(QSCOUT)
located
at
Sandia
National
Laboratories
[12].
The
QSCOUT
register
con-
sists
of
a
linear
chain
of
171Yb+
ions
whose
hyperfine
states
2S1/2 |F = 0, mF = 0⟩(|0⟩)
and
arXiv:2504.06259v1  [quant-ph]  8 Apr 2025
