2
NEURAL NETWORK POLYCONVEXIFICATION
[Bar05, EBG13, BEG15].
However, these methods are often subject to the curse of high-
dimensionality, since they require the mesh-based discretisation of the (d×d)-dimensional space of
deformation gradients. Polyconvexification algorithms further increase the dimensionality because
they perform the convexification in the minors space of the deformation gradient. For isotropic
functions, this dimensionality can be reduced by characterising the polyconvexity via signed
singular values, as in [WP23] (see [NPPW24] for a corresponding polyconvexification algorithm).
However, despite their efficiency, these algorithms remain resource and time consuming, especially
when d = 3. As a result, conventional relaxation algorithms are often impractical for engineering
applications that require iterative computations and multi-query evaluations of the polyconvex
hull for varying parameter values.
For example, frameworks such as the isotropic pseudo-time incremental damage model intro-
duced in [BO12] involve a (d × d + 1)-parameter dependent family of convexification problems,
consisting of the deformation gradient and the internal variable from the previous time step that
captures the material history (see Section 2). Such parameter dependence introduces additional
dimensionality as the material parameter ζ can vary at any material point in Ω. This requires the
polyconvex envelope to be computed from scratch for each parameter configuration, resulting in
a (d × d + p)-dimensional problem. Overall, the accurate approximation of polyconvex envelope
for parameter-dependent energy densities is of great importance for the practical application of
computational relaxation techniques.
To overcome the computational challenges of conventional relaxation schemes and make them
practically feasible, we propose a neural network-based approach that compresses the parameter-
dependent polyconvex envelope into the parameters of a small-scale artificial neural network
that incorporates intrinsic properties of the polyconvexification problem into its architecture.
Our method exploits a design that encodes polyconvexity by combining a feature extraction
layer, which computes the minors function based on a signed singular value characterisation
of isotropic functions, with Input Convex Neural Networks (ICNNs). In addition, symmetry
properties and upper-bound relationships are systematically enforced during training through
penalty terms in the loss functional, ensuring that the network satisfies the necessary physical
and mathematical constraints. This tailored approach not only speeds up the approximation
of the polyconvex envelope, but also increases the reliability of the approximations in practical
engineering applications.
Recent advances in neural networks, particularly through the development of ICNNs [AXK17],
have enabled architectures that enforce convexity in energy density functions, a key requirement
for accurate material modelling. For example, [AAF22, AF23] use ANNs to learn constitutive laws
from stress-strain data, while preserving fundamental principles of solid mechanics through ICNNs
that ensure material stability. Similarly, [KFM+22] and [KOMFW22] propose machine learning
based constitutive models for finite deformation and electro-mechanically coupled behaviour
respectively, using ICNNs to enforce hyperelasticity, anisotropy and polyconvexity. In [LKK+23],
a neural network-based hyperelastic constitutive model is introduced that inherently satisfies
standard constitutive conditions using ICNNs, while [VRPB25] designs multi-scale heterogeneous
structures with spatially varying microstructures by incorporating physical principles such as
polyconvexity, objectivity and thermodynamic consistency. More recently, [GKWM25] introduced
convex signed singular value neural networks (CSSV-NN) for isotropic hyperelastic energy
formulations, enabling the prediction of polyconvex hulls. Unlike [GKWM25], which learns
polyconvex hulls directly from the function, our approach aims to learn polyconvex envelopes,
potentially parameter-dependent, from reference envelopes obtained either analytically or via
established algorithms. Other work has also explored ANNs for modelling the behaviour of
mechanically sound materials without using ICNNs [LK23, FJB+21, TSRT22, TCT22, CG22].
The remaining parts of this paper are structured as follows. In Section 2 we introduce a
leading engineering application by presenting a parameter-dependent family of energy densities
arising from an isotropic damage problem. In Section 3 we recall the signed singular value
formulation of the polyconvex envelope for isotropic functions, while Section 4 introduces the
properties preserving neural networks that enforce polyconvexity, symmetries and the upper bound
relation. Finally, Sections 5 and 6 provides numerical examples including both mathematical
