42
Tools and methodology
It can be shown that the transformation can be applied a posteriori to an already computed
interpolation grid.
Target mass corrections.
While the DIS factorization is usually derived for the scattering
of two massless particles, it is possible to account for the finite mass of the scattering target
through target mass corrections [140, 141, 12]. These corrections become relevant for either
small virtualities or large Bjorken-x. They can be implemented as an additional convolution,
and we provide several approximations (corresponding to higher twist expansions) following
Ref. [140].
Flavor Number scheme.
Flavor number schemes provide a prescription to resolve the ambigu-
ous treatment of heavy quark masses (see also Section 1.4.2). Generally, to achieve a faithful
description of experimental data at scales roughly around the heavy quarks mass Q ∼mh,
quarks should be treated fully massive. However, in the region where Q ≫mh, quarks should
be considered massless. In Yadism we allow for 3 different schemes. Only one single heavy
quark is allowed at each time.
• Fixed flavor number scheme (FFNSnf). The FFNSnf, is defined as a configuration
with a fixed number of flavors at all scales, i.e. all quark masses are fixed to be either light
(up to nf), heavy (nf + 1) or decoupled (above nf + 1).
• Zero mass-variable flavor number scheme (ZM-VFNS). In the ZM-VFNS all quark
masses in the calculations are either light or decoupled. The number of light quarks
nf is not fixed, but instead varies with the number of active flavors depending on the scale
of the process, i.e. nf(Q2). Specifically, nf = 3 below mc and this increases as the heavy
quark thresholds are crossed, i.e. Q > mh, after which the corresponding heavy quark is
treated to be light.
• Asymptotic fixed flavor number scheme (FFNSn(0)
f ). The FFNSnf(0) is similar to
the FFNSnf, but retains only the logarithmic corrections, i.e. it does not contain any power-
like heavy quark corrections m2/Q2. The FFNSnf(0) is constructed as the overlap between
FFNSnf and ZM-VFNS and can be used to construct a VFNS flavor number schemes.
Yadism does not provide explicitly the FONLL scheme, but all the necessary ingredients FFNSnf,
FFNSn(0)
f , and ZM-VFNS are available.
We now provide representative comparisons on the different prescriptions used to treat heavy
quark masses in order to underline their relevance in the different kinematic regions. In all
the subsequent comparisons, we adopt a fixed boundary condition defined as a PDF set at a
given scale µF = µ0. Evolution of the boundary condition, including changing of the number
of active flavors, is performed using EKO. First, in Fig. 2.5, we compare the ZM-VFNS and
FFNS3 coefficient functions as a function of Q2. We expect both calculations to differ more
in the low-Q2 region and progressively reach better agreement towards the large-Q2 region.
