The Path to aN3LO Parton Distributions
115
a generic feature of all quark and gluon PDFs in this small-x region. In fact, the total theory
uncertainty at aN3LO is at the sub-percent level for all x ≳10−3. Hence, not only has the MHOU
become negligible, but also the effect of IHOU on PDF evolution is only significant at small-x.
4.1.7. Comparison to other groups
We finally compare our approximation of the N3LO splitting functions to other recent results
from Refs. [303, 298, 299, 300]. While the approach of Refs. [298, 299, 300] (FHMRUVV,
henceforth) is very similar to our own, with differences only due to details of the choice of
basis functions, a rather different approach is adopted in Ref. [303] (MSHT20, henceforth).
There, the approximation is constructed from similar theoretical constraints (small-x, large-x
coefficients and Mellin moments), but supplementing the parametrization with additional
nuisance parameters, which control the uncertainties arising from unknown N3LO terms.
However, these approximations are taken as a prior, and the nuisance parameters are fitted to
the data along with the PDF parameters. The best-fit values of the parameters determine the
posterior for the splitting function, and their uncertainties are interpreted as the final IHOU on
it. A consequence of this procedure is that the posterior can reabsorb not only N3LO corrections,
but any other missing contribution, of theoretical or experimental origin.
The comparison is presented in Fig. 4.8, for all the four singlet splitting functions. For the
MSHT20 results both prior and posterior are displayed. It should be noticed that even though
the uncertainty bands on the NNPDF4.0, FHMRUVV and MSHT20 prior are all obtained by
varying the set of basis functions, they are found using somewhat different procedures, and
their meaning is accordingly somewhat different. Indeed, for NNPDF4.0 the is constructed out
of the covariance matrix according to Eq. (4.9). For FHMRUVV is instead the band between an
upper and lower estimates which are representative of the envelope of all variations. Finally,
for the MSHT20 prior it is the variance of the probability distribution obtained assuming a
multi-Gaussian distribution of suitable nuisance parameters.
As expected, excellent agreement is found with the FHMRUVV result, for all splitting functions
and for all x, especially for the Pqg and Pqq splitting functions, for which the highest number of
Mellin moments is known. Good qualitative agreement is also found for Pgq and Pgg, although
at small x IHOUs are larger and consequently central values differ somewhat more, though
still in agreement within uncertainties. Uncertainties are qualitatively similar, except at small
x, where less exact information is available and both central values and uncertainties are less
constrained. In this region the NNPDF4.0 is generally somewhat more conservative, possibly
due to the fact that it is obtained by adding individual shifts in quadrature, rather than taking
their envelope.
Coming now to MSHT20 results, good agreement is found with the prior, except for Pgq, for
which MSHT20 shows a small-x dip accompanied by a large-x bump. The different small-x
behavior is likely due to the fact that MSHT20 do not enforce the color-charge relation Eq. (4.16)
at NLLx, with the large-x bump then following from the constraints Eq. (4.23). Also, in the
