model. However, instead of the mass matrix, there is a rank three tensor governing the couplings
of the cubic potential. A possible generalisation of the examples with quadratic potential would
be to consider the hyperdeterminant of this tensor which determines loci where certain couplings
vanish. Unfortunately, dealing with hyperdeterminants poses computational challenges, and we
can only give an incomplete analysis. Further complications come from the fact that the phase
has a unbroken continuous non-abelian gauge symmetry. The Landau-Ginzburg fibre is therefore
not an orbifold, which would be fairly straightfoward to analyse [30–32].
Instead, we have to
quotient by a continuous group. Therefore we are faced with an interacting gauge theory, which
is why we refer to this phase as strongly coupled. But there is more: In contrast to the Rødland,
Hosono-Takagi and KKSS-models, this example in addition has a non-compact Coulomb branch
in the strongly coupled phase. GLSMs that exhibit this phenomenon are called non-regular [9, 13]
and are poorly understood (see [33] for a recent analysis of a non-regular GLSM). We have not
succeeded in understanding the physics of this phase well enough to extract a geometry out of it.
Especially given the appearance of Coulomb branch, it is remarkable that the model still has a
MUM-point associated to this phase.
After our inconclusive GLSM analysis we return to the problems identified in [23, 26], where
naive attempts failed to produce an integral symplectic basis that could be related to topological
quantities of a mirror threefold. The resolution to this conundrum lies in a modification to the
prepotential identified in [4], which must be taken into account when the MUM point is mirror not
to a smooth threefold, but to the noncommutative resolution of a singular threefold.
With this in mind, we proceed to analyse the MUM point φ = ∞using the tools of [4]. Instead of
directly realising a geometry in the GLSM, we discuss in Appendix §A how to obtain topological
string free energies up to genus 4 using the approaches of [34–37] to solving the holomorphic
anomaly equations [38, 39]. The topological string free energy can be analytically continued from
the geometric phase that we understand at ζ ≫0 to the phase that we aim to better understand
at ζ ≪0. This provides enough information for us to bootstrap topological data for the smooth
deformation of whichever singular threefold is hiding at φ = ∞(or equivalently, ζ ≪0).
In
this way we recognise a familiar example, namely we anticipate that φ = ∞corresponds to a
noncommutative resolution of an intersection
WP5
111223[4, 6]
(1.3)
with 63 nodal singularities, where a non-K¨ahler resolution has Z3 torsion. Now the constant term
formula in [4] solves our monodromy problem, and allows us to proceed with the genus expansion up
to g = 11 as tabulated in Appendix §B. Beyond genus 11, there is insufficient information for us to
fix the holomorphic ambiguity of [34]. We take this successful expansion up to genus 11, including
the highly nontrivial reproduction of the constant term in the topological string free energy at each
lower genus as computed in [4], to justify the assumptions we make in using the results of [4].
4
