11
where γ is a phenomenological broadening parameter
that quantifies the pair-breaking process in the tunneling
density of states, and ∆is the superconducting gap.
The superconducting gap is a function of the system
parameters, such as the applied bias current IDC and
magnetic field. At low supercurrents IS, the pairing po-
tential is suppressed approximately as
p
1 −(IS/IC)2,
where IC is the bulk superconductor critical current [18].
Since Josephson voltage VJ varies approximately linearly
with current (see Fig. 2(b)), we can write this suppression
in terms of VJ. Similarly, the magnetic field will suppress
the superconducting gap.
Here, we neglect spin-orbit
scattering effects and write a linear Pauli suppression
due to the Zeeman field, which agrees well with the be-
havior found experimentally. All together, we can write
the induced pairing potential suppressed by current and
magnetic field as
∆= ∆ind
s
1 −
 VJ
VC
2 
1 −B
BC

,
(10)
Here ∆ind is the induced superconducting gap of InAs in
the absence of a magnetic field and supercurrent, VC is
the voltage drop across Josephson junction at the critical
current, BC is the critical in-plane magnetic field. The
gap suppression is fully characterized by two phenomeno-
logical parameters, VC and BC, which can be obtained
from the data. The parameter VC is obtained from the
experimental data at B = 0 T shown in Fig. 4(a) to
match the voltage VJ in which the superconducting gap
closes at VJ ≈550 µV. The value of BC can be found by
extrapolating the data shown in Fig. 4(i) and finding the
crossing point between P1 and P3, i.e., the Zeeman field
at which the superconducting gap closes. For the simula-
tion plots shown in Fig. 3(d) and Fig. 4(e)-(h) and (j) we
use ∆ind = 0.2 meV, VC = 2.75∆ind and BC = 650 mT.
The conductance as a function of the voltages VJ and VB
is found by adding the two contributions from the NS in-
terfaces, dIN/dVB ∝NBCS(e|VJ −VB|) + NBCS(e|VB|),
where the voltages are independent of the magnetic field
in Figs. 4(e)-(h). However, for the conductance shown
in Fig. 4(j), the experiment is carried out with fixed bias
current IDC, independent of the magnetic field. This is
achieved by varying the bias voltage VJ as a function of
the applied field; see Fig. 12. The simulated conductance
shown in Fig. 4(j) is obtained by taking VJ →VJ(B∥)
from experimental data, Fig. 12.
VIII.
WAFER CHARACTERIZATION
The heterostructure used in this work, shown schemat-
ically in Fig. 6(a), was grown by molecular beam epi-
taxy. More growth and fabrication details can be found
in Refs. [14, 27].
To characterize basic 2DEG proper-
ties, gated hall bars were fabricated and measured in a
cryogen-free dilution refrigerator at a mixing chamber
temperature of T = 10 mK. Additional details on basic
characterization measurements can be found in [14]. In
Fig. 6(b), we plot the mobility µ as a function of the
2DEG density n, where we find the peak mobility 57 000
cm2 / V at n = 0.6 × 1012 cm−2. In Fig. 6(c), the 2DEG
density is plotted as a function of the top gate voltage
VTop, gate; Peak mobility occurs at VTop, gate = −0.7 V.
To investigate the induced superconducting gap in
this wafer, we fabricated superconductor-quantum point
contact-semiconductor (SQPCN) devices designed to
perform tunneling spectroscopy in the epi-Al/InAs re-
gion. The quantum point contact gate voltage controls
the tunneling barrier potential VQPC.
The differential
conductance G is measured as a function of the source-
drain bias Vsd. When the QPC is tuned to the tunneling
regime, the differential conductance reflects the local den-
sity of states (LDOS), allowing direct observation of the
induced superconducting gap. In Fig. 7 we show tunnel-
ing spectroscopy as a function of the QPC gate voltage
VQPC. The magnitude of the induced gap, extracted from
the separation of the coherence peaks, is approximately
200 µeV.
Fabrication and measurement techniques are
consistent with those described in [14].
IX.
INTERFACE TRANSPARENCY
Fig. 8 displays I-V data (blue) at Vmiddle = −0.7 V
and a zero magnetic field on the same planar Joseph-
son junction as studied in the main text. A linear fit is
performed in the large current regime (|IDC| ≥4 µA)
to extract excess current, Iexc, and the normal state re-
sistance RN. The intercept between the linear fit and
the x-axis defines the excess current. The product of ex-
cess current and normal state resistance, eIexcRN/∆ind,
can be used to estimate the transparency of the inter-
face between the bare InAs region and the proximitized
epi-Al/InAs region [28, 29].
For a perfectly transpar-
ent interface, eIexcRN/∆ind ≈2.7 in the ballistic regime
[28, 29]. From the linear fit, eIexcRN is 564 µeV, yielding
eIexcRN/∆ind = 564 µeV/200 µeV = 2.8, which is close
to the value of 2.7 expected for a fully transparent inter-
face. This indicates high transparency between the bare
InAs and epi-Al/InAs regions of the studied Josephson
junction.
X.
REDUCTION IN CRITICAL CURRENT
ASSOCIATED WITH NORMAL CURRENT
INJECTION
Fig. 9 presents the DC voltage drop across the Joseph-
son junction, VJ, as a function of the DC voltage bias
simultaneously applied to the top and bottom tunnel
probes, VT and VB, and the DC current bias, IDC.
This measurement was performed in a Josephson junc-
tion with a superconducting lead width Ws = 600 nm,
junction length L = 1.6 µm, and normal region width
WN = 100 nm. The transmissions of the top and bottom
