Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
(a) Flow2d
(b) Smoke2d
(c) Smoke3d
FNO
UNO
UFNO
LSM
HelmFluid
PINP
Figure 4: Comparison of MSE for different models on each prediction frame.
Real（t = 40）
U-NO
U-FNO
PINP
Prediction
Error
Prediction
Error
(a) Concentration prediction and comparison
t = 40
(b) Latent physical quantities Prediction
Figure 5: (a) A comparison of the 40th frame prediction results between our method and U-NO,
U-FNO. (b) The inferred and predicted velocity and pressure fields at the 40th frame.
As shown in Table 1, PINP significantly outperforms other models, achieving a notable reduction in
error compared to the second-best model (MAE: 0.0107 vs. 0.0183). In the frame-by-frame fluid
prediction comparison (Figure 4 (a)), our model also outperforms others.
To further illustrate the effectiveness of our model, Figure 5 (a) presents several examples. Com-
pared to U-NO and U-FNO, our model predicts fluid evolution more accurately, particularly in
regions where the substance interacts with boundaries. Additionally, our model estimates velocity
and pressure fields at each prediction step, providing interpretable evidence that supports the predic-
tions and highlights its advantages in capturing complex dynamics. Figure 5 (b) shows the estimated
latent physical quantities at the 40th predicted frame. The inferred physical quantities have physical
significance, including the velocity distribution at the edges of obstacles and the pressure changes
before and after the obstacles. These quantities can serve as interpretable evidence for predictions.
In Figure 4 (a), some of the baseline models exhibit periodic oscillations in the MSE as the number
of prediction frames increases. This phenomenon is quite unusual because, under normal circum-
stances, a well-trained model should not exhibit such erratic oscillations. This might be due to rollout
training with a small number of steps. We have discussed this issue in Supplementary Material.
Smoke 2D. Smoke rises and diffuses in an enclosed space, with smoke concentration as the ob-
servable data. During training, the model predicts the next 10 frames of concentration based on the
previous 4 frames. During testing, the model need to predict 100 future frames based on the first 4
frames input, with variations in smoke source locations between the training and testing sets.
In the 2D smoke concentration prediction task, PINP significantly outperforms other models (Table
1). In the frame-by-frame prediction comparison (Figure 4 (b)), both HelmFluid and U-NO ini-
tially perform better than our model. But their prediction errors increase rapidly as the prediction
progresses. This demonstrates the temporal extrapolation capability of our model.
Figure 6 (a) presents an example showing that, compared to U-NO and HelmFluid, our model pre-
dicts the movement of smoke more accurately, particularly the shape of the smoke plume and the
direction of the smoke column. Additionally, Figure 6 (b) shows a comparison between our inferred
and predicted latent physical quantities and the ground truth in the smoke region. The velocity and
pressure fields, estimated solely from observable data, resemble the true values, effectively serving
as evidence for the interpretability of our method.
7
