54
Tools and methodology
Figure 2.9: Diagrammatic representation of the calculation of the χ2 in the NNPDF fitting framework
as a function of the values of {x(k)
n } for the different datasets. Each block indicates an independent
component. From Ref. [109].
three inputs are given by the theoretical calculation encoded in the FK-tables, the experimental
data and the set of optimal hyperparameters which determine the neural network and the
optimization algorithm. These are used to compute (and optimize) the figure of merit χ2 over
different Monte Carlo replicas. The algorithm make use of the cross validation technique to
avoid over-fitting, impose necessary constraints and, provide as output a set of best fitting PDF
grids for each replica. Finally, we can obtain the all scale PDFs running the DGLAP evolution
with the program EKO and dump the final result as a standard LHAPDF set.
More specifically, see Fig. 2.9, the χ2 computation is preformed starting from the initial scale
PDFs which are parametrized in the evolution basis (Eq. (1.61)) at a given scale Q0 and related
to the initial x-grid through the neural network. PDF parametrizations are normalized to
match theoretical constraints, such as sum rules and integrability and then convolved with the
FK-tables to match the experimental observables. Finally, the datapoints are split in training
and validation sets and we proceed to update the neural network parameters until the stopping
criteria are matched.
2.3. The NNPDF 4.0 PDF set
The previous sections summarize the key concepts of the NNPDF methodology. In principle,
these apply to a generic polarized and unpolarized PDF determination of the NNPDF family but,
the result that we shall present in Chapters 3 to 5 are build upon a specific unpolarized PDF
set, the NNPDF4.0 PDF set. In particular, in Chapters 3 and 4 we assume the NNLO set with
fitted charm to be our baseline, while in Chapter 5 we adopt the NNLO set with perturbative
charm as boundary condition. This section, by describing a concrete example of a PDF fit, aims
to bridge the introductory part of the thesis, with the chapters focused on the actual results.
NNPDF4.0 [109] has been a major release that has improved the previous NNPDF3.1 [156],
both upon kinematic coverage, including systematically LHC data, and upon fitting methodology
which has been supported by validation tools as closure tests and hyperoptimization. In Ref. [6]
this determination has been complemented with the inclusion of theoretical error, while a
photon PDF has been determined in Ref. [11] together with mixed QED⊗QCD effects.
