*1 Niigata University 
*2 Max Planck Institute for Solar System Research 
 Autoencoder-Based Detection of Anomalous Stokes V Spectra in the  
Flare-Producing Active Region 13663 Using Hinode/SP Observations 
 
Jargalmaa BATMUNKH*1, Yusuke IIDA*1, Takayoshi OBA*2 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Detecting unusual signals in observational solar spectra is crucial for understanding the features associated with 
impactful solar events, such as solar flares. However, existing spectral analysis techniques face challenges, 
particularly when relying on pre-defined, physics-based calculations to process large volumes of noisy and complex 
observational data. To address these limitations, we applied deep learning to detect anomalies in the Stokes V spectra 
from the Hinode/SP instrument. Specifically, we developed an autoencoder model for spectral compression, which 
serves as an anomaly detection method. Our model effectively identifies anomalous spectra within spectro-
polarimetric maps captured prior to the onset of the X1.3 flare on May 5, 2024, in NOAA AR 13663. These atypical 
spectral points exhibit highly complex profiles and spatially align with polarity inversion lines in magnetogram 
images, indicating their potential as sites of magnetic energy storage and possible triggers for flares. Notably, the 
detected anomalies are highly localized, making them particularly challenging to identify in magnetogram images 
using current manual methods. 
 
Keywords: Solar physics, Sunspot, Spectro-polarimetry, Deep learning, Anomaly detection 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Solar spectra provide physical parameters such as 
Doppler velocity, temperature, and magnetic fields. 
Identifying unusual signals in the spectra is significantly 
important from the perspective of observational 
discovery. The Hinode Solar Optical Telescope 
Spectral-Polarimeter (Hinode SOT/SP) mission [1,2] has 
continuously collected high-resolution, full-Stokes 
solar 
spectro-polarimetric 
data 
[3]. 
However, 
conventional methods for analyzing these spectral data 
lack flexibility because they rely on time-consuming, 
human-driven setups for statistical calculations. 
Additionally, high noise levels in the observations 
complicate data processing and often necessitate 
manual inspections. Furthermore, the rapidly increasing 
volume of observational data collected by the satellite 
further challenges the ability of conventional methods 
to examine each spectrum individually.  
Machine 
learning 
(ML) 
approaches 
have 
demonstrated increasing efficacy in handling large-
scale, complex data, making them well-suited for 
processing and analyzing solar spectral data. Previous 
studies on solar flare prediction using spectral data [4,5] 
have applied ML techniques primarily focused on 
Stokes I profiles, which contain information mainly on 
temperature and velocity, with pre-selected features for 
model input. Incorporating the other Stokes profiles (Q, 
U, and V) would enhance the analysis to improve flare 
prediction accuracy because these profiles carry 
intrinsic information strongly influenced by the 
magnetic field in the solar atmosphere. To address this, 
we propose a method specifically adapted to enable 
detecting anomalous profiles in both Stokes I and V 
spectra from Hinode/SP data, using a compression 
