S7
FIG. S4. Kondo temperature for the non-Hermitian Kondo model at weak coupling. The crossover iteration Nc between LM
and SC fixed points is extracted from NH-NRG eigenvalue flow diagrams for various JR and JI in the weak coupling (small
|J|) regime. Shown for Λ = 3, Nk = 400.
ϵd ≫D. The resulting NH Wilson chain is simply a non-interacting tight-binding chain and can be solved exactly as
per the results in the previous section. In Fig. S2 we compare NH-NRG results (red diamonds) with those of exact
diagonalization of the tight-binding model (black circle points), for the four truncation schemes discussed above. We
again give results for the rescaled many-particle eigenvalues. The results vividly show that NH-NRG works well in all
cases, just reconstructing different parts of the spectrum when different truncation schemes are used.
S.IV.
ADDITIONAL ANDERSON IMPURITY MODEL DATA
In the main text we presented NH-NRG results for the NH AIM. Here in Fig. S3 we show that by increasing the
magnitude of the imaginary part of the impurity-bath hybridization V , one first observes a quantum phase transition
from SC to LM, and then back to SC. This re-entrant Kondo behavior is predicted from the NH Kondo model (see
Fig. 1(a) of the main text), but is also accessible in the parent AIM. In both cases the transition is first-order. For
strong enough Re(V ) the LM phase disappears entirely. Thus the topology of the phase diagrams for Kondo and
Anderson models is the same (albeit that naturally the details are somewhat different). This lends further support
to the mapping between AIM and Kondo in the non-perturbative strong-coupling regime beyond Schrieffer-Wolff.
S.V.
KONDO TEMPERATURE
Here, we numerically extract the crossover iteration number Nc, characterizing the flow between LM and SC fixed
points from the RG flow diagrams of the NH-NRG. In Fig. S4, we plot the extracted Nc as a function of the complex
coupling J = JR −iJI. At weak coupling (large Nc), we find excellent agreement with the predicted form of TK
discussed in the main text. The running NRG energy scale [6] is given by E ∼DΛ−N/2 and so we identify the
Kondo ‘temperature’ TK ∼DΛ−Nc/2 in terms of the crossover iteration Nc. Our data is consistent with the relation
TK ∼De−2DJR/|J|2 which implies Nc = a + bJR/|J|2 with a an irrelevant constant that depends on the specific
definition of TK used, and b = 4/ ln Λ.
Near the phase transition between SC and LM phases, we identify in a similar way a vanishing crossover scale
Tc ∼D|J −Jc| where Jc is the coupling at the transition point. The linear scaling in the perturbation suggests a
level-crossing (first-order) quantum phase transition. From the RG flow diagrams close to the transition, we do not
observe a distinct critical fixed point in the NRG level structure.
[1] D. C. Brody, Biorthogonal quantum mechanics, Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical 47, 035305 (2013).
[2] E. Edvardsson, J. L. K. K¨onig, and M. St˚alhammar, Biorthogonal renormalization (2023), arXiv:2212.06004 [quant-ph].
