The Path to aN3LO Parton Distributions
109
Specifically, the functions Gij are chosen as follows.
1. The function Gij
1 (N) reproduces the leading unknown contribution in the large-N limit,
i.e. the unknown term in Eq. (4.18) with highest k and lowest l.
2. The functions Gij
2 (N) and Gij
3 (N) reproduce the first two leading unknown contributions
in the small-N limit, i.e. the unknown
1
(N−1)k leading poles with highest and next-to-
highest values of k, i.e. k = 2 and k = 1. For γqq,ps and γqg a subleading small-x pole
with the same power and opposite sign is added to the leading pole with respectively
k = 1, 2 and k = 1, so as to leave unaffected the respective large-x leading power behavior
Eqs. (4.20) and (4.22).
3. For γqq,ps and γqg, for which an additional five moments are known, the functions Gqj
4,...,8(N)
reproduce subleading small- and large-N terms.
Note that a larger number of basis functions is chosen to describe the small-N poles rather
than the large-N behavior because less exact information is available in the former case: so for
instance only the leading pole Eq. (4.15) is known for γ(3)
qg (N), while the first two logarithmically
enhanced large-N contributions to it Eq. (4.20) are known.
As mentioned, the functions Hij are chosen to reproduce further subleading contributions:
1. The functions Hgj
1 (N), Hgj
2 (N) in the gluon sector, where only five moments are known
exactly, are chosen to reproduce subleading small- and large-N terms, i.e. similar to
Gqj
4,...,8(N).
2. The functions Hqg
1 (N), Hqg
2 (N) are chosen as subleading and next-to-leading power large-x
terms and the remaining unknown leading small-N pole.
3. The functions Hqq, ps
1
(N), Hqq, ps
2
(N) are chosen as low-order polynomials, i.e., sub-subleading
small-x poles.
The number of basis functions is greater for anomalous dimension matrix elements for which
less exact information is available: 7 in the gluon sector (i.e. gg and gq), 6 for the qg entry
and 4 for the pure singlet entry. For the gg entry two combinations are discarded as they
lead to unstable (oscillating) results and we thus end up with eNgg = 19, eNgq = 21, eNqg = 15,
and eNqq = 6 different parametrizations. The full set of basis functions Gij and Hij is listed in
Table 4.2. We have checked that results are stable upon variation of these choices, so for instance
including a larger number of Hij functions does not lead to significantly larger uncertainties.
Upon combining the exactly known contributions with the eNij remainder terms according to
Eq. (4.3) we end up with an ensemble of eNij instances of γ(3), (k)
ij
(N) for each singlet anomalous
dimension matrix element and the final matrix elements γ(3)
ij (N) and their uncertainties σij(N)
are computed using Eqs. (4.5) and (4.9) respectively.
4.1.5. Results: aN3LO splitting functions
We now present the aN3LO splitting functions constructed following the procedure described
in Sections 4.1.1, 4.1.3 and 4.1.4. The non-singlet result, already compared in Fig. 4.1 to the
