 
2 
 
Abstract 
 The global ocean meridional overturning circulation (GMOC) is central for ocean transport and climate 
variations [1–4]. However, a comprehensive picture of its historical mean state and variability remains vague 
due to limitations in modelling and observing systems [4,5]. Incorporating observations into models offers a 
viable approach to reconstructing climate history, yet achieving coherent estimates of GMOC has proven 
challenging due to difficulties in harmonizing ocean stratification [6,7]. Here, we demonstrate that applying 
multiscale data assimilation scheme that integrates atmospheric and oceanic observations into multiple coupled 
models in a dynamically consistent way, the global ocean currents and GMOC over the past 80 years are 
retrieved. While the major historic events are printed in variability of the rebuilt GMOC, the timeseries of 
multisphere 3-dimensional physical variables representing the realistic historical evolution enable us to 
advance understanding of mechanisms of climate signal propagation cross spheres and give birth to Artificial 
Intelligence coupled big models, thus advancing the Earth science. 
Main 
Current understanding of the GMOC that serves as a critical climate component in globally redistributing 
heat, freshwater, carbon, and nutrients [1–3,8,9] remains restricted because of the lack of its direct observations, 
necessitating estimation through model-data integration via advanced data assimilation [3,10]. However, given 
limited deep-ocean observations [6], GMOC estimation is highly challenging since it requires a high-order 
coherence in ocean vertical structure (i.e. stratification) [7,10] and balance between atmospheric and oceanic 
variables. Achieving such coherence and balance necessitates both dynamic consistence of multi-spheric as 
well as multiscale interactions [11,12] as observations are assimilated into models. 
Coupled data assimilation (CDA) [13–15] incorporates Earth observational information into coupled 
model dynamics and physics to rebuild an Earth system close to the real world, aiming to produce dynamically-
consistent estimates for three-dimensional (3-D) atmospheric and oceanic motions [16,17], i.e., coupled 
reanalysis. High-quality coupled reanalysis datasets not only serve as the cornerstone for data-driven artificial 
intelligence (AI) climate studies (18,19), but also constitute an indispensable foundational resource for giving 
birth to coupled AI big models (20–22). However, CDA struggles to resolve issues related to insufficient 
multiscale interactions [23] and the negative effects of systematic model error (i.e. model bias) at deep ocean 
[24] on assimilation. These challenges lead to divergent estimates of GMOC in existing ocean reanalyses, 
where mean state and variability often differ substantially [3,25]. The CDA development over decades 
[13,16,26–30] has advancements in mitigating these issues and CDA is expected to produce useful and reliable 
