and (b) illustrate the magnetic ﬁeld dependence of Jc at 2 K and 4.2 K, respectively.
Notably, the self-ﬁeld Jc at 2 K for the as-cast and 400 ◦C annealed samples exceeds 1
MA/cm2, classifying these materials as possessing exceptionally high Jc values. Under
a ﬁxed magnetic ﬁeld, the Jc of the as-cast sample slightly increases with annealing up
to 400 ◦C, but rapidly diminishes by an order of magnitude with further increases in
annealing temperature (see Fig. 21(c)). This trend strongly correlates with the lattice
strain, which reaches its maximum at 400 ◦C, as shown in Fig.17(b). Consequently,
the larger lattice strain observed at lower annealing temperatures induces higher
Jc, similar to the behavior reported for heat-treated Ta1/6Nb2/6Hf1/6Zr1/6Ti1/6 and
(TaNb)0.7(HfZrTi)0.5. A signiﬁcant additional ﬁnding in NbScTiZr is the relationship
between Jc and the eutectic microstructure. As observed in Figs. 18(a) and (b), the
eutectic microstructure of the as-cast or 400 ◦C annealed sample is notably ﬁne. How-
ever, annealing temperatures exceeding 400 ◦C result in a systematic coarsening of
the morphology. Grain boundaries, which act as ﬂux pinning centers, are more abun-
dant in the ﬁne eutectic microstructure. This increased density of grain boundaries
between the bcc and hcp phases contributes to the higher Jc observed in the as-cast
and 400 ◦C annealed samples. In summary, the enhancement of Jc in NbScTiZr is
attributed to two key factors: the lattice strain induced by thermal annealing and the
ﬁne eutectic microstructure.
To elucidate the ﬂux pinning mechanism, the ﬂux pinning force densities (Fp) for
all samples at 2 K are calculated and plotted as a function of the external ﬁeld in
Fig. 22(a). Notably, Fp reaches nearly 10 GN/m3 at approximately 1 T in the 400
◦C annealed sample. In both the as-cast and 400 ◦C annealed samples, the maximum
Fp occurs at approximately 1 T, whereas for the 800 ◦C and 1000 ◦C annealed sam-
ples, this maximum shifts to higher magnetic ﬁelds. At the intermediate annealing
temperature of 600 ◦C, a shoulder-like feature appears around 0.5 T, suggesting a
possible crossover in the pinning mechanism between the low- and high-temperature
annealed samples. Figure 22(b) presents an analysis of the pinning mechanism using
the normalized ﬂux pinning force density (Fp/Fp,max) as a function of H/Hpeak. The
magnetic ﬁeld dependencies of Fp/Fp,max for samples subjected to high-temperature
annealing (800 ◦C and 1000 ◦C) are well described by the surface pinning model. In
these samples, the eutectic structure size is relatively large, and the lattice strain is
weak. The surface pinning model suggests that the interface between the bcc and hcp
phases predominantly serves as the pinning site. In contrast, the samples annealed at
lower temperatures exhibit substantial deviations from both the surface and point pin-
ning models, implying that an alternative mechanism or a combination of mechanisms
may be required to fully account for the ﬂux pinning behavior, which is inﬂuenced by
lattice strain and the ﬁne eutectic microstructure.
6 (Nb,Zr,Pt)67Ti33
Srivastava et al. investigated the correlation between Jc and microstructure in the mul-
tiphase (Nb,Zr,Pt)67Ti33 HEA superconductor[91]. Although this alloy is multiphase,
each impurity phase does not include α-Ti, which is present in Nb-Ti alloys. There-
fore, the eﬀect of impurity species on Jc performance can be studied over a broader
23
