NEURAL NETWORK ENHANCED POLYCONVEXIFICATION OF
ISOTROPIC ENERGY DENSITIES IN COMPUTATIONAL MECHANICS
L. BALAZI∗, T. NEUMEIER∗, M. A. PETER†, D. PETERSEIM†
Abstract. We present a neural network approach for fast evaluation of parameter-dependent
polyconvex envelopes, which are crucial in computational mechanics. Our method uses a neural
network architecture that inherently encodes polyconvexity in the main variable by combining
a feature extraction layer that computes the minors function on the signed singular value
characterisation of isotropic energy densities with a partially input convex neural network
(PICNN). Polyconvex underestimation is weakly enforced by penalisation during training, as are
the symmetries of the function. As a guiding example, we focus on a well-known isotropic damage
problem, reformulated in terms of signed singular values, and apply a splitting approach to reduce
the dimensionality of the parameter space, thereby making training more tractable. Numerical
experiments show that the networks achieve sufficient accuracy for engineering applications
while providing high compression and significant speed-up over traditional polyconvexification
schemes. Most importantly, the network adapts to varying physical or material parameters,
enabling real-time polyconvexification in large-scale computational mechanics scenarios.
Key words. Polyconvexity, input convex neural network, relaxation, isotropic damage model, parameter-dependent
AMS subject classifications. 49J45, 49J10, 74G65, 74B20, 68T07, 74A45
1. Introduction
Many relevant problems in solid mechanics seek to minimise the deformations u: Ω→Rd of a
body Ωin spatial dimension d ∈{2, 3} with respect to the energy functional
(1)
I(u) =
Z
Ω
W(∇u; ζ) dx,
where the energy density W : Rd×d × Rp →R∞:= R ∪{∞} is defined over a suitable class
of admissible functions. The vector ζ ∈Rp represents spatially varying parameters, including
material history, damage evolution or phase information. In many established engineering models,
the density W is either inherently nonconvex or develops nonconvexity as its parameters evolve, as
in damage or phase transition models. Such nonconvexity not only poses significant mathematical
challenges, including the potential non-existence of minimisers, but also leads to serious problems
in numerical simulation, such as mesh dependence and reduced robustness.
Relaxing W via (semi-)convexification identifies bounds of infimising sequences for the original
nonconvex problem, yielding robust and mesh insensitive numerical results.
As shown in
[Bal76, Bal77, Bal02], polyconvexity is well suited for nonlinear elasticity. However, an analytical
polyconvex envelope W pc is often not available, so computational relaxation methods are
required. Conventional approaches include optimisation-based and computational geometry
methods, such as relaxation algorithms approximating the rank-one convex hull [Dol99, DW00,
Bar04, BKN+24, KNP+24, KNM+22, CD18] or dedicated algorithms for polyconvex envelopes
∗Institute of Mathematics, University of Augsburg, Universit¨atsstr. 12a, 86159 Augsburg,
Germany
† Institute of Mathematics & Centre for Advanced Analytics and Predictive Sciences (CAAPS),
University of Augsburg, Universit¨atsstr. 12a, 86159 Augsburg, Germany
E-mail address: {loic.balazi, timo.neumeier, malte.peter, daniel.peterseim}@uni-a.de.
Date: April 10, 2025.
The authors gratefully acknowledge funding from the German Research Foundation (DFG) within the Priority
Programme 2256 Variational Methods for Predicting Complex Phenomena in Engineering Structures and Materials
(project number 441154176, reference IDs PE1464/7-2 and PE2143/5-2). Furthermore, we would like to thank the
Bavarian State Ministry of Science and the Arts for funding the Augsburg AI Production Network as part of the
High-Tech Agenda Plus.
1
arXiv:2504.06425v1  [math.NA]  8 Apr 2025
