Chapter 5.
NNLO polarized PDFs with MHOU
This chapter is based my result presented in Refs. [4]. In this study my contribution has focused on
the development of the theoretical framework needed to extract polarized PDFs and to the data
implementation.
The interest in helicity dependent (polarized henceforth) PDFs is mainly related to the fact that
their lowest moments are proportional to the proton axial currents, which express the fraction
of proton spin carried by quarks and gluons [329]. In spite of tremendous experimental and
theoretical investigations over the past thirty years, knowledge of polarized PDFs remains limited
in comparison to their unpolarized counterparts, in particular concerning the distributions
of sea quarks and gluons. This fact hinders the fundamental understanding of proton spin
decomposition in the framework of QCD [330].
The Electron-Ion Collider (EIC) [229, 230], expected to start its operations in the 2030s, is
designed to revolutionize this state of affairs. The EIC will have the possibility to collide
polarized proton and lepton beams, so to measure the polarized inclusive and semi-inclusive
DIS structure functions, to which polarized PDFs are related through factorization theorem [48].
These measurements are forecast to cover an unprecedented range of proton momentum
fraction x and virtuality Q2, and to attain percent-level precision. These facts call for a matching
accuracy of the corresponding theoretical predictions, which require in turn an improvement in
the accuracy of perturbative computations and of polarized PDF determinations.
As a further step forward into this context, in this paper we present NNPDFPOL2.0, a new
determination of the proton polarized PDFs based on the NNPDF methodology (cf. Chapter 2).
This determination improves the previous one, NNPDFPOL1.1 [331], in three respects, which
set it apart from [332, 333].
1. We extend the range of fitted datasets. We specifically consider measurements of polar-
ized inclusive lepton-nucleon DIS, including legacy measurements from HERMES and
COMPASS, and measurements of W-boson, single-inclusive jet, and dijet production from
STAR.
2. We incorporate higher-order corrections in PDF evolution and in the hard cross-sections,
whenever available, up to NNLO in the strong coupling. We likewise incorporate heavy
quark mass corrections in the analysis of polarized inclusive DIS structure functions, ac-
cording to the FONLL scheme implemented in [12, 5]. We include uncertainties due
to QCD missing higher-order corrections (MHOUs) by means of the methodology devel-
147
