SLAC-PUB-250331, ZU-TH 24/25
Three-Loop QCD corrections to the production of a Higgs boson and a Jet
Xiang Chen,1, ∗Xin Guan,2, † and Bernhard Mistlberger,2, ‡
1Physik-Institut, Universit¨at Z¨urich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 Z¨urich, Switzerland
2SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94039, USA
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
We compute three-loop QCD corrections to the scattering amplitude of a Higgs boson and three
partons interfered with its tree level counterpart. Specifically, we derive our results in the generalized
leading color limit. Our results are represented in terms of so-called multiple polylogarithms and
thus ready for use in phenomenological predictions. We provide the three-loop amplitudes necessary
to compute the production cross section of a Higgs boson and a hadronic jet at hadron colliders and
the decay probability of a Higgs boson to three hadronic jets at lepton colliders.
INTRODUCTION
The discovery of the Higgs boson by the ATLAS [1]
and CMS [2] experiment at the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC) ushered in a new era of exploration of fundamental
forces. For the first time we gained experimental access
to probe the interactions of all fundamental particles of
the Standard Model and thus a brand new opportunity to
test the foundations of our understanding of nature. To-
day, we explore the rich implications of the Higgs boson
by performing high precision comparison of experimen-
tal data with theoretical predictions for the outcome of
LHC scattering experiments. The large data sets already
collected by the LHC and in particular the advent of the
upcoming High-Luminosity Phase [3] enable a precision
phenomenology program testing the Standard Model and
searching for new physics beyond this paradigm.
The
high experimental precision must be matched by equally
precise theoretical predictions based on the cutting edge
of our understanding of Quantum Field Theory (QFT).
In this Letter, we achieve a new milestone of precision
calculations at the core of such predictions.
Precision computations for the LHC are performed ex-
ploiting the factorization of high energetic scattering pro-
cesses of the QCD partons - the constituents of the two
scattering protons - and the low-energy dynamics of the
individual protons. Within this framework, we compute
scattering cross sections based on the first principle La-
grangian of the Standard Model or other theories of na-
ture using perturbative QFT. Precision is achieved by
computing cross sections to higher and higher power in
an expansion in coupling constants. The largest of all
coupling constants at LHC energies is the coupling of the
strong force αS. Achieving high order results in the ex-
pansion in powers of αS is a formidable task challenging
our technical and theoretical abilities of using QFT.
An overwhelming number of about ninety percent of all
Higgs bosons at the LHC are produced via the gluon fu-
sion mechanism. This mechanism describes the fusion of
two initial state gluons via a virtual top-quark loop which
in turn radiates the Higgs boson. Perturbative QCD cor-
rections for this production mechnism are notoriously
FIG. 1: Example diagram for the leading-color,
three-loop scattering amplitude of three gluons and a
Higgs boson.
large and consequently very high order predictions are
required to rival experimental precision. A powerful ap-
proach is the construction of an effective field theory [4–7]
integrating out the degrees of freedom of the top quark
yielding the first term in an expansion in inverse pow-
ers of the large top quark mass. This approach reduces
the top-quark loop at Born level to a point-like interac-
tion coupling the Higgs field H directly to the gluon field
strength Gµν
a
via a Wilson coefficient [8–12] C0.
Leff = LSM,5 −C0
4 HGµν
a Ga,µν.
(1)
The application of this effective field theory has en-
abled frontier computations of the inclusive Higgs pro-
duction cross section through next-to-next-to-next-to-
leading order (N3LO) in QCD perturbation theory [13–
18] and predictions including the massive top quark were
obtained already through next-to-next-to-leading order
(NNLO) [19–23]. Higgs phenomenology is however much
richer than only inclusive rates and a vast range of ob-
servables differential in the decay products of the Higgs
boson allow us to study this new particle in great de-
tail. The advances in our understanding of differential
cross section of the past two decades enabled the compu-
tation of fully differential predictions for the production
of a Higgs boson through N3LO in QCD perturbation
theory [24–30]. A leap in our ability to perform differen-
tial computations with hadronic jets occurred about one
decade ago [31–38] leading to fully differential predic-
tions of the gluon fusion production of a Higgs boson in
association with a jet at NNLO [39–42]. The additional
final state jet is a requirement for any observable depen-
arXiv:2504.06490v1  [hep-ph]  8 Apr 2025
