where inverse temperature β ≥0 controls the accuracy of choosing the wider side. The limit of high temperature,
β = 0, indicates a complete randomness, and β →∞represents a deterministic choice for the one with the
wider angle. Once the next roles among OFs are determined, the initial conditions for their positions are fixed.
For example, Passer of the (n + 1)-th pass scene must start from the position where the previous Receiver,
who is the same individual, stood at the last moment in the n-th pass scene. To take into account the drastic
reorientation of players, initial velocities are set to zero for all players, i.e. ⃗vi(tn+1 = 0) = ⃗0. In the model,
the destination of the (n + 1)-th pass ⃗dn+1
B
is determined before the (n + 1)-th pass scene starts. Although the
ball runs generally towards Receiver, its direction can deviate either intentionally or by mistake. Therefore,
similarly to the pervious work [39], ⃗dn+1
B
is calculated by rotating the vector ⃗x∗
R −⃗x∗
P, which directs from Passer
to Receiver of the n-th pass at the moment of the transition, around ⃗x∗
P by a random angle of θn drawn from
a normal distribution N(0, σ2). The DF’s motion mode depends stochastically on the previous one. With the
probability of q, which is a model parameter, DF employs the same motion mode as in the previous pass scene.
An extreme case of q = 0 means that the DF’s motion mode alternates between ‘wait’ and ‘chase’, while q = 1
indicates that DF keep choosing the same mode throughout a game.
During each pass scene, dynamics are governed by the ODEs, and therefore dynamics are deterministic. The
transition algorithm is a stochastic mapping from the n-th to (n + 1)-th pass scene. Hence, it may be possible
to regard our model as a Markov process by considering each pass scene to be a single ‘state’. This class of
models differs from other well-known classes of stochastic models such as stochastic differential equations or
random ODEs. It may be beneficial to elaborate on mathematical properties of this class of models, especially
in relation to development of data assimilation methodologies.
Numerical methods and parameters
Table 1 lists the model parameters. Simulations and analyses in this study were performed with Julia. We
utilised DifferentialEquations.jl package [56] for the numerical integration of the ODE system [eq. (1)].
Generating simulated dataset
To prepare Fig. 3 and perform the sensitivity analysis, we generated a dataset composing of randomly sampled
values of model parameters, the average number of passes, and the average OF area. Among the parameters
listed in table 1, we fixed the values of L, Lbuff, and Lout. For each of the other 13 model parameters, a value
was drawn from a uniform distribution whose range is indicated in table 1. We determined the value ranges
in consideration of the previous study [39] and plausibility. For each set of parameter values, 500 games were
simulated. We recorded the number of passes and the temporal average of OF area for every game, and then
took ensemble average over 500 trials to obtain the average number of passes and the temporal and ensemble
average of OF area, which we simply denote as the average OF area, for each set of parameter values. This
procedure was repeated to obtain data for 15, 000 sets of parameter values. The simulated dataset is visually
summarized in Supplementary Figure S1.
A small portion of parameter values induced unrealistic results in terms of the average number of passes and
the average OF area. Since our major concern was on influences of model parameters on the outcomes, not on
conditions for the model to work properly in the first place, we excluded unreasonable data points according to
the following criteria. Firstly, the average number of passes must not be less than 1. In addition, the average
OF area must be less than 18 m2, which is the area of the largest triangle within the court. Moreover, the
number of games terminated due to the ball-out event must not be more than 400 out of 500 trials. As a result,
895 samples were excluded, leaving 14, 105 samples for further analyses. The dataset after the preprocessing is
visually summarised in Supplementary Figure S2.
Sensitivity analysis
Using the preprocessed dataset, we performed multivariate quadratic regression to examine effects of parameters
that were varied. The regression model was
yi = ai +
13
X
k=1
 
bkx(k)
i
+ ck
h
x(k)
i
i2
+
X
l>k
dkl
h
x(k)
i
· x(l)
i
i!
+ ϵi,
(9)
where i is the index of sets of parameters, yi is the average number of passes, x(k)
i
is the standardised value of the
k-th parameter whose mean is 0 and variance is 1, and ϵi is the residual following a normal distribution. On the
right-hand side, ai denotes the intercept, bk and ck represent the linear and square effects of the k-th parameter,
respectively, and dkl indicates the interaction effect between the k-th and l-th parameters. In Fig. 4, we plotted
14
