For this molecular system, we employed a simple informed resetting protocol: no reset-
ting for RMSD values smaller than some threshold, and Poisson resetting at some ﬁnite
rate otherwise. In practice, however, the resetting rate can be any function of the spatial
and momenta coordinates or some low-dimensional CV space. In Ref.,76 we showed that a
neural network-based resetting protocol relying on three CVs (the RMSD, the radius of gyra-
tion, and the end-to-end distance) could provide greater speedups than the one-dimensional
threshold-based protocol employed in Ref.41 Moreover, we found neural network-based re-
setting protocols that accelerate transitions from the unfolded state to the native state – a
process for which one-dimensional thresholds along the RMSD did not improve over standard
resetting. This proves that incorporating additional information into the resetting scheme
can provide further acceleration. But, as is common in CV-based methods, the performance
of ISR depends on the correct utilization of the available information. When prior knowl-
edge is lacking, one may better begin by sampling trajectories with standard SR. Insights
from those trajectories can later be used to design informed resetting protocols for additional
sampling with improved eﬃciency.
5
Kinetics inference
We now discuss another major goal of enhanced sampling: inferring the unbiased kinetics
from accelerated simulations. We ﬁrst consider the inference of the MFPT. We overview two
approaches designed for SR as a standalone method, and a suitable approach when incorpo-
rating SR in MetaD simulations. The latter is also appropriate for improving the eﬃciency
of kinetics inference from MetaD simulations without resetting.42 Finally, we discuss the
inference of kinetic properties other than the MFPT, focusing on direct transit times.
5.1
Inference of the MFPT for SR as a standalone method
In the ﬁrst approach, we obtain the MFPT under resetting at diﬀerent rates r and ﬁt a
function to ⟨τ⟩r. The estimation of the unbiased MFPT is simply the value of the ﬁtted
function at r = 0. Diﬀerent techniques can be employed for the ﬁt. In Ref.,5 we obtained ⟨τ⟩r
at nine equally-spaced grid points and ﬁtted them with a fourth-order Taylor series, using
ﬁnite-diﬀerence methods to evaluate the derivatives. Crucially, performing many simulations
to obtain the MFPT at various rates would have been prohibitive. Luckily, instead, we only
need to perform simulations at a single resetting rate r∗and obtain the MFPT at higher
rates as explained in Section 3.
This inference procedure is illustrated in Figure 5(a): simulations with resetting rate
r∗directly provide ⟨τ⟩r∗(orange star), and the FPT distribution under resetting rate r∗,
fr∗(τ). With fr∗(τ) at hand, the MFPT under r > r∗is predicted through Equations 4 or 6
(green circles). A function is ﬁtted (blue dashed line) and extrapolated to r →0 to obtain
the unbiased MFPT, ⟨τ⟩0 (pink rhombus). We note that this approach is also applicable to
simulations with ISR as a standalone method.41
The second approach is suited for sharp resetting at constant time intervals T ∗. We ﬁrst
14
