A Scalable Automatic Model Generation Tool for Cyber-Physical Network Topologies and Data Flows for Large-Scale
Synthetic Power Grid Models
XXX:13
This metric is applied for all the routers in our network because distance measured in the
number of hops is usually applied to count the number of routers in the path between
source and destination nodes. In terms of network performance such as delays, it is best
practice to reduce the number of hops. For network reliability and cybersecurity resilience,
it is desirable to have alternate paths to reach the destination.
(2) Network Diameter (ğ‘‘) is the greatest distance in number of hops between two nodes. This
metric finds the shortest paths between all pairs of distinct nodes and selects the maximum
value, as in Eq. 2.
ğ‘‘= ğ‘šğ‘ğ‘¥[ğ‘‘(ğ‘¥,ğ‘¦)]|ğ‘¥= 1, 2, ...,ğ‘›,ğ‘¦= 1, 2, ...,ğ‘›,ğ‘¥â‰ ğ‘¦
(2)
This metric is also applied only to routers. Network diameter indicates the longest path in
the WAN, which is also a performance metric.
(3) Node Degree metric quantifies the number of connections each node has, with a lower
node degree being preferable because it indicates a node is connected to a smaller amount
of links. In communication networks for power systems, a lower node degree means a less
critical node. On the other hand, a high node degree means potential bottlenecks or Points
of Failure. For example, if a critical router is the target of a cyber attack, such as a Denial
of Service (DoS), the communication between several substations and control center will
be impacted. A DoS can impede traffic flow between nodes, by either slowing down the
transmission of packets or stopping the traffic. In order to evaluate and compare the network
efficiency and resilience of different WAN topologies, the average, minimum, and maximum
node degrees of routers are documented across the three use cases and topologies.
(4) Number of Links (ğ‘š) counts the number of links for all nodes in the generated network
models. It is an essential metric because increasing the number of network links reduces path
length, latency, and congestion. Yet, this expansion increases infrastructure costs and creates
higher node degrees. Achieving an optimal link count requires balancing performance gains
with cost and node connections.
(5) Number of Nodes (ğ‘›) counts all the nodes in all the Local Area Networks in NetworkX, or
internal nodes, such as the total number of switches, routers, hosts, and so on. This metric
gives us an idea of the size of our network, i.e., in terms of the number of network assets it
has.
(6) Network Density (ğ·) refers to the number of linksğ‘šrelative to the total number of possible
links between all ğ‘›nodes. A denser network indicates there are more connections among
nodes. This metric takes into consideration all the nodes and links the model generates.
Assuming the network is an undirected graph, Eq. 3 is used to calculate the network density.
ğ·=
2ğ‘š
ğ‘›(ğ‘›âˆ’1)
(3)
(7) Generation Time shows the time it takes the algorithm to generate the CPPS model. This
time is measured in three pieces of the code: the JSON generation program, the NetworkX
visualization program, and the file that checks the metrics. This is collected while the code
runs for different test cases to verify how the generation time increases with the size of
the power system test case. It is plotted in Fig. 7 to help estimate the time it would take for
other test cases of different sizes to run.
(8) ACL Count quantifies the number of access control lists (ACLs) configured within the
network. This count is taken for each high-level node, providing insight into the complexity
of data flows and the configuration of firewalls, as depicted in Fig. 4.
