3
|0⟩
|0⟩
X
RX(θ)
RZ(θ)
RY (θ)
σz
RX(θ)
RZ(θ)
RY (θ)
Basis Encoding
Variational Component
FIG. 1. The Variational Quantum Classifier (VQC) with an example input state of |10⟩and rotational parameter θ.
where c and s are short-hand notations for cos(θ) and
sin(θ), the logical states are subscripted with L and the
ancilla states are subscripted with aj.
There are two
ancilla states (a1, a2) invoked because two rotations have
occurred. By the end of a logical operation, the ancilla
qubits in each term reflect the logical state within the
same term.
The steps we used to logically perform the double RY
and RX gates are outlined below:
1. New ancilla initiation: If no rotations have been
performed in previous steps, initiate two new an-
cilla qubits to match the initial input logical state
to the circuit. For example, if the initial input log-
ical state is |01⟩L, then the two new ancilla qubits,
aj and aj+1, should respectively be in the states |0⟩
and |1⟩. If double rotations have been performed
in previous steps, invoke the new ancilla qubits in
the |0⟩state, then match the new ancilla states to
the previous two ancilla states that were invoked
to perform the last double rotation, by applying
CNOT gates to the new ancilla qubits controlled
by the two previous ancilla qubits.
2. Change previous ancilla states: If double rota-
tions have been performed in previous steps, apply
CNOT gates to each of the previously invoked an-
cilla qubits, controlled by the new ancilla qubits.
For example, for newly invoked ancilla qubits aj
and aj+1, we apply CNOT gates to any previous
ancillas aj−2, aj−4, ..., a0 and aj−1, aj−3, ..., a1
controlled by aj and aj+1 respectively.
3. Change logical state:
Apply CNOT gates to
physical qubits q1 and q3 controlled by newly ini-
tiated ancilla aj, and CNOT gates to q2 and q3
controlled by newly initiated ancilla aj+1.
4. Apply rotation gate: Apply the relevant rota-
tion gates to each of the 2 ancilla qubits.
5. Undo logical state change: Apply the same set
of CNOT operations targeting the physical qubits
and controlled by the 2 ancilla qubits as was per-
formed in Step 3.
6. Undo previous ancilla state change: Apply the
same set of CNOT operations as applied in Step 2,
targeting the ancilla qubits invoked for previous ro-
tations, and controlled by the newest ancilla states.
The steps for implementing the RZ gates are much
simpler and do not require as many CNOT gates be-
tween physical and ancilla qubits. We only match the
newly introduced ancilla qubits to the previous two an-
cilla qubits, then apply the RZ rotation gate to each new
ancilla qubit. In Figure 2, we show the full set of oper-
ations we used to perform the logical equivalent of the
double RX, RZ and RY gates shown in Figure 1. For the
logical CNOT gate, we applied additional CNOT gates
after the SWAP gate to ensure matching between the an-
cilla and logical states in each term of the full quantum
state of the system.
The above steps can also be used to logically imple-
ment single qubit rotations, in which case we only need
to introduce one ancilla qubit each time. Logically ro-
tating a logical qubit generally requires initiating a new
ancilla qubit, transforming the states of the ancillas that
were used to logically rotate the qubit in previous steps,
transforming the qubit state itself, followed by applying
the relevant rotation gate to the newly initiated ancilla,
and finally re-applying the same operations to the an-
cillas and logical qubit that were applied before the ro-
tation. This approach to logically performing rotation
gates can be generalised to circuits with any number of
rotation gates.
The logical circuit does not allow the direct Z basis
measurement of the first logical qubit, so we conducted
the logical equivalent by measuring the probability dis-
tribution across the 16 states spanned by the four phys-
ical qubits, in the Z basis. Using these probabilities, we
calculated the equivalent probability distribution for the
four logical 2-qubit states, from which we determined the
expectation value of the Z basis measurement of the first
logical qubit.
B.
Noise and Error models
We considered two types of incoherent noise that can
occur in a quantum circuit: probabilistic gate noise and
environmental noise. Gate noise can arise from imper-
fections in hardware or control signals, qubit cross-talk
during multi-qubit operations, and otherwise non-ideal
behaviour of the qubit system whenever a gate is imple-
mented. Environmental noise typically consists of noise
that is external to the qubit system seeping in, including
stray electromagnetic (EM) fields, photons, and mechani-
