cross sections that enter into the PDF fits, hence the need for the nuisance parameters described
above. Most of the discrimination power for the global PDF fits arises from differential data
from processes such as DIS, DY, inclusive jet and t¯t production. Their full use in N3LO PDF fits
requires the availability of differential predictions at that level. Such predictions exist for Drell–
Yan but are very CPU-intensive (see the discussion in the Drell–Yan section of the wishlist) and
thus not yet at a stage to enable their use in global PDF analyses. It will be some time before
such differential predictions are available at N3LO for inclusive jet and t¯t production, and even
then the computing resources needed may be prohibitive.
Using information from this list, there have been two approximate N3LO PDF fits, first
by MSHT [23] and second by NNPDF [27]. The Higgs Cross Section Working group has allotted
a theory uncertainty for the use of NNLO PDFs with N3LO matrix elements of the order of
one percent. Nominally, the determination of PDFs at this (approximate) order would allow
the retirement of the uncertainty for those cross sections known to N3LO due to the use of
NNLO PDFs; however, as mentioned earlier, very little information is known about the relevant
hadronic cross sections at that order. In addition, the differences between the gluon distributions
for the two approximate N3LO PDFs may result in an uncertainty for the ggF Higgs boson cross
section larger than that observed at the previous order (and much larger than observed for the
similar q¯q PDF luminosity comparison), primarily due to differing impacts from the NNLO to
approximate N3LO transition.
A combination of the two N3LO PDFs has been carried out, named MSHT20xNNPDF40 [28].
In Figure 1, the gg PDF luminosity (left) and the q¯q PDF luminosity (right) at 13.6 TeV is shown
for MSHT20 and NNPDF4.0 and MSHT20xNNPDF40 for approximate N3LO. There are size-
able differences in the gg PDF luminosity not observed in the q¯q PDF luminosity. Some of
the differences in the gg PDF luminosities may build upon existing variations in analysis and
technique already existing at NNLO. This can be tested by taking the ratio of the approximate
N3LO gg and q¯q PDF luminosities to the corresponding NNLO PDF luminosities, separately for
MSHT20 and NNPDF4.0, and then to take the ratio of the two ratios, as shown in Figure 2. This
explicitly examines differences arising from the treatment of the approximate N3LO information.
At the Higgs boson mass, there is a deviation from unity of the ratio of ratios of almost 4%;
the ratio of ratios for the q¯q luminosities is of the order of a percent or less. The benchmarking
exercise referred to earlier [24], demonstrated that, when using a common toy PDF, both the
MSHT and NNPDF approaches produce similar evolution results, indicating that the evolution
at N3LO does not seem to be the cause of the observed differences.
Fig. 1: A comparison of the aN3LO PDF luminosities for MSHT20 and NNPDF4.0 to their
combination (aN3LOHXSWG) for gg (left) and q¯q (right).
It will be some time before the N3LO information for the other processes becomes avail-
able, as discussed above, but this may indicate the need for some additional understand-
6
