Figure 14: Figure from [296]. Geometry formulation of the CC attack.
One implication of this bound is that all PPT states satisfy the CHSH inequality, resulting in a zero device-
independent key rate for CHSH-based protocols. This, in turn, proves the revised Peres conjecture for
such protocols. It is important to note that while there exist bound entangled states from which a private
key can be distilled in device-dependent protocols, these states are useless for DI-QKD in CHSH-based
protocols. Furthermore, for CHSH-based protocols, they show that the convex hull of above-mentioned
bounds is a tighter upper bound on the device-independent key rates.
Upper bounds based on convex-combination attacks. Farkas et al.
[70] studied the problem of upper
bounding the key rate of a DI-QKD problem by applying a convex combination attak.
In a convex
combination attack, Eve distributes local deterministic correlations with certain probabilities that give
rise to a local correlation pL
AB(a, b|x, y) with overall probability qL, and a nonlocal quantum correlation
pNL
AB(a, b|x, y) with probability 1 −qL. Eventually, the observed correlation of Alice and Bob takes the
form
pAB(x, y) = qLpL
AB(a, b|x, y) + (1 −qL)pNL
AB(a, b|x, y),
(147)
Since Alice and Bob announce their inputs for every round, Eve knows their outcomes in all rounds in
which she distributes a local correlation, so to gain more information about key, she should maximize
qL for the given observed correlation (147). By denoting e as the classical variable representing Eve’s
knowledge which e = (a, b) when a local correlation was distributed and e =? for the cases of nonlocal
correlations was distributed. The corresponding joint probability of (147) distribution among Alice, Bob,
and Eve is then written as
pABE(x, y, e) = qLpL
AB(a, b|x, y)δe,(a,b) + (1 −qL)pNL
AB(a, b|x, y)δe,?,
(148)
where δ is the Kronecker delta. Then, the following bound on the key rate can be obtained
r ≤
X
x,y
pxyIxy(A : B ↓E),
(149)
where pxy is the probability of Alice and Bob choosing the settings x and y and Ixy(A : B ↓E) is the
intrinsic information of the distribution (148) which is defined as I(A, B ↓E) = minE→F I(A : B|F)
where I(A : B|F) is the conditional mutual information and the minimization is taken over all stochastic
maps E →F that map the variable E to a new variable F such that the alphabet size of F is at most
that of E.
The upper bound (149) resulted from a well-established result in classical cryptography that the asymp-
totic rate extractable from a distribution pABE(a, b, f) is bounded by intrinsic information [295].
Additionally, Farkas et al. [70] investigate the problem by applying the upper bound on a standard pro-
tocol implemented on a two-qubit Werner state with visibility v using an arbitrary number of projective
measurements. They showed that for a range of visibilities for which the Werner state is nonlocal the
upper bound on the key rate is zero. This means that nonlocal quantum states exist that can not be
used for standard DI-QKD with projective measurements. Therefore, the bell nonlocality is generally
insufficient for the security of standard device-independent quantum key distribution protocols.
To find the maximum value of qL in (147), Lukanowski et al. [296] provided a geometric interpretation of
the CC attack, which describes its optimization in terms of a linear program for determining the tightest
upper bound on the key rate. A given correlation p(a, b|x, y) represents a point within the probability
51
