Evidence for Intrinsic charm in the proton
77
fraction left as a free parameter. A comparison between our result and Ref. [241] is available in
[1, App. F].
We emphasize that in our analysis the charm PDF is entirely determined by the experimental data
included in the PDF determination. The data with the most impact on charm are from recently
measured LHC processes, which are both accurate and precise. Since these measurements are
made at high scales, the corresponding hard cross-sections can be reliably computed in QCD
perturbation theory.
3.2.3. The charm momentum fraction
The fraction of the proton momentum carried by charm quarks is given by
[c] =
Z 1
0
dx xc+(x, Q2) .
(3.3)
Model predictions, as mentioned, are typically provided up to an overall normalization, which
in turn determines the charm momentum fraction. Consequently, the momentum fraction is
often cited as a characteristic parameter of intrinsic charm. It should however be borne in mind
that, even in the absence of intrinsic charm, this charm momentum fraction is nonzero due to
the perturbative contribution.
In Table 3.1 we indicate the values of the charm momentum fraction in the 3FNS for our default
charm determination and in the 4FNS (at Q = 1.65 GeV) both for the default result and for
perturbative charm PDF. We provide results for three different values of the charm mass mc and
indicate separately the PDF and the MHO uncertainties. The 3FNS result is scale-independent, it
corresponds to the momentum fraction carried by intrinsic charm, and it vanishes identically by
assumption in the perturbative charm case. The 4FNS result corresponds to the scale-dependent
momentum fraction that combines the intrinsic and perturbative contribution, while of course
it contains only the perturbative contribution in the case of perturbative charm. As discussed
in Section 3.1.2, the large uncertainty associated to higher order corrections to the matching
conditions affects the 3FNS result (intrinsic charm) in the default case, in which the charm PDF
is determined from data in the 4FNS scheme, while it affects the 4FNS result for perturbative
charm, that is determined assuming the vanishing of the 3FNS result.
For our default determination, the charm momentum fraction in the 4FNS at low scale differs
from zero at the 3σ level. However, it is not possible to tell whether this is of perturbative
or intrinsic origin, because, due to the large MHOU in the matching condition, the intrinsic
(3FNS) charm momentum fraction is compatible with zero. This large uncertainty is entirely
due to the small x <∼0.2 region, see Fig. 3.7 (right). Accordingly, for perturbative charm the
low-scale 4FNS momentum fraction is compatible with zero. Consistently with the results of
Section 3.1.3, the 4FNS result is essentially independent of the value of the charm mass, but it
becomes strongly dependent on it if one assumes perturbative charm.
