4
FIG. 2: Weighted-average differential PSD of the magnetic
fields, stacked over all eight-hour data segments with noise-
based weights and subtracted the smooth spectrum, ˆs(fa)
in blue. The standard deviation is depicted in orange. The
axion signal candidates (SNR> 3) are marked by diamonds
in cyan. The inset highlights the signal candidate with the
highest SNR (13.342).
quencies (±1000 bins). The resultant PSD is shown
in Fig. 2.
The search for the axion-induced signal consists of
evaluating the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) for each fre-
quency bin and selecting the candidates that exceed
a certain threshold.
The standard deviation of the
weighted-average differential PSD is calculated from
the surrounding ±200 bins, excluding the three bins
around f = fa, as shown by the orange curve in Fig. 2.
We regard this as noise amplitude to estimate the SNR
for the axion signal at fa, and evaluate the SNR from
0.01 Hz, below which the number of samples is insuf-
ficient, to 44 Hz, above which the estimated spectrum
becomes less reliable because it is close to the Nyquist
frequency.
We then identify signal candidates by requiring (i)
SNR > 2 in all-year data, (ii) SNR in each year’s
data larger than the SNR threshold (2 in our case)
weighted by the sum of the inverse of noise variances in
the year, ensuring persistence over the entire observa-
tion period, and (iii) that their frequencies are at least
10−3 Hz away from multiples of 0.05 Hz.
The third
condition is for excluding likely artificial line noises.
We found 342 candidates (see also [28] for signal can-
didates with different SNR thresholds). These candi-
dates appear in a single frequency bin, consistent with
the sharpness of an axion signal. There are 1 candidate
with significant SNR (13.342) and 31 candidates with
SNR> 5 for the all-year data. In Fig. 2, representa-
tive candidates of SNR> 3 are depicted by cyan-filled
diamonds. Lacking enough information to veto them,
we retain them as potential axion signal candidates.
We note that below 1 Hz, Ref.
[18] reported three
signal candidates with modest significance using Su-
perMAG 1-second sampling data. Although our anal-
ysis identified five candidates with SNR> 2, none of
them matched those reported in Ref. [18]. Given that
our measurement sensitivity is comparable to theirs2,
the signal candidates identified below 1 Hz in both
analyzes can be ruled out.
Apart from the signal candidates mentioned above,
no axion-like signal was found. We can therefore place
upper limits on the axion coupling strength in the fre-
quency range of 0.43 −43.9 Hz. The 95% C. L. up-
per limit on the axion-photon coupling strength is ob-
tained from
Z ˆsobs(ma)
−∞
dˆs p[ˆs(ma)|gaγ] = 0.05 .
(4)
The ˆsobs is the observed value of the weighted-average
differential PSD, which can be converted to the ax-
ion coupling strength by equating it with ⟨ˆsa(ma)⟩≡
2Tseg|Ba(ma)|2 (see Ref. [28] for the derivation) and
using the theoretical curve in the bottom panel of
Fig. 1.
The p[ˆs(ma)|gaγ] is the probability density
distribution of the weighted-average differential PSD
in the presence of axions, constructed from data ˆs of
the surrounding ±200 bins (excluding the three bins
around f = fa) and shifted by the axion signal ˆsa at
f = fa.
Figure 3 shows the upper limit on the axion cou-
pling we obtained (in blue), along with other obser-
vation bounds. Tightest limit is obtained around an
axion mass of 3×10−14 eV, which is improved by about
two orders of magnitude compared to the CAST result
[19, 20], and exceeds the limit from astrophysical X-ray
observations by Chandra [41–43]. In the lower mass
range, our constraint is weakened because of fixing
the data segment size to 8 hrs and using broader fre-
quency resolution, irrespective of the coherence time
of axions. In the higher mass range above 10−14 eV,
the constraint is also weakened due to the suppression
of the magnetic field’s response to axions.
Conclusions and outlook. In this Letter, we prop-
erly accounted for atmospheric conductivity to predict
terrestrial EM waves induced by coherently oscillat-
ing axions, enabling a search for axion DM signals in
public magnetic field data. We set the most stringent
direct upper bound on the axion-photon coupling pa-
rameter at 10−15 eV ≲ma ≲10−13 eV, and identify
potential signal candidates with significant SNR for
further study.
Follow-up ground-based experiments
like DANCE [46] or X-ray observations by Athena
[47] will be crucial to verify or rule out these can-
didates.
While we focus on axions as a representa-
tive ultralight DM, our methodology applies to other
DM coupled to EM fields, such as dark photon DM
2 To be precise, our sensitivity is slightly worse than theirs for
the candidate at 0.2630Hz identified by Ref. [18].
