8
Besides, we can deduce the nature of vortex criticality
based on the momentum-space locations of JT phase
transitions:
(a) on-TRIM: indicating one Kitaev or nodal vortex
phase transition at around µc.
(b) off-TRIM & opposite kz: indicating two simulta-
neous vortex gap closures at around µc, which to-
gether change the chiral winding number by ±2.
(c) off-TRIM & same kz: indicating two subsequent
vortex phase transitions around µc, each changing
either Kitaev or nodal vortex topology. The nature
of vortex transitions can be further predicted when
the system features C2z or C4z, following Sec. III C.
The above criticality correspondence relations provide
concrete guidelines to quantitatively reconstruct the vor-
tex topological phase diagram without performing large-
scale vortex simulations.
IV.
JOSEPHSON-VORTEX RELATIONS IN
EFFECTIVE MODELS
In this section, we will numerically investigate a set
of effective models for 3D conventional superconduc-
tors that exhibit diverse manifestations of JT and VLT
physics. For each model, we begin by constructing the
topological phase diagram of the π-junction through com-
prehensive simulations. Leveraging the JVC relations, we
then infer the corresponding vortex-line topological phase
diagram. Finally, we directly compute the vortex phase
diagram and compare it against the JVC-based predic-
tion, thereby benchmarking the accuracy and robustness
of our correspondence framework.
A.
Doped topological insulator
We start with the standard Fu-Kane system, i.e.,
a doped 3D class-AII topological insulator (TI) with
conventional s-wave Cooper pairing [24].
The normal-
state Hamiltonian for such a TI can be minimally de-
scribed by a massive Dirac model on a cubic lattice
with hT I(k) = P5
i=1 di(k)γi.
Here, we have defined
d = (v sin kx, v sin ky, vz sin kz, 0, m(k)) with the mass
term m(k) = m0 + m1(cos kx + cos ky) + m2 cos kz. Our
choice of the Dirac γ matrices are
γ1 = σx ⊗sx, γ2 = σx ⊗sy, γ3 = σx ⊗sz,
γ4 = σy ⊗s0, γ5 = σz ⊗s0.
(15)
We denote σα and sα as the Pauli matrices for the orbital
and spin degrees of freedom, respectively. Notably, hT I
features the spatial inversion symmetry P = γ5, the TRS
Θ = −iγ13K, and a 4-fold around-ˆz rotation symmetry
C4z = exp(iJzπ/2) with the generator Jz = γ12/2. For
our purpose, we choose the model parameter set to be
FIG. 3. JT and VLT phase diagrams of a superconducting
TI. (a) µ-dependent Andreev spectrum in a (100)-directional
π-junction at ky,z = 0.
Andreev band crossings at E = 0
manifest as Josephson topological phase transitions. Regions
in blue are Z2 trivial, while the pink region is Z2 topological.
(b) Wilson loop characterization of Andreev bound states at
µ = 0.7, where the helical winding pattern suggests a non-
trivial JT Z2 index ν0 = 1. (c) µ-dependent CdGM spectrum
of a (001)-directional vortex line at kz = 0. The pink region
shows a topological Kitaev vortex phase with end MZMs. (d)
Evolution of µ(J)
c
and µ(v)
c
as a function of pairing order ∆0,
which confirms the π-junction and vortex line are simultane-
ously topological.
m0 = 2.5 and v = vz = −m1 = −m2 = 1, with which
the normal state at µ = 0 achieves a strong Z2 TI phase
with a topological band inversion at Γ point.
The BdG Hamiltonian for the doped TI system directly
follows the formalism in Eq. 1, where a bulk conven-
tional s-wave pairing is assumed. We further construct a
thick-slab Hamiltonian Hx(ky, kz) for this BdG system,
which consists of 300 unit cells along ˆx direction and
respects the periodic boundary conditions along other
directions. The π-junction geometry is implemented by
taking the left half slab to carry a positive pairing am-
plitude ∆0 = 0.03, while the electrons on the other half
slab are negatively paired with −∆0.
The JT in this setup can be intuitively understood by
taking two limits: µ = 0 and µ = ∞. With zero doping,
the Fermi level crosses only the Dirac surface states, and
an effective surface theory will suffice. Specifically, on ei-
ther (010) or (001) surface, the surface Dirac fermion will
develop a pairing-induced mass that flips its sign exactly
at the π-junction, thus leading to a pair of helical Majo-
rana modes bound to the domain [24, 59]. To numerically
check the JT, we have calculated the inversion eigenval-
ues of all negative-energy states at ky,z = 0, π for the
π-junction slab with µ = 0. Following Eq. 4, we find the
BdG inversion-symmetry indicator to be κ = 1. Mean-
