5
λ2e−m2
M2 + ˜λ2e−˜
m2
M2 + λ′2e−m′2
M2 = ΠQCD
̸q gµν (s0, M 2),
(15)
and
λ2me−m2
M2 −˜λ2 ˜me−˜
m2
M2 + λ′2m′e−m′2
M2 = ΠQCD
gµν
(s0, M 2).
(16)
In the next step of this section, we will demonstrate how to extract the QCD sum rules for the masses and residues of the 1S, 1P,
and 2S states for the structure ̸ qgµν. To fulﬁll this aim, a comprehensive three-step method will be employed. First, the mass
and residue for the 1S state will be determined independently. Accordingly, we follow the 1S state + continuum scheme, in
which the terms other than the ﬁrst on the left-hand side of Eq. (15) are considered as continuum components. By adjusting the
continuum threshold, s0, we can ensure that only the contribution from the 1S state appears in our calculations. To obtain the
mass and residue of 1S state, we need two equations, which would be found by using the derivative of Eq. (15) with respect to
−1
M2 . After some manipulations and by focusing solely on the ﬁrst term on the left- hand side of Eq. (15), the sum rules for
the mass and residue of the 1S state can be extracted as follows:
m2 =
d
d(−
1
M2 )ΠQCD
̸q gµν(s0, M 2)
ΠQCD
̸q gµν(s0, M 2)
,
(17)
and
λ2 = e
m2
M2 ΠQCD
̸q gµν(s0, M 2).
(18)
Similarly to the ﬁrst step, the parameters of the 1P state, including mass and residue, are calculated based on the 1S state +
1P state + continuum scheme. In the second step, the continuum threshold, s0, is adjusted to introduce the 2S state into the
continuum. It is important to mention that the mass and residue of the 1S state are considered as input quantities at this stage.
Finally, in the third step, the previously described method is utilized for the next radial excitation, that is, the 2S state. In other
words, the 1S state + 1P state + 2S state + continuum scheme is now employed to extract the physical parameters, mass and
residue, for the 2S state. For this purpose, the value of s0 is increased again, and the masses and residues of the 1S and 1P states
are used as inputs. In the next section, a complete numerical analysis of the results for these states will be presented.
III.
NUMERICAL ANALYSES
The QCD sum rules derived for the masses and residues of triply heavy baryons with spin-3/2 in the ground, ﬁrst orbital and
ﬁrst radial excited states are analyzed numerically in the current section using the required input parameters. A range of essential
input parameters is required, including the quark masses in both the MS and pole schemes, as well as the two-gluon and three-
gluon condensates, which are presented in Table II. It is noteworthy that nonperturbative operators with mass dimensions higher
than six are expressed as combinations of lower-mass-dimension operators, based on the hypothesis of QCD factorization. In the
previous section, we utilized this hypothesis to derive the expressions related to the heavy quark propagators. By incorporating
these heavy quark propagators into Eq. (11), higher-dimensional operators appear as products of lower-dimensional operators,
whose numerical values are derived from the data provided in Table II.
As well as the parameters presented in Table II, the QCD sum rules for the mass and residue of triply heavy baryons with
spin-3/2 include two auxiliary quantities: the Borel parameter, M 2, and the continuum threshold parameter, s0, both of which
must be determined. To specify these parameters, the QCD sum rules are subject to standard criteria of the method, for instance,
the weak dependence of physical quantities on these auxiliary parameters, the convergence of OPE, and pole dominance. The
convergence of OPE is achieved when the contribution from the perturbative part dominates over the nonperturbative parts, and
the higher the dimension of a nonperturbative operator, the smaller its contribution becomes. Pole dominance ensures that the
resonances under study provide a dominant contribution compared to higher excited and continuum states.
Therefore, the upper limit of the M 2 parameter is determined from the condition that the contributions from the ﬁrst three
resonances (FTRs) surpass those from higher excited states and the continuum. Within the standard framework, the following
conditions must be met:
FTRC = Π(s0, M 2)
Π(∞, M 2) ≥0.5.
(19)
The lower limit for the M 2 is set by the requirement of OPE series convergence. This means that the perturbative contri-
bution must dominate over the nonperturbative terms, and nonperturbative operators of higher dimensions should have lower
