Figure 1: Sketch of the parallel plate setup. An NLC is placed between two parallel patterned
thinly spaced plates, with strong planar anchoring. Half-integer disclinations in the 2D surface
pattern are endpoints to disclination lines. At equilibrium, these lines traverse horizontally along
the mid-plane between the two boundaries (except near their ends). Their top-view projection is
discussed in this paper.
For sufficiently thin cells, the director field remains planar not only on the boundaries but also in
the entire bulk [23]. This observation leads to a half-integer classification of line defects, similar to
that of point disclinations in 2D [2,25]. In [23], equilibrium states of disclination lines were studied
based on this assumption of bulk planarity. A closed-form equation for disclination trajectories was
derived, taking into account the strong anchoring conditions, nematic elasticity, and line tension.
Furthermore, [23] resolved the inverse problem of designing a cell in which a specific desired curve
is in equilibrium. A different inverse design approach was introduced in [18], based on designing
very strong elastic potential wells to overcome line tension.
Building on the framework in [23], we first address the forward problem: given prescribed surface
patterns on two parallel plates, we determine the resulting disclination path in equilibrium. For the
inverse problem, we observe that fully controlling the anchoring on the entire boundary surface to
realize just a single curve shape leaves a multitude of unused degrees of freedom. This motivates
an extended inverse problem: designing the confining surface patterns such that a family of curves
is obtained when changing system parameters. We show how to explicitly calculate such patterns,
discuss the limitations of different parameter types, and explore potential applications.
Results
We consider an NLC in the parallel plane setup with strong patterned planar anchoring. The surface
patterns for the top and bottom plates are denoted θt(x, y) and θb(x, y), respectively, representing
planar director angles (defined modulo π). It is assumed that the thickness of the cell h is much
smaller than all lateral length scales in the problem. We assume the standard Frank free energy
density for elastic distortions,
Fel = 1
2K1(∇· ˆn)2 + 1
2K2(ˆn · ∇× ˆn)2 + 1
2K3∥ˆn × ∇× ˆn∥2,
(1)
2
