reader, a few more similar solutions can be found in Appendix A.
All in all, we find no new purely chiral boundary conditions of M-theory; they all descend
from the Hoˇrava-Witten E8 theory via different embeddings G2 →E8. One could suspect
that the restriction that all matter fields have the same chirality may be too strong. To
address this, we have also performed a scan allowing for non-chiral matter (effectively, this
means that some of the ni coefficients may become negative). For computational reasons, we
have restricted ourselves to representations of dimension less than 248, as we did in the chiral
case, even though there is no physical reason to do that now that both positive and negative
chiralities are allowed. We have also let the coefficient a in (3.9), which controls the relation
between the M-theory G4-form and the Chern class of the G2 bundle, to vary in the range
a ∈[0, 100],
and
|ni| ≤200.
(3.20)
In this range, we find several solutions to the linear system of equations. It is already remark-
able that there is any solution at all, since (3.13) comprises a Diophantine system of equations
over the integers.2 Among the solutions that we found, there is one which is somewhat special:
Consider the spectrum
(n1 = −27, n14 = 50, n27 = −30, n77 = 5),
(3.21)
which, in our notation, corresponds to having 27 gauge neutral right-handed fermions, 30
right-handed fermions transforming in the 27 representation of G2, along with 50 and 5 left-
handed fermions transforming in the 14 and 77 representations of G2 respectively. Using the
data of table 8, one can show that the anomaly polynomial is given by (3.9) with a = 10.
This solution is minimal, in the sense that it only involves four different particle species to
achieve anomaly cancellation (while there are five non-trivial anomaly constraints). It is the
only solution with this property that we found in our scan.
In short, the question “does M-theory anomaly inflow allow for more general boundary
conditions than the E8-brane, once SUSY is dropped” has an affirmative answer, and the
most minimalistic such solution for G2 group is given by (3.21). The most natural question is
whether this solution is physical, and corresponds to a novel G2 end-of-the-world membrane in
M theory, or if, on the contrary it is a spurious solution that does not have physical meaning.
We will not solve this question here, but merely point out that since the coefficient a = 10,
and the smallest value that c2 can have in the fundamental representation of G2 is 2, we learn
that, should such a brane exist, the small instanton limit of a worldvolume G2 instanton has
the same C7 charge as 5 M5 branes (this is to be contrasted to the same calculation for E8,
for which the answer is 1 [49]).
Again, it might be the case that this solution is spurious, and there is no end-of-the-
world boundary condition for M-theory with G2 gauge group. But it is fun to speculate what
2Diophantine equations have also found application in the search for extensions of the Standard Model
gauge group consistent with perturbative anomaly cancellation, see [42–47], and for a more mathematical
application, see [48]
– 12 –
