Low-latency control system for feedback experiments with optical tweezer arrays
Amir H. Dadpour,1 Timur Khayrullin,1 Fouad Afiouni,2, 3 Remy El Sabeh,4
Amer E. Mouawad,2, 4 Izzat El Hajj,2 and Alexandre Cooper1, 5, ∗
1Institute for Quantum Computing, University of Waterloo, Canada.
2Department of Computer Science, American University of Beirut, Lebanon.
3School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, USA.
4David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Canada.
5Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Waterloo, Canada.
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
We present and characterize a modular, open-source system to perform feedback control experi-
ments on configurations of atoms and molecules in arrays of optical tweezers. The system features a
modular, cost-effective computer architecture with a motherboard and peripheral cards. It supports
efficient data transfer to and from graphics processing units (GPUs) using Remote Direct Memory
Access (RDMA), leveraging GPU efficiency in matrix multiplication and parallelism, while enabling
direct data transfer between devices without involving the CPU. We first describe the architecture
and workflow of the system, detailing its hardware components and software modules. We then
evaluate the computational runtime for preparing defect-free chains and grids of atoms using effi-
cient implementations of atom reconfiguration algorithms. Finally, we discuss timing bottlenecks
and strategies to reduce latency. Beyond solving reconfiguration problems, the system can readily
be used to implement adaptive and feedforward protocols, as well as digital quantum algorithms re-
lying on particle displacement. Our results lay the groundwork for developing low-latency feedback
control systems, benchmarking their performance, and advancing scalable quantum hardware.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Quantum processors rely on classical control and ac-
quisition systems to prepare, manipulate, and read out
their quantum states. Whereas open-loop systems exe-
cute pre-defined sequences of control operations, closed-
loop systems dynamically update their sequences based
on measurement outcomes. Real-time feedback control
systems are control systems that actuate the processor
faster than the dominant dissipation processes.
These
systems play an increasingly important role in improving
the capability of quantum processors across many plat-
forms, including those based on configurations of atoms
and molecules. Their recent deployment in practical set-
tings has enabled the preparation of defect-free configu-
rations of atoms [1–3], the realization of non-local con-
nectivity by displacing atoms [4], and the implementation
of mid-circuit measurements and feedforward operations
to stabilize quantum gates [5] and realize quantum error
correction codes [6]. These demonstrations have relied
on custom solutions that interface multiple components,
typically utilizing motherboard-based or FPGA architec-
tures [2, 6–8].
However, despite their shared architec-
tural principles and workflows, a comprehensive analysis
of their underlying hardware and software, along with
a quantitative breakdown of their runtime performance,
remains largely unexplored. Furthermore, the rapid ad-
vances in the capabilities of GPUs, including their pro-
cessing speed and low-latency data transfers, call for sys-
tematic studies of the opportunities they offer for inte-
gration into experimental workflows.
∗alexandre.cooper@uwaterloo.ca
(a)
(b)
CPU
GPU
Digitizer
Processor
Controller
Sensor
System
Actuator
FGC
AWG
EMCCD
System
AODs
Figure 1.
Diagram of feedback control system. (a) A
typical FCS comprises a chain of modules to actuate the state
of a physical system based on a sequence of measurements.
(b) Our low-latency reconfiguration system is built on the ar-
chitecture of a typical FCS. An Electron Multiplying Charge-
Coupled Device (EMCCD) camera acquires images of config-
urations of individual atoms. A Frame Grabber Card (FGC)
transfers these images to a Central Processing Unit (CPU)
or Graphics Processing Unit (GPU). The processor solves an
atom reconfiguration problem to compute the sequence of con-
trol signals necessary to reach the desired configuration of
atoms. An Arbitrary Waveform Generator (AWG) streams
these signals to actuate a pair of Acousto-Optic Deflectors
(AODs). The resulting multiplexed laser beams update the
configuration of atoms. The LLRS repeats the process until
the desired state is reached, or the the criteria for solving the
problem is no longer met.
In this work, we introduce and characterize an open-
source low-latency reconfiguration system (LLRS) for
quantum processors based on atoms and molecules. The
LLRS features a simple, cost-effective, and extendable
motherboard-based architecture that ensures easy de-
ployment and cross-compatibility with multiple devices,
including GPUs. Its use of off-the-shelf components pro-
vides flexibility in interfacing with diverse devices and
enabling new capabilities across various applications. Fo-
arXiv:2504.06528v1  [quant-ph]  9 Apr 2025
