1.
Introduction and summary
Calabi-Yau manifolds and their moduli spaces have played a central role in string theory and the
associated mathematics for more than three decades. More recently, it has been appreciated that
new phenomena and correspondences can occur when one goes beyond the well-studied framework
of smooth complete intersections in toric ambient spaces. A valuable tool is Witten’s gauged lin-
ear sigma model (GLSM) [1]. It allows to explore the stringy K¨ahler moduli space beyond the
boundaries of a K¨ahler cone associated to a Calabi-Yau. In this way one can establish connec-
tions between Calabi-Yaus that are located at different limiting regions of a shared moduli space.
Physically, the Calabi-Yaus are target spaces for non-linear sigma models appearing as low-energy
effective theories, or phases, of GLSMs at different limiting values of the FI-theta parameters,
which get identified with the complexified K¨ahler moduli. Moreover, the Coulomb branch of the
GLSM encodes information about singularities in the moduli space. Mirror symmetry combines
the different chambers of K¨ahler structure moduli space into the single mirror complex structure
moduli space, which allows one to analyse the different regions of moduli space using differential
equations which encode this same singularity structure.
Not every phase of a Calabi-Yau GLSM has to be a non-linear sigma model with a smooth target
geometry. Other well-studied examples are for instance Landau-Ginzburg orbifolds. More generic
phases are still rather poorly understood. Typically, one expects them to be some type of hybrid
theory, i.e. a Landau-Ginzburg model fibred over a geometric base, but even more exotic con-
figurations can occur. Of particular interest are GLSMs that have more than one phase that is
geometric in some suitable sense. It has been shown in various examples that GLSMs can have
two Calabi-Yau phases that are not necessarily birational to each other. This has connections to
active research areas in mathematics such as non-commutative algebraic geometry and homological
projective duality. The torsion-refinement of the Gopakumar-Vafa formula [2] turns out to be a
very useful too for analysing these cases. An important example in the context of abelian GLSMs
was studied in [3], where it was shown that a fairly simple complete intersection of quadrics in
P7 shares its moduli space with a non-commutative resolution of a double cover of P3, branched
over a singular octic hypersurface in P3. This singular variety, which is not a smooth manifold, is
still an acceptable target space for a supersymmetric nonlinear sigma model because nonsingular
geometries are not a prerequisite for nonsingular physics. This construction and its generalisations
have recently been studied by Katz-Klemm-Schimannek-Sharpe (KKSS) [4], see also [5, 6].
The mechanism by which such a singular geometry remains a valid NLSM target is through “frac-
tional” B-fields, which in [4] are argued to generalise the notion of discrete torsion [7, 8]. Fractional
B-fields can be supported on exceptional curves, that are torsion in homology, on a non-K¨ahler res-
olution of the singular geometry, and in the singular limit where the exceptional curves shrink the
effects of this B-field persist in the worldsheet theory. This is the string-theoretic realisation of non-
commutative resolution, which the authors of [4] advanced and then used to define torsion-refined
Gopakumar-Vafa invariants by an analysis of topological string theory in the presence of these
fractional B-fields. This follows on from the work [2], which introduced this torsion refinement.
Another source of non-birational Calabi-Yaus sharing the same moduli space are non-abelian
GLSMs. A first construction was provided by Hori and Tong [9], who gave a physical realisation
of the Pfaffian-Grassmannian correspondence first observed by Rødland [10] and later formulated
1
