Elimination of spurious oscillations on photoemission spectra
16
[12, 14, 24]. The corresponding projections on the stationary eigenstates result in
high or low values depending on whether the parity of the time-evolved wave function
matches or not the parity of the continuum eigenstate, respectively. Consequently, we
obtain the very oscillating spectrum in Fig. 9a. We observe the multiphoton peaks
at E ≃0.7 a.u. and 1.7 a.u. separated by the photon energy ω = 1 a.u.. We use
the WOM with width parameter γ = 0.045 a.u. and n = 3 to smooth the spectrum,
which is observed in green solid line in the whole energy range. SPM results also in
a smooth spectrum in the high-energy region but many oscillations arises for E ≲0.8
a.u. The amplitude of these high frequency oscillations increases substantially as the
energies approach the threshold. We show a close-up of Fig. 9a near threshold in
Fig. 9b and near the ﬁrst multiphoton peak in Fig. 9c. We observe that the high
oscillations exposed by the SPM have a spacing which increases with the electron
kinetic energy and perfectly matches the eigenenergies of the inﬁnite well of width a
and depth V0, indicated with vertical dashed lines. This is a proof that these high-
frequency oscillations are of the diﬀerent nature from the spurious high-frequency
oscillations when projecting on stationary eigenstates of the box with deﬁnite parity.
The oscillations captured by the SPM corresponds to Ramsauer-Townsend oscillations
coming from the interference of the travelling waves bouncing against the sharp
edges of the well with energies Ej = j2π2(2a2) −V0. We clearly see that the SPM
accounts accurately for any high-frequency physically meaningful oscillation in the
energy spectrum whereas the WOM overlooks such resonances. .
However, if the
potential well described a ﬁnite system such as nanostructures or quantum dots,
Ramsauer-Towsend oscillations or any kind of high frequency oscillation do have a
physical meaning and would be completely overlooked by the WOM. However, for
the particular case of photoionization from a metallic surface, in the limit of a →∞
Ramsauer-Townsend oscillations must disappear.
When a half-cycle pulse of duration τ = 1 and momentum transfer ∆p = −0.05
a.u. is applied to the Al(111) surface modeled with the jellium model, we observe
in Fig. 10a that the highly oscillating total spectrum calculated by projecting onto
the stationary states of the continuum is completely smoothed by the WOM using
a window width γ = 0.0045 a.u. and n = 3. However, the SPM accounts for the
Ramsauer-Townsend oscillations with high precision. In Fig. 10b, we show emission
in both directions calculated within the SPM, also displaying Ramsauer-Towsend
resonances. The emission to the right (left) is the 57% (43%) of a very low ionization
probability Pion = 2 × 10−5.
4.2. Band-Structure-Based surface model
Finally, we solve the problem of photoionization of a metal surface in which case the
potential VS(z) in Eq. (19) is replaced by the more realistic Band-Structure-Based
(BSB) potential where the surface is represented as a collection of atomic planes that
together form a slab and takes into account eﬀects of the band structure of the metal
[18]. The BSB potential is illustrated in Fig. 8 for the case of Al(111). We solve Eq.
(1) using the BSB potential for an Al(111) surface and calculate the perpendicular
photoemission probability produced by the same laser pulse of Fig. 8. A grid of length
L = 789.84 a.u., spacing ∆z = 0.05 a.u. with time step ∆t = 0.000405 a.u. is used.
After diagonalization [25] of the BSB potential, we obtain 120 bound eigenstates,
from which 91 are occupied below the Fermi level (E < EF ), and 467 continuum
eigenstates. In Fig. 11, we compare the total emission calculated with the projection
