17
distribution of C has a similar tail, which we attribute
to the relatively low population of its predator species B
[recall again Fig. 7(b)]. Indeed, comparing strategies E
and S in Fig. 7(b), we observe that the A population is af-
fected similarly by the directional incentive, but the B, C
populations are lower for the E strategy. (This effect is
particularly pronounced for B.)
Fig. 14(e) shows the fractions of particles in the highest
hunger level: we find that all species are hungrier when
the A particles evade their predator. The reasons seem
to be different for each species: the small σA tends to
increase the hunger level of A; the small numbers of C
mean that B struggle to find prey (C); the evasion of
C by A means that C struggle to find their prey (A).
The larger fluctuations in f ′′
C are presumably due to their
lower overall population. The high hunger levels and long
lifetimes together reflect that particles tend to segregate
into groups of their own species, which reduces both the
opportunities and the risks associated with predation.
Fig. 14(f) shows distributions of the particle number in
circular probe areas.
Interestingly, the A distribution
shows a local maximum at NA ≈50, which is partly
attributable to the large A population, but also indicates
strong clustering among these particles.
Spatial correlations are shown in Fig. 14(g,h).
The
B, C correlation is again positive for intermediate-to-
large distances recall Fig. 13(h) for the sparse case, the
reason is presumably the same but the effect is even
stronger in this case because it is more likely that A and
B particles are adjacent and swap places during move-
ment.
The emerging picture is the usual one for the survival
of the weakest: species A directly evades its predator
species (C) but it also acts to control its population by
maintaining a large B population (because they are the
predators for C). This leads to A particles being hungrier
but living longer.
VII.
CONCLUSION
This work generalised the rock-paper-scissors model
of [7], with the result that individual species can only
survive as part of a biodiverse state in which all three
species are present.
This was achieved by incorporat-
ing hunger levels and spontaneous death processes. We
then made the further generalization that a privileged
(“smart”) species (A) can adjust its behaviour to opti-
mise its population. Effective strategies for this optimi-
sation rely on the survival of the weakest effect [36, 53],
in which the smart species maintains a large population
of its prey, which in turn reduces the population of preda-
tors for A. An interesting analogy for this effect is based
on a human-tree-desert ecosystem: by planting trees, or
at least preserving trees, humans can constrain the en-
croachment of the desert and enhance their survivability
in the ecosystem. Even though planting trees can at some
level reduce the well-being of humans such as reducing
the area available as farmland, the planting of trees ben-
efits humans overall.
The smart species additionally adopts strategies with
directional incentives, for example to hunt prey or evade
predators. Using reinforcement learning to identify ef-
fective strategies, we found that evasion of A’s predators
tends to enhance its population, as can spreading into
empty space, if the system is not too crowded. On the
other hand, the survival-of-the-weakest effect explains
why hunting prey is not effective in this regard.
These results raise new questions regarding the adapt-
ability of individual species in a cyclic dominance system.
For example, the reward being optimised involves a bal-
ance between the risk of extinction and the size of the
species’ population. This balance depends on the time T
and the penalty for extinction that appears in (13). It
would be interesting to investigate this balance in more
detail, for example by including a much larger penalty
for extinction so that the species’ main aim is to avoid
this (catastrophic) rare event instead of optimising its
population for the typical case.
Other interesting questions arise if more than one
species becomes “smart” (able to optimise its own param-
eters). One can also imagine more complex interactions
among large numbers of species, in which case even richer
behaviour might emerge [101–103]. Finally, we note that
we have adopted the perspective of centralised learning,
where the parameters for the whole species are adjusted
based on its average behaviour. An alternative perspec-
tive would treat each particle as an agent with its own
learning capacity, which introduces yet more complexity
to the optimization and learning processes [55, 56, 104].
We look forward to future works in these directions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Ellery Gopaoco, Daan Frenkel, Nir Gov,
Paddy Royall, Aleks Reinhardt, and Samuel W. Coles
for helpful discussions.
Appendix A: Survival of the weakest at low natural
death
To complement the discussion in Sec. VI A, we show
the survival of the weakest phenomenon in the crowded
case with pω = 0.005. The population density diagram
of A with pω = 0.005 is shown in Fig. 16. The features
are consistent with the behaviour with pω = 0.015 as dis-
cussed in the main text. Particle demographic data and
spatial correlations at pω = 0.005 as shown in Fig. 16 and
Fig. 17. Again, the general behaviour is similar to the
case at pω = 0.015. We note some differences between
the high and low pω cases. At pω = 0.005, the predation
count is higher than the pω = 0.015 case as higher parti-
cle density allows more predation as shown in Fig. 16(a).
Recall from Fig. 11(b), at pω = 0.015, species A has
