4
Consistency of the theory
In this section, our proposal confronts two milestones of QFT: the Kallen-Lehmann representa-
tion of the propagator; the Gell-Mann and Low theorem for the propagator.
While the nonperturbative Kallen-Lehmann representation bounds the behavior of the prop-
agator, thus providing a consistency check for the theory, the Gell-Mann and Low formula, base
for perturbation theory, is not a test for the theory but is an improved result within nonstandard
QFT including the scale M.
Notice that both these well-known results are related to the Poncar´e (non)invariance of the
vacuum. We shall now go through the issue in detail.
Kallen-Lehmann spectral representation.
In standard QFT, the Kallen-Lehmann represen-
tation of the propagator reads,
G(p) =
Z ∞
0
d(µ2)ρ(µ2)
1
p2 −µ2 ,
(35)
where ρ is a positive definite function, known as spectral function.
The above equation implies that the propagator cannot decay faster than p−2 for large mo-
mentum, in apparent contrast with (29). However, the Kallen-Lehmann representation does not
exist in the fractal QFT and this invalidates the above constraint. The existence of the Kallen-
Lehmann representation in (35) requires the Poncar´e invariance of the vacuum to manipulate
the expression ⟨Ω|ϕ(x)ϕ(y)|Ω⟩. In particular, one has in the fractal QFT,
⟨Ω|ϕ(x)ϕ(y)|Ω⟩=
X
n
⟨Ω|ϕ(x)|n⟩⟨n|ϕ(y)|Ω⟩= eipΩ(x−y) X
n
e−ipn(x−y)|⟨Ω|ϕ(0)|n⟩|2 ,
(36)
In the first step, we used the completeness relation for a complete set |n⟩, eigenvalues of the
four-momentum, in the last step, we implemented the non-translational invariance of the vac-
uum, via the vacuum momentum pΩ. However, this is infinite since one has a finite momentum
density in (32) and (33), corresponding to an infinite momentum for an infinite volume. There-
fore, the expression in (36) becomes ill-defined.
We thus conclude that the Kallen-Lehmann representation of the two-point function does
not exist if the vacuum is not invariant under translations, and therefore it does not constrain the
expression (29) to behave as 1/p2 for large p.
Gell-Mann and Low theorem and S-matrix construction.
While the previous paragraph
is a consistency check, this section demonstrates how fractal QFT solves some fundamental
issues in standard QFT through Poincar´e non-invariance of the vacuum. This property, shown
in equation (33), enables the construction of a consistent S-matrix and proper application of the
10
