138
The Path to aN3LO Parton Distributions
4.4. Impact on LHC phenomenology
We present an assessment of the implications of aN3LO PDFs for LHC phenomenology, by
looking at processes for which N3LO results are publicly available, namely the DY and Higgs total
inclusive cross-sections. We present predictions at NLO, NNLO, and aN3LO using both NNPDF4.0
and MSHT20 PDFs, consistently matching the perturbative order of the PDF and matrix element.
At N3LO we also show results obtained with the currently common approximation of using
NNLO PDFs with aN3LO matrix elements.
At each perturbative order, the uncertainty on the cross-section is determined by adding
in quadrature the PDF uncertainty to the MHOU on the hard matrix element determined
performing 7-point renormalization and factorization scale variation and taking the envelope
of the results. This is the procedure that is most commonly used for the estimation of the
total uncertainty on hadron collider processes; here we follow it for ease of comparison with
available results. 5
We display results with a total uncertainty obtained combining these uncertainties in quadrature
(both with and without MHOUs in the PDF fit), and we also tabulate this total uncertainty
(without MHOUs in the PDF fit) along with the PDF uncertainty both with and without MHOUs.
Also, in order to assess the impact of the use of aN3LO PDFs, we plot N3LO results obtained
using NNLO and aN3LO PDFs, we tabulate the shift between the N3LO prediction obtained using
NNLO and aN3LO PDFs, and we compare it to previous estimate of this expected shift based on
the differences between NNLO and NLO PDFs. Indeed, predictions for processes computed at
N3LO accuracy are commonly obtained using NNLO PDFs, with an extra uncertainty assigned to
the result dues to this mismatch in perturbative order between the PDF and the matrix element.
A commonly used prescription in order to estimate this uncertainty [321, 278] is to take it
equal to
∆app
NNLO ≡1
2

σNNLO
NNLO−PDF −σNNLO
NLO−PDF
σNNLO
NNLO−PDF
,
(4.30)
namely to assume that the same percentage shift, computed at one less perturbative order,
would be twice as large. This prescription can now be compared to the exact result via
∆exact
NNLO ≡

σN3LO
N3LO−PDF −σN3LO
NNLO−PDF
σN3LO
N3LO−PDF
 .
(4.31)
4.4.1. Inclusive Drell-Yan production
We start showing results for inclusive CC and NC gauge boson production cross-sections followed
by their decays into the dilepton final state. Cross-sections are evaluated using the N3LOXS
5In a more refined treatment, MHOUs on the hard cross-section can be included through a theory covariance matrix
for the hard cross-section itself, like the MHOUs and IHOUs on the PDF. This would then make it possible to
keep track of the correlation between these different sources of uncertainty [319, 320].
