Stage I
Stage II
Figure 6. Textures after the first and the second stage.
FID
KID
(↓)
(×10−3, ↓)
Text2Tex
21.3
4.1
CasTex (Text2Tex init, kd frozen)
21.3
4.2
CasTex (Text2Tex init, kd trained)
20.5
3.9
Table 3.
Ablation study of initializing our second stage with
Text2Tex outputs to generate PBR textures. The results show that
allowing the diffuse map (kd) to be optimized during our second
stage leads to significant improvements in both FID and KID met-
rics, while keeping the diffuse map frozen maintains the same FID
but slightly increases KID. This suggests that our approach can
effectively serve as an enhancement module for existing texture
generation methods.
FID
KID
(↓)
(×10−3, ↓)
Paint-it (Paint-it envlight)
25.2
6.7
Paint-it (proposed envlight)
24.5
6.4
CasTex (Paint-it envlight)
23.3
5.5
CasTex (proposed envlight)
20.5
3.1
Table 4. Ablation of environment lighting. We discovered that
environmental lighting may play a crucial role in the plausibility
of resulting physically-based textures. The default environmental
lighting map in Paint-it presents an even gray lighting across all
directions. The difference between a specular and a rough diffuse
surface with such lighting is barely distinguishable. Instead, we
propose an environmental lighting map with a single pronounced
light source and augment lighting with horizontal rotations.
inconsistencies. In contrast, when we allow diffuse map
optimization (kd trained), our approach achieves significant
improvements in both metrics, yielding the best FID and
KID. This demonstrates that enabling diffuse map refine-
ment allows our method to correct lighting artifacts and
better harmonize the entire PBR material set, highlighting
the potential of our approach as a versatile enhancement
module for various texture generation pipelines.
How does environment lighting affect results? Among
recent works, Paint-it is the most similar to ours, as it also re-
FID
KID
Runtime
(↓)
(×10−3, ↓)
(seconds, ↓)
CasTex (DIP, XL)
23.2
4.6
229
CasTex (XL)
22.8
4.4
174
CasTex (DIP, XL+L)
21
3.8
862
CasTex (XL+L)
20.5
3.1
710
Table 5. Deep Image Prior ablation. Even though DIP plays a
crucial role in texture synthesis with latent diffusion models, for the
cascaded diffusion models the induced regularization is obsolete
and slightly reduces the resulting scores. Also DIP-based variants
are more time-consuming, while all experiments generate textures
at 1024×1024 resolution.
lies solely on SDS-based optimization. Unlike our approach,
their rendering algorithm uses a brighter, uniform lighting
environment map, whereas our setup combines a pronounced
light source and a weaker ambient lighting component.
To understand the effect of environment lighting on SDS-
based optimization, we evaluate both Paint-it’s lighting setup
and our alternative configuration. As shown in Table 5,
Paint-it achieves better results when using our lighting setup,
slightly improving its FID and KID. Similarly, our methods
performance degrades with Paint-it’s environment lighting.
We hypothesize that, unlike uniform lighting, a single pro-
nounce light source allows to highlight specular components
of the PBR texture during training. The hypothesis and the
above observations agree with the results from [13].
DIP versus explicit parameterization. Following the ap-
proach of our closest competitor, Paint-it, we integrate Deep
Image Prior (DIP) [38] into our method and evaluate its im-
pact on texture optimization (see Section 4.1 for details). As
shown in Table 5, our DIP-based variant achieves results
comparable to our standard explicit parameterization ap-
proach but performs slightly worse in both FID and KID
metrics while being significantly slower.
Since explicit
parameterization already delivers strong results and works
faster, the added complexity of DIP does not offer a clear
advantage in our framework.
6. Conclusion
In this work, we proposed an optimization-based texture
synthesis approach based on cascaded diffusion models. We
motivated the design with an analysis indicating the limita-
tions of latent diffusion models. Our method improves upon
recent optimization-based texture synthesis approaches in
terms of automated metrics and user study. Even though our
model benefits from using physically-based textures, we still
observed baked-in lighting and occasional inconsistencies
between a texture and the corresponding model geometry.
Future work may address the baked-in lighting artifacts of
