III.
METHODS
A.
Polarization resolved SHG
For the power-dependent SHG measurements, we use the FB, generated by an optical
parametric oscillator (Levante IR fs from APE), pumped by the output of a Yb doped mode-
locked laser (FLINT FL2-12, Light Conversion) with a repetition rate of 76 MHz and pulse
length of 100 fs. This allows tuning of the FB from 1300 nm to 2000 nm.
We guide the laser in a home-made multi photon microscopy setup, which we operate
in transmission geometry. Before entering the microscope, a combination of halfwave-plate
(AHWP05M-1600, Thorlabs) and wire-grid polarizer (WP25M-UB, Thorlabs) allows us to
fully control the polarization axis of the FB. Subsequently, the FB is focussed onto the
sample by a ×40 objective (LMM-40X-P01, Thorlabs) and the transmitted FB, as well as the
generated NLO signal are collimated by a lens (C330TMD, Thorlabs). The transmitted FB
is blocked by a shortpass filter (FESH0950 & FESH0850, Thorlabs) and the signal is further
separated from the TH by an additional longpass filter (FEL0550, Thorlabs).
With an
additional Glan-Thompson prism (GTH10M, Thorlabs), we are able to selectively block the
SH and transmit the TP-PL. Finally, we detect the remaining signal with a silicon avalanche-
photo-diode (APD440A, Thorlabs) and lock-in amplifier (HF2LI, Zurich Instruments).
A similar setup was used to collect the 2D color maps in Fig. 3a. However, for these,
we used a Ti:Sapphire pump laser (Chameleon Ultra II) in combination with an optical
parametric oscillator (Chameleon Compact OPO, both Coherent Inc.)
for the FB. The
output with a repetition rate of 80 MHz and a pulse duration of 220 fs [41] can be tuned
from 1.1 µm to 1.6 µm.
B.
Sample preparation and characterization
We mechanically exfoliate WSe2 from a bulk crystal (HQ Graphene) onto PDMS and
transfer it onto a transparent fused silica substrate. To confirm the monolayer nature of
the flake of interest, we evaluate PL and Raman measurements of the sample and ensure
it shows the characteristic monolayer signatures. In particular, we look for a strong PL
emission peak at the exciton resonance (∼750 nm for WSe2), the typical frequency difference
between the degenerate E1
2g and A1g modes and the second-order 2LA(M) mode, and the
13
