Low-Complexity SDP-ADMM for Physical-Layer
Multicasting in Massive MIMO Systems
Mahmoud Zaher, and Emil Bj¨ornson
{mahmoudz, emilbjo}@kth.se
Department of Computer Science, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden
Abstract—There is a demand for the same data content from
several user equipments (UEs) in many wireless communication
applications. Physical-layer multicasting combines the beamform-
ing capability of massive MIMO (multiple-input multiple-output)
and the broadcast nature of the wireless channel to efficiently
deliver the same data to a group of UEs using a single trans-
mission. This paper tackles the max-min fair (MMF) multicast
beamforming optimization, which is an NP-hard problem. We
develop an efficient semidefinite program-alternating direction
method of multipliers (SDP-ADMM) algorithm to find the near-
global optimal rank-1 solution to the MMF multicast problem in
a massive MIMO system. Numerical results show that the pro-
posed SDP-ADMM algorithm exhibits similar spectral efficiency
performance to state-of-the-art algorithms running on standard
SDP solvers at a vastly reduced computational complexity. We
highlight that the proposed ADMM elimination procedure can be
employed as an effective low-complexity rank reduction method
for other problems utilizing semidefinite relaxation.
Index Terms—Multicast, downlink beamforming, convex opti-
mization, semidefinite relaxation, ADMM, massive MIMO.
I. INTRODUCTION
Massive MIMO (multiple-input multiple-output) technology
has emerged as a key enabler for wireless communication
systems, offering significant gains in spectral efficiency (SE)
[1], [2]. By deploying many antennas at the base station
(BS), massive MIMO facilitates effective beamforming and
spatial multiplexing, which can greatly boost the desired
signal quality of multiple user equipments (UEs). Through
beamforming, physical-layer multicasting can simultaneously
deliver the same information to multiple UEs within a cover-
age area using a single transmission. This approach mitigates
the problem of co-channel interference and is particularly
beneficial to efficiently utilize network resources [3].
Physical-layer multicasting can support a wide range of
applications in modern wireless communication networks. For
instance, mobile network operators can leverage it for video
streaming of live events to multiple subscribers, providing a
cost-effective alternative to traditional unicast-based content
delivery. Other applications of multicasting include videocon-
ferencing as well as broadcasting of machine learning models
in federated learning applications, where multiple UEs need to
receive the same data stream. Another use case is emergency
broadcast systems where critical information needs to be
disseminated rapidly to a large audience, ensuring efficient
and timely communication.
This work was supported by the FFL18-0277 grant from the Swedish
Foundation for Strategic Research.
A foundational framework for physical-layer multicasting
is presented in [4], introducing quality of service (QoS) and
max-min fair (MMF) designs for a single-cell single-group
multicast scenario, where the QoS level ensures a minimum
received SNR for all UEs, and MMF aims to maximize
the lowest received SNR. This concept was later expanded
in [5] to include multiple co-channel multicast groups. The
problem was proven to be NP-hard, and approximate solutions
were derived using semidefinite relaxation (SDR). In [4], [5],
different randomization strategies were proposed to extract
near-optimal rank-1 beamforming solutions from higher-rank
semidefinite program (SDP) output. However, as the number of
transmit antennas and UEs grow, the approximation accuracy
deteriorates significantly [4]–[6]. Note that a rank-1 beam-
forming solution, where the BS transmits a single multicast
signal using spatial multiplexing, represents a practical choice
due to its ease of implementation compared to a higher-rank
transmission.
Recent studies have introduced different iterative opti-
mization techniques to address the QoS and MMF multi-
cast problems. In [6], the authors formulate a coordinated
MMF multicast problem in a multicell network, where each
BS serves a single UE group, and solve it using paramet-
ric manifold optimization. The study in [3] proposes three
different algorithms for the MMF problem under per-cell
power constraints with joint beamforming across cooperating
BSs. Among these, the difference-of-convex approximation
(DCA) algorithm demonstrates superior SE while achieving
lower computational complexity compared to traditional SDR
methods with randomization. The DCA algorithm is built
upon the successive convex approximation (SCA) framework,
which represents the state-of-the-art in multicast beamforming
optimization. A two-layer beamforming scheme is introduced
in [7], where the first layer suppresses multicast inter-group
interference, and the second layer utilizes SCA to maximize
the SNR of the decoupled multicast groups. In [8], we propose
a successive elimination algorithm (SEA) that relies on SDR
followed by iterative elimination of higher-rank solutions to
extract a near-optimal rank-1 solution to the MMF multicast
problem. Additionally, the authors in [9] present alternative
formulations for the QoS and MMF problems, leveraging the
optimal multicast beamforming structure, which provides a
reduction in computational complexity when the number of
BS antennas is much greater than the number of UEs.
A common approach in the prior literature [10]–[12] is
arXiv:2504.06090v1  [eess.SP]  8 Apr 2025
