100
The Path to aN3LO Parton Distributions
include MHOUs in the PDF uncertainty. With PDFs determined from the same global dataset
and using the same methodology at four consecutive perturbative orders it is now possible to
assess carefully perturbative stability and provide a reliable uncertainty estimation.
Outline.
In Section 4.1 we construct an approximation to the N3LO splitting functions based
on all known exact results and limits. We compare it with the MSHT approximation [303] as
well as with the more recent approximation of Refs. [292, 298, 299, 300]. In Section 4.2 we
discuss available and approximate N3LO corrections to hard cross-sections: specifically, DIS
coefficient functions, including a generalization to this order of the FONLL [107, 104] method
for the inclusion of heavy quark mass effects, and the DY cross-section. In Section 4.3 we
present the main results of this chapter, namely the aN3LO NNPDF4.0 PDF set. We discuss
in detail perturbative convergence before and after the inclusion of MHOUs, and results are
compared to those of the MSHT group [303]. Finally, a first assessment of the impact of aN3LO
PDFs on DY and Higgs production is presented in Section 4.4.
4.1. Approximate DGLAP N3LO evolution
Having introduced DGLAP evolution in Section 1.3.2, in this section we proceed to the construc-
tion and implementation of aN3LO evolution. We first describe our strategy to approximate
the N3LO evolution equations, the way this is used to construct aN3LO anomalous dimensions
and splitting functions, and to estimate the uncertainty in the approximation and its impact on
theory predictions. We then use this strategy to construct an approximation in the non-singlet
sector, where accurate results have been available for a while [292], and benchmark it against
these results. We then present our construction of aN3LO singlet splitting functions, examine
our results, their uncertainties and their perturbative behavior. We next describe our implemen-
tation of aN3LO evolution and study the impact of aN3LO on the perturbative evolution of PDFs.
Finally, we compare our aN3LO singlet splitting functions to those of the MSHT group and to
the recent results of [298, 299, 300].
4.1.1. Construction of the approximation
The approximation of N3LO DGLAP splitting functions (Eq. (1.60)) is more conveniently
performed in Mellin space, where the kernels are called anomalous dimensions (Eq. (1.74)).
At N3LO there are seven independent contributions: three in the non-singlet sector, γns,± and
γns,s, and four in the singlet sector, γqq,ps, γqg, γgq, and γgg. In turn, each of these anomalous
dimensions can be expanded according to
γij(N, as(µ2)) = asγ(0)
ij (N) + a2
sγ(1)
ij (N) + a3
sγ(2)
ij (N) + a4
sγ(3)
ij (N) + O

a5
s

.
(4.1)
