13
are (w0x, w0y, tcoh) where w0x,y is the waist in the x, y
dimension and tcoh is the coherence time of the laser.
The coherence time is the characteristic duration since it
gives the maximal extension over which the fluids of light
is coherent. After a time on the order of the coherent
time, we could consider that it is a new fluid leading to a
new “run” of the experiment. This size can be mapped to
the axes (x, y, ζ′), where the coherence time is converted
to a length using the masses ratio of Eq. (58), such that
a linewidth of 10 kHz gives a scale along ζ′ larger than
10 m. The beam waist is usually of a few millimeters,
such that geometrically, typical experiments are highly
cigar-shaped. There are however no excitations along the
axis of the cigar, and the detection method integrates
the fluid along this axis over the exposure time of the
camera. Hence, due to translational invariance along the
t′ (or ζ′ axis), the dynamics of the system is effectively
2D. In the case of a pulse, tcoh is replaced by the pulse
duration tpulse and the aspect ratio is modified. It would
nonetheless be interesting to use the 3D+1 picture, by
adding a modulation of weak amplitude detuned by a
δω ∼1/ξt, and resolving its dynamics in the spectrum of
the fluid.
IV. ADIMENSIONALIZATION AND COMPARISON
WITH COLD ATOMS
A. Adimensional equation
Following the previous discussion, we now only con-
sider the 2D+1 NLSE. To provide a quantitative compar-
ison between paraxial fluids of light and ultracold atomic
Bose gases, it is useful to adimensionalize the NLSE and
the GPE. We rescale the transverse dynamics by the heal-
ing length ξ = 1/k0
√
2∆n. We also introduce another
characteristic scale in the longitudinal direction, the non-
linear length:
zNL =
1
k0|∆n|.
(65)
It is the propagation length (or effective evolution time)
above which nonlinear effect, hence photon-photon inter-
actions, become sizeable. One can note that it is also
the inverse of the equivalent “chemical potential” k0∆n.
We make the following changes of variables: ˜r⊥= r⊥/ξ,
˜z = z/zNL, ˜ψ = E/
p
2I0/ε0c where I0 is the average in-
tensity of the field. Then, dropping the external potential
and loss term for simplicity, Eq. (28) becomes
i∂˜ψ
∂˜z =

−˜∇2
⊥+ | ˜ψ|2
˜ψ,
(66)
where ˜∇⊥indicates derivative with respect to the adi-
mensional ˜r⊥.
All quantities in Eq. (66) are now di-
mensionless.
One can note that the new effective di-
mensionless “time” is directly equal to the nonlinear
phase accumulated during propagation over a distance
z: ˜z = z/zNL = k0∆nz. Similar adimensionalization can
be done for the GPE describing a uniform BEC by defin-
ing the healing length ξ = ℏ/√2mµ, the nonlinear time
tNL = ℏ/µ and ˜ψ = ψ/√ρ0 where µ = gρ0 and ρ0 is the
average density of the condensate and µ is the chemical
potential.
B. Comparison with cold atoms
From the adimensional form of the NLSE and the
GPE, we can compare the key quantities of the two plat-
forms to gain insight on the observable dynamics in each
of them.
Let us compare the adimensional quantities
z/zNL (or t/tNL in the cold atom case), and R/ξ where
R is the extension of the fluid.
In fluids of light, if we take the example of hot rubid-
ium vapors, we typically measure ∆n ∼10−5 (Piekarski
et al., 2021), with maximal values up to 10−4.
Then,
with λ0=780 nm, we get ξ ∼16 µm and kξ = 1/ξ ∼
50 mm−1.
Hence, the typical interaction value we
measure gives an optically accessible kξ. Indeed, we can
perturb the system with transverse waves of momentum
k⊥orders of magnitudes smaller or bigger than kξ, for
instance with a spatial light modulator (see Section VI.A
for details). Then, the minimal value of k⊥,min for which
we can detect a change in energy is limited by the length
of the nonlinear medium L. Like in the previous section,
we define as an order of magnitude the k⊥,min value for
which the perturbation gets π phase shift after propaga-
tion: ΩB(k⊥,min)L = π. We obtain k⊥,min ∼10 rad/mm
< kξ.
This means that we can probe the superfluid
to normal-fluid transition, which happens at kξ.
The
extension R of the system is the waist w0 of the beam,
which is usually of a few millimeters.
Typically, we
get R/ξ ∼100.
Since superfluid features like vortices
have a typical lengthscale of ξ, this shows that we can
observe a significant distribution of them and study
their dynamics within the extent of the fluid.
In BECs, the interactions are quantified by the chem-
ical potential µ = gρ, for which a typical order of mag-
nitude is (for 2D BECs) µ ∼10−30J (Desbuquois et al.,
2012). Consequently, ξ ∼200 nm. As a typical BEC size
we take R ∼20 µm, which gives R/ξ ∼100, so a similar
order of magnitude as paraxial fluids of light in rubidium
vapor.
The relevant limiting time t to consider for BECs is the
coherence time, which ranges from milliseconds to sec-
onds. This gives t/tNL ∼103-106. For fluids of light, the
nonlinear medium length L (hence the effective evolution
time) typically ranges from 1 cm to 20 cm, which gives
L/zNL ∼100.
Hence we measure significantly shorter
time dynamics than atomic BECs. In addition, we can
only detect the fluids after a fixed effective evolution time
