Accepted Version 
Accetped date: 7 April 2025 
2 
This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-4.0 license 
 
Energy Distribution analysis) in combination with the nuclear site group analysis. 
Spectroscopic results concerning sulfates of 2-aminopyrimidine provided valuable “reference” 
materials for the vibrational spectroscopic study and also addressed the question of their 
polymorphism. An optimal computational approach employing solid-state DFT calculations 
has also been sought to model the vibrational spectra of 2-aminopyrimidinium (1+) hydrogen 
phosphite crystals. 
 
Keywords: 2-aminopyrimidinium hydrogen phosphite; 2-aminopyrimidinium hydrogen 
sulfate; bis(2-aminopyrimidinium) sulfate monohydrate; 2-aminopyrimidinium chloride 
hemihydrate; Crystal structures; Linear and nonlinear optical properties; Vibrational spectra. 
 
1. Introduction 
In Materials Science, part of the research focuses on identifying and designing new 
crystalline materials for nonlinear optics (NLO) using organic molecules and their salts and 
cocrystals [1-4]. Thanks to their χ(2) and χ(3) NLO effects (e.g., second (SHG) and third (THG) 
harmonic generation and cascaded self-frequency doubling and tripling), these materials find 
many technical applications, especially in new laser frequency generators and signal processing 
units, in addition to optical communication, all-optical switching, optical power limiting and 
image manipulation devices [1, 5]. Designing a new molecular NLO material under controlled 
conditions requires selecting (synthesis) a promising polarizable molecule (i.e., molecular 
engineering) and promoting its incorporation into a suitable crystal structure (i.e., crystal 
engineering) [6]. The resulting molecular crystals contain organic molecules (acting as carriers 
of NLO properties), which ideally can form non-centrosymmetric phases that meet symmetry 
conditions for χ(2) NLO effects (e.g., SHG). Appropriate crystal packing results from 
supramolecular self-assembly controlled by intermolecular interactions (primarily hydrogen 
bonding) between these molecules or with co-crystallisation partners or by salt formation. The 
salts and cocrystals of these organic molecules combine favourable physicochemical properties, 
such as appropriate hyperpolarizability, high optical transparency, sufficient thermal stability, 
and an excellent optical damage threshold.  
Some of the most intensively studied materials in this family are compounds based on 
heteroaromatic molecules, particularly nitrogen-containing heterocyclic bases derived from 
triazoles [7-9], triazines [10-14], pyrazines [15] and pyrimidines [16, 17].  
