11
F(θ) = P|00⟩cos2
θ
2

+ P|11⟩sin2
θ
2

+ AΠ cos
θ
2

sin
θ
2

(15)
Here P|ij⟩refers to the probability of measuring state
|ij⟩, while AΠ is the fitted contrast of the parity oscilla-
tions, discussed in more detail in Appendix A. In Fig. 11,
a clear trend is seen that shows reduced infidelity for de-
creasing entangling angle. This trend is similar to that
seen by other groups using arbitrary-angle MS(θ) gates
as well [1, 6].
Due to significant error bars in our es-
timates, we caution against deducing a specific scaling
behavior.
0
/8
/4
3 /8
/2
, Entangling Angle (rad.)
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.030
0.035
Estimated Gate Infidelity
FIG. 11: Estimated MS(θ) infidelity as a function of θ.
The infidelity estimate is determined by Eq. 15. Error
bars are calculated for each independent measurement
(the state probabilities and the parity oscillations) and
then summed in quadrature. For the probability
measurements, 2σ Wilson scores are used. For the
parity measurement, a maximum likelihood estimation
is used to fit an amplitude to the parity oscillations, and
then the 2σ confidence intervals are determined from a
likelihood estimation performed across a selection of
oscillation amplitudes around the fitted amplitude.
B.
What is the best gate angle to use?
As shown in Fig. 11, it is clear that the fidelity per gate
improves with decreasing θ, and in Fig. 3, the decay con-
stant Mσ,even increases with decreasing θ. However, the
fidelity per radian of entangling angle is better for large θ
as seen by the total number of visible Rabi oscillations in
Fig. 3 improving with increasing θ. By lowering the in-
tensity of the beam for a fixed gate duration to generate
smaller θ, we limit the effect of power-dependent errors;
however, random frequency shifts and noise in the system
will still cause imprecision in both θ and gate coherence
that would compound for multiple applications of small-
angle gates when trying to generate a larger-angle gate.
Therefore,
when
compiling
quantum
gates
with
continuously-parameterized circuits, the minimal suffi-
cient entangling angle to achieve some desired unitary
should be used while putting as much of the entangling
angle as possible into a single pulse. For example, if a cir-
cuit calls for a fully-entangling unitary, a single MS(π/2)
should be used, not two applications of MS(π/4). On the
other hand, circuits calling for incremental entangling ro-
tations (e.g., small Trotter steps) should use only as large
a θ as necessary to take each step. These conditions are
naturally accomplished when using the KAK decompo-
sition for arbitrary SU(4) unitary operations [22, 24], a
standard approach used for circuit compilation. More-
over, additional compilation techniques are able to uti-
lize an MS(θ) gateset for improved performance such
as swap mirroring, reordering qubit labels to reduce en-
tangling angle on poorer performing pairs, and circuit
approximation [25].
VII.
CONCLUSION
Tailoring the degree of entanglement in two-qubit oper-
ations offers greater flexibility in circuit design than with
a more restricted gateset featuring only maximally entan-
gling gates. This paired with improved gate performance
for decreased θ enables decomposition of arbitary unitary
operations into a minimal set of high performance entan-
gling operations. We have detailed the key elements of
implementation that enable the realization of arbitrary-
angle entangling gates in the QSCOUT system.
We describe a detailed set of calibrations that result
in high performance arbitrary-angle gates. Careful char-
acterization of the saturation and distortion effects on
the RF amplitude arising from the hardware is used to
precisely tune the amplitude for a desired arbitrary θ.
Effects of the fourth-order light shift, namely, phase ac-
cumulation during an entangling gate that lead to deco-
herence, are mitigated by careful selection of the tone am-
plitudes generating MS(θ). We find, however, a residual
light shift is still present when selecting tone amplitudes
that result in the best entangling gate coherence. To ad-
dress this, a dynamic virtual phase shift concurrent with
the entangling gate is used to nullify the residual light
shift phase.
We have also incorporated a series of approaches that
work to provide holistic improvements in MS(θ) perfor-
mance. Spectrally compact pulse shaping and motional
mode balancing minimize the impact of frequency drift
and reduce displacement errors.
Additionally, a basis
transformation of the entangling interaction to ZZ(θ) is
performed in order to mitigates crosstalk-induced rota-
tion errors and to isolate the gate from phase instabilities
arising from different laser propagation paths.
