Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
APPENDIX
A
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
In this section, we provide additional details on key aspects of the paper, including the Gradient
Operator, Signed Distance Field (SDF), Mask Settings and Model Structure.
For the gradient operator, we discuss its approximation and the associated errors, particularly in
fluid-boundary interactions. To address these issues, we introduce specific masks—Mask1 for the
first-order gradient operator and Mask2 for the second-order operator—to reduce these errors.
The Signed Distance Field (SDF) helps define boundary points and enhances spatial understanding,
which is crucial for handling irregular shapes and obstacles. The SDF also plays a key role in the
boundary point identification process (Figure S1).
Considering that the established mapping function in Eq. 8 is nonlinear and multiscale, our archi-
tecture employs a structure similar to 3D U-Net to build complex mappings and multiscale features.
These detailed approaches contribute to improving the accuracy and robustness of the overall pre-
diction model.
A.1
GRADIENT OPERATOR
Using the Navier-Stokes equations, we transform the partial derivative of concentration with respect
to time into spatial gradient terms. For these gradient terms, we employ the second-order central
difference method to achieve estimation. Letting x be an interior point with x −∆x and x + ∆x be
points neighboring it to the left and right respectively:
f (x + ∆x) = f(x) + ∆xf ′(x) + ∆x2 f ′′(x)
2
+ ∆x3 f ′′′ (ξ1)
6
, ξ1 ∈(x, x + ∆x)
f (x −∆x) = f(x) −∆xf ′(x) + ∆x2 f ′′(x)
2
−∆x3 f ′′′ (ξ2)
6
, ξ2 ∈(x, x −∆x) .
(S1)
Solving the linear system, we derive:
f ′(x) ≈f (x + ∆x) −f (x −∆x)
2∆x
.
(S2)
To achieve better optimization results, we exclude gradients of boundary points from the training
loss calculation.
A.2
SIGNED DISTANCE FUNCTION
A signed distance field (SDF) measures the orthogonal distance from a given point x in a metric
space to the boundary of a set Ω, with the sign determined by the location of x relative to Ω. Specif-
ically: If x is inside Ω, the signed distance is positive. The distance decreases as x approaches the
boundary of Ω. If x is outside Ω, the signed distance becomes negative. In essence, the signed
distance field provides both a magnitude of the shortest distance to the boundary of the set and a
sign indicating whether the point is inside or outside the boundary.
Figure S1: An example of Signed distance function and Mask
14
