MobiSys ’25, June 23–27, 2025, Anaheim, California, US
Jinbo Peng, Junwen Duan, Zheng Lin, Haoxuan Yuan, Yue Gao, and Zhe Chen
Sequential 
scanning
Sub-Nyquist 
sampling
SigChord
Not concurrent
Need sparsity
Spectrum sensing
Concurrent, 
non-sparse
Time
Frequency
Spectrogram
Signal recovery
Protocol identification
Open header decoding
Figure 1: The SigChord wide multiband sniffing system. Un-
like sequential scanning methods [1–4] that capture only
one signal at a time, or sub-Nyquist methods [5–8] limited
to sparse spectra, SigChord detects and decodes concurrent,
non-sparse wide multiband signals at low sampling rates.
an urgent demand for a tool that provides holistic insights into the
rapidly evolving and complex wireless environments.
However, designing such a tool is non-trivial due to the prohibi-
tively high cost of traditional sampling for wide bandwidths. Ac-
cording to Nyquist sampling theory, capturing GHz spectra requires
IQ sampling rates at least equal to the spectrum bandwidth, which
confines sniffing to narrow and homogeneous signals [17, 18, 37–
41], or necessitates sacrificing detailed information [42–47]. For
the democratization of effective sniffing tools, existing studies for
wideband signal sniffing reduces the sampling overhead through
two strategies: rapid spectrum sweeping [1–3] and sub-Nyquist
sampling [5–8, 48], but both have significant limitations. Spectrum
sweeping employs narrowband radios to scan the spectrum rapidly
but cannot capture multiple signals simultaneously, restricting its
ability to analyze concurrent behaviors [22]. Moreover, while it
expedites data collection by acquiring only limited information for
each signal, this insufficiency restricts detailed physical-layer anal-
ysis such as packet header decoding. Sub-Nyquist sampling tech-
niques, such as Sparse Fourier Transform [6, 49] and Compressed
Sensing (CS) [48, 50], can recover signals below the Nyquist rate
by exploiting spectrum sparsity. However, the rapid expansion of
wireless networks has introduced increasingly non-sparse condi-
tions, where the occupied bandwidth exceeds the capabilities of
sub-Nyquist sampling. In non-sparse scenarios, the IQ sampling
rate falls below twice the Landau rate [5, 51]. Sub-Nyquist sampling
techniques fail to detect and recover signals below twice the Landau
rate [5].
To overcome the aforementioned limitations, we propose Sig-
Chord, a Transformer-based wireless signal sniffer capable of real-
time and concurrent sniffing of non-sparse wideband signals, as
shown in Figure 1. SigChord employs multi-coset sub-Nyquist sam-
pling at the frontend. At the backend, SigChord first uses a Multi
Layer Perceptron (MLP) network to embed the IQ samples into
a latent space. Then, to enable non-sparse signal sniffing, unlike
state-of-the-art (SOTA) end-to-end and generative model based
algorithms [52, 53] that involve time-consuming iterations and
struggle to preserve complex signal structures (e.g., modulation
and encoding) [54–57], we divide the signal recovery into two
stages. First, a deep Transformer network predicts the critical in-
formation for recovery, i.e., the spectrum occupancy. Then, with
this information, we make signal recovery below twice the Landau
rate feasible through rule-based least squares estimation. After that,
SigChord uses Transformer-based protocol identifiers and decoders
0
Landau rate
Blind sub-
Nyquist rate
Nyquist 
rate
Σ
𝐵
𝑓
(1) (2) (3)
(4)
(5)
2Σ
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Amplitude
Bandwidth sum
Figure 2: Nyquist rate, Landau rate [51] and blind sub-Nyquist
rate [5] for multiband signals. The Nyquist rate equals to the
bandwidth of the whole spectrum. The Landau rate equals
to the sum of the bandwidth of each signal. The blind sub-
Nyquist rate in [5] is twice the Landau rate.
for protocol classification and physical layer packet decoding. By
decoding open headers, SigChord extracts sufficient unencrypted
data for wireless network measurement.
• We design a physical layer sniffing system SigChord, capable
of spectrum sensing, signal recovery, protocol identification,
and decoding (including terrestrial, OFDM signals such as
Wi-Fi [10] and non-terrestrial, single-carrier signals such as
DVB-S2 [9]) with low sampling overhead. SigChord enables
detailed signal sniffing in wide and non-sparse spectra for
the first time.
• We design a deep and rule-based algorithm for signal recov-
ery that breaks the sub-Nyquist sampling limit, i.e., twice the
Landau rate. The neural network does not require Nyquist-
rate original signals as training labels, and the recovery al-
gorithm generalizes well to entirely unseen signals.
• The cascaded signal analysis Transformer networks elimi-
nate the need for complex protocol-specific preamble cor-
relation and traditional signal processing algorithms. With
minimal adjustments to the model architecture, SigChord
seamlessly adapts to a wide range of protocols for decoding
physical layer headers.
• We implement SigChord using software-defined radio plat-
forms. Experiments show that SigChord is both highly ef-
fective and efficient, enabling accurate and real-time perfor-
mance in physical layer inspection.
This paper is organized as follows. We give a brief introduction
to sub-Nyquist sampling and physical layer protocol headers, and
reveal our motivation in Section 2. In Section 3, we demonstrate
the design details of SigChord. We introduce the implementation
and setup in Section 4, show the experiment results in Section 5.
Related studies are reviewed in Section 6 and we finally conclude
this paper in Section 7.
2
Motivation and Background
2.1
Sub-Nyquist Sampling
Traditional signal sampling is limited by the Nyquist rate, requir-
ing a sampling rate at least equal to the full spectrum bandwidth,
necessitating costly high-speed ADCs. Landau [51] showed that
when spectrum occupancy is known, the minimum sampling rate
