different values of ℓ. To address these limitations, we adopt a reference potential made up of three Morse function
which are smoothly joined at the in between boundaries to accurately describe the short-range, medium-range, and
long-range behavior of the interaction.
The range of values limited by the bounds set for the various model parameters of the reference function results
in a diverse set of curves in the sample space. The optimal inverse potential, which best reproduces the expected
phase shifts, is identified by adjusting the parameters of the reference function to minimize a cost function, such
as the Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE). This procedure of constructing inverse potentials by solving the
phase equation using a reference function is known as the reference potential approach.
Based on this methodology, we have previously modeled the interaction using two Morse functions for α −α[20]
and three Morse functions for n-p [21] system to obtain the inverse potential across various ℓ-channels. Here we
extend the methodology to construct the inverse potential for α −d system to study the low-lying excited states
for 6Li corresponding to T =0.
2
Methodology
In this section, we discuss the significance of the reference function in inverse scattering and demonstrate the
non-linear relationship between the observable and the obtained inverse potential. The phase function method
(PFM) is used as a guiding principle in machine learning algorithms to determine the inverse scattering potential
via the Reference Potential Approach (RPA). Hence, referred to as physics-informed machine learning (PIML).
PFM provides a versatile and efficient framework for analyzing quantum scattering problems, offering distinct
advantages and simplicity. We elaborate the PFM for both single and multi-channel scattering [22] and discuss the
machine-learning-based meta-heuristic algorithm used to optimize the model parameters [14].
2.1
Reference Potential Approach
Understanding nuclear structure, reactions, and scattering requires an understanding of the nuclear interaction
potential, which describes the forces between nucleons. The nuclear interaction potential exhibits a complex struc-
ture with three distinct regions, corresponding to different physical behaviors at short, intermediate, and long ranges.
An effective potential encompasses all three regions: short-range repulsion, intermediate-range attraction, and
long-range decay to provide an accurate description of nuclear scattering dynamics.
Therefore, we use a combination of Morse functions to construct the reference potential. As a sum of exponential
terms, the Morse function effectively captures the complex structure of the interaction potential, including short-
range repulsion and the long-decaying tail at large distances. The availability of an analytical solution for the l = 0
state makes it particularly suitable for modeling nuclear interactions that vary with distance.
3
