5.3.5. Measurement-device-independent Multiparty Quantum Communication
Multiparty quantum communication protocols strive to ensure information-theoretic security in the
realm of highly sensitive and confidential multiuser communication. Using the principles of quantum
mechanics, these protocols exhibit superior physical performance compared to their classical counterparts.
Their versatile applications encompass a spectrum of scenarios such as secret multiparty conferences,
remote voting, online auctions, management of payment system master keys, collaborative scrutiny of
accounts containing quantum money, and the facilitation of secure distributed quantum computation.
Specifically, Quantum Cryptographic Conferencing (QCC) is a protocol designed for multiparty Quan-
tum Key Distribution. QCC ensures the secure sharing of a key among legitimate users, even in the
presence of potential eavesdroppers. Another notable protocol, Quantum Secret Sharing (QSS), involves
the fragmentation of a message into multiple parts distributed among a group of participants. Each
participant is allocated a share of the secret, and consequently, the complete set of shares is required
to comprehensively decipher the message. For instance, QSS can be employed to guarantee that no sin-
gle individual possesses the capability to launch a nuclear missile or access a bank vault independently.
Instead, the collective participation of all legitimate users is essential for these critical actions.
Discrete variable protocols. The Greenberger-Horne-Zeilinger (GHZ) entanglement is an important re-
source for multiparty quantum communication tasks especially for the measurement-device-independent
versions of QCC (MDI-QCC) and QSS (MDI-QSS). However, the practical applications of GHZ states
are quite limited due to the lack of two important factors—(i) high-intensity sources and (ii) reliable
distribution of the GHZ states. To tackle these limitations, Fu et al. [399] take advantage of postselected
GHZ states among three legitimate users (typically called Alice, Bob, and Charlie) to perform secure
multiparty quantum communication. As a typical MDI-QKD protocol, the postselecting measurement
device here can be regarded as a black box that can be manipulated by anyone including the eaves-
dropper. Therefore, the scheme is naturally immune to all detection-side attacks and can be regarded
as the combination of time-reversed GHZ state distribution and measurement. Moreover, by employing
the decoy-state method, the scheme can defeat photon-number-splitting attacks. The protocol in [399]
is as follows: Alice, Bob, and Charlie independently and randomly prepare quantum states with phase-
randomized weak coherent pulses in two complementary bases (Z basis and X basis). They send the
pulses to the untrusted fourth party located in the middle node, David, to perform a GHZ-state measure-
ment which projects the incoming signals onto a GHZ state. After performing the measurement, David
announces the events through public channels whether he has obtained a GHZ state and which GHZ state
he has received. Alice, Bob, and Charlie only keep the raw data of successful GHZ-state measurements
and discard the rest. They post-select the events where they use the same basis in their transmission
through an authenticated public channel. Notice that Alice performs a bit flip when Alice, Bob, and
Charlie all choose X basis and David obtains a GHZ state
1
√
2(|000⟩−|111⟩). The data of Z basis is used
to generate the key, while the data of X basis are used to estimate errors. After classical error correction
and privacy amplification, Alice, Bob, and Charlie extract secure cryptographic conferencing keys. In
the asymptotic limit, the MDI-QCC key generation rate and the MDI-QSS key rate are given by
RQCC = QZ
ν + QZ
111[1 −H(eBX
111 )] −H(EZ∗
µνω)fQZ
µνω,
(170)
RQSS = QX
ν + QX
111[1 −H(eBZ
111)] −H(EX
µνω)fQX
µνω
(171)
where QZ
µνω and EZ∗
µνω (QX
µνω and EX
µνω)) are the gain and quantum bit error rate of Z (X) basis
respectively. The subscripts µ,ν, and ω are the pulse intensities of Alice, Bob, and Charlie respectively.
QZ
111 (QX
111) is the gain of of Z (X) basis and eBX
111 (eBZ
111) is the bit error rate of X (Z) basis. The
parameter f is the error correction efficiency.
Simulation results for QCC show that the estimation using two decoy states gives a secure key rate
nearly the same as the corresponding one using infinite decoy states. In the case of asymptotic data
with two decoy states, the secure transmission distance between Alice and the middle node of MDI-QCC
is about 190 km for the detection efficiency of 40% (210 km for the detection efficiency of 93%). For
MDI-QSS, the secure transmission distance is about 130 km for the detection efficiency of 40% (150
km for the detection efficiency of 93%) between the middle node and any user. Hua et al. proposed a
similar scheme based on a GHZ entangled state which is different from the above protocol and uses a
GHZ entangled state and the polarization state prepared by users to execute BSM and realize multi-user
sharing of a common secret key [400]. They derived the secure key rate when users employ an ideal
single photon source and a weak coherent source and showed that the secure distance between each user
and the measurement device can reach more than 280 km while reducing the complexity of the quantum
network. Despite the efficiency of the protocol, its scalability diminishes exponentially with the number
65
