4
Remarks on the (super-)Planckian regime
Is quadratic gravity UV-complete in the sense that it can make predictions at arbitrarily high
energies? This question is still open [5,88].
Quadratic gravity differs greatly from standard renormalizable QFTs. Unlike the case of the
electroweak theory where, for example, the addition of the Higgs boson also improves the UV
behavior of the tree-level W-W cross section, in the case of quadratic gravity the additional
massive degrees of freedom do not improve the UV behavior of the tree-level graviton-graviton
amplitude. The latter is equal to the GR expression and grows as a function of the center-of-
mass energy, i.e. as E2
cm/M 2
p [147,54]. Furthermore, unlike the case of QCD where the property
of asymptotic freedom causes the scattering amplitudes to vanish in the infinite energy limit, in
quadratic gravity it is not yet clear whether the same holds true. At least in renormalizable scalar
models the presence of fourth-order derivatives was shown to introduce a power-law dependence
that overcomes the one-loop logarithmic suppression of the asymptotically free couplings [148].
These peculiar features could have some physical explanations and implications. For exam-
ple, asymptotic freedom may not be necessary in a quantum-gravitational context; or having
asymptotically free couplings may just be crucial to ensure that the perturbative expansion is
well-defined in the UV regime, but additional insights may be needed to have a suppressed high-
energy behavior of the amplitudes when higher-order derivatives are present. Let us discuss at
least three possibilities.
• Non-perturbative resummation: The growth of the tree-level graviton-graviton scatter-
ing amplitude might just be an indication that perturbation theory breaks down at energy
scales of the order of Ecm ∼Mp. This could mean that the resummation of the loop con-
tributions is needed in order to achieve suppression of the amplitudes [149, 150]. Due to
computational complexity, this has not yet been verified in quadratic gravity.
• Totally inclusive cross sections: It might be that in quadratic gravity the exclusive
cross sections are not physically observable at sufficiently high energies, but the measurable
ones are totally inclusive [54–57]. This was first suggested in [54], where it was shown that
the totally inclusive cross section of all tree-level exclusive processes, involving graviton,
scalaron and spin-two ghost, is suppressed in the high-energy limit.
This would mean
that at energies Ecm ≳m0, m2 the presence of the additional massive degrees of freedom
cannot be neglected and all possible active processes must be included. This phenomenon
only occurs if the spin-two ghost is quantized with negative norms, since the presence of
negative cross sections is important for cancellations to take place. This idea is still a matter
of debate, but it must be said that such a cancellation could also help explain why negative
probabilities may ultimately not be observable in quadratic gravity.
• Black-hole dominance: If black holes are present in a gravitational theory, then they are
17
