Chapter 2.
Tools and methodology
This chapter is based on Ref. [109] and my result presented in Refs. [10, 8, 7, 6].
Perturbative QCD can be used to describe the behavior of high energy scattering processes
involving hadrons as we have outlined in the previous chapter.
This approach relies on
the factorization theorem which allows to separate the perturbative from non-perturbative
contributions by absorbing the latter into quantities such as Parton Distribution Functions
(PDFs). Unfortunately, beyond the framework of lattice QCD, the functional form of PDFs
is not computable from first principles. The most common approach to overcome this issue
entails parametrizing PDFs at a common given scale Q0 and, by using DGLAP evolution, fitting
them to experimental high energy data. Historically, the first parametrizations of PDFs relied
on fixed functional forms, while in the NNPDF approach, adopted in this thesis, PDFs are
obtained by training a neural network, which can approximate any continuous function as
dictated by the Universal Approximation Theorem [110]. During a PDF fit, different sources of
uncertainties arise and have to be consistently propagated. These uncertainties, which can have
both experimental and theoretical origins, will provide a bound on our PDFs estimate, which
can systematically limit the accuracy of further computations that make use of such PDFs. It
is then clear that, to achieve accurate predictions for future colliders, as HL-LHC or EIC, both
accurate pQCD calculations and reliable statistical tools have to be adopted for PDF extraction.
In this chapter, we review the tools, assumptions and settings used within the NNPDF framework
to fit PDFs and which constitute the starting setup used to derive the results presented in the
next Chapters 3 to 5. Let us remark that the theoretical tools presented in the first section are
independent of and decoupled from the NNPDF methodology, which is outlined in the second
and third parts of the chapter. In particular, the former have also been adopted in other works
which are not directly related to PDF fitting.
Outline.
This chapter covers three rather independent topics, which are collected here to
give a unitary description of the common working environment adopted during the studies of
Chapters 3 to 5.
In Section 2.1, we describe the tools used to produce theory predictions of DIS and hadronic
observables, able to constrain PDFs. In particular, we describe two open-source code EKO Sec-
tion 2.1.1 and Yadism Section 2.1.2 adopted respectively to perform DGLAP evolution and
computing DIS coefficients. In Section 2.2, we summarize the treatment of uncertainties (both
experimental and theoretical) during our PDF fits and outline the common aspects of the
fitting methodology adopted both for polarized and unpolarized fits. Finally, we conclude, in
31
