10 
 
Methods 
 
Thin-film Synthesis. Epitaxial heterostructures of 100 nm, 50 nm, and 30 nm SrTiO3 films were 
synthesized with a 12 nm Sr3Al2O6 sacrificial layer on (001)-oriented SrTiO3 substrates by a 
RHEED-assisted pulsed laser deposition system (NBM Design). Synthesis of the Sr3Al2O6 
sacrificial layer was conducted in vacuum at a pressure of 10-6 Torr, temperature of 950 °C, laser 
fluence of 2.0 J/cm2, spot size of 2.6 mm2, and a laser repetition rate of 1 Hz. Synthesis of the 
SrTiO3 films was conducted in an oxygen environment of 0.1 Torr, temperature of 760 °C, laser 
fluence of 1.23 J/cm2, spot size of 2.6 mm2 and a laser repetition rate of 1-3 Hz.  
 
SrTiO3 Membrane Fabrication. A 600 nm-800 nm thick polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) 
support layer was spin coated on top of the SrTiO3/Sr3Al2O6/SrTiO3 heterostructures and cured at 
a temperature of 135 °C for 5 minutes. The heterostructures were then placed into deionized water 
and left at room temperature until the Sr3Al2O6 sacrificial layers were completely dissolved. After 
releasing the PMMA coated SrTiO3 films from the substrates, the membranes were transferred 
onto SiO2/Si substrates with arrays of 5 μm wide and 1 μm deep trenches. The trenched substrates 
were prepared by reactive ion etching (RIE) of photolithographically patterned SiO2. To remove 
residual water, the transferred membranes were baked at 90 °C for 5 minutes. Finally, the PMMA 
layers were dissolved in acetone at 60 °C for 30 minutes, rinsed immediately with isopropanol, 
and dried with nitrogen, leaving only the membranes. 
 
Materials Characterization. RHEED patterns and oscillations were recorded at an electron 
energy of 20 kV using a TorrRHEED system from Staib Instruments and analyzed with kSA 400 
software from k-Space Associates. AFM tapping mode images were acquired with an Asylum 
Research MFP-3D Origin+ AFM using BudgetSensor Tap300DLC tips. X-ray theta-2theta line 
scans were performed on a Rigaku Smartlab X-ray Diffractometer. SEM images were taken using 
a Hitachi SU8700 scanning electron microscope. Atomic-resolution STEM images were taken 
using a probe aberration-corrected ThermoFisher Titan scanning transmission electron microscope 
operating at 300 keV.  
 
Synchrotron Infrared Nanospectroscopy (SINS). SINS experiments were performed at 
Advanced Light Source (ALS) beamline 2.4. The beamline uses an optical setup consisting of an 
asymmetric Michelson interferometer mounted into a commercial s-SNOM microscope 
(neaSNOM, Neaspec GmBH). The setup can be described as an AFM possessing optical access to 
acquire the optical near-field. The incident IR beam within the interferometer is split into 
components by a diamond beamsplitter. The split beam defines the two interferometer arms 
formed by a metallic AFM tip and an IR high-reflectivity mirror mounted onto a translation stage. 
The IR beam component of the tip arm is focused by a parabolic mirror on the tip-sample region. 
In the experiment, the AFM is operated in tapping mode, wherein the tip is electronically driven 
to oscillate in its fundamental mechanical frequency Ω (~250 kHz with an amplitude of ~90 nm) 
