5
which can be derived using reflection positivity [21].
Let us note that our approach shares similarities with
Hamiltonian truncation (e.g. truncated conformal space ap-
proach or TCSA) [67]. However, instead of diagonalizing the
full Hamiltonian Hλ ≡Kd + Pd + λ ˆO, we diagonalize only
the perturbation ˆO. This distinction arises from the fact that
we are primarily interested in the instantaneous action of the
perturbation rather than the deformation of the whole spec-
trum in such theories. Nevertheless, if the perturbation in-
duces a gap in the bulk, the eigenstates of ˆO can be used as
a variational ansatz to approximate the ground state of the in-
teracting theory [68–70], effectively neglecting the Kd + Pd
term in the full Hamiltonian Hλ. In contrast, to produce a
gapless theory in TCSA, the original Hamiltonian Kd + Pd is
important to balance the perturbation λ ˆO, and the connection
to our pinning flow becomes more obscure.
III.
SYMMETRY CONSTRAINTS
The factorization channels that describe the pinning de-
fect in the IR are further constrained by generalized global
symmetries in the bulk CFT. In modern understanding, while
local operators transform as ordinary charges of standard 0-
form symmetry, extended defects transform in higher repre-
sentations of the generalized symmetries (see e.g. [71–77]).
Intuitively, such a representation contains information about
the fusion of the topological symmetry defects with the (non-
topological) defects and the topological junctions between
them, subject to consistencies of isotopy invariance. To make
the following discussion concrete and self-contained, we will
focus on 2d, in which case the CFT symmetry is described in
part by a fusion (sub)category C and the symmetry properties
of general line defects are captured by a bimodule category
M over C. Physically, the simple objects label indecompos-
able defects, and include their cousins from fusion with the
topological defects Li ∈C. As will explain below, the sym-
metry properties of pinning defects are described by special
bimodule categories. The generalization to higher dimensions
is conceptually similar though the details are incomplete.
We define a C-symmetric defect D to be such that it is trans-
parent to, and thus commutes with, all topological defects
Li ∈C,
Li ◦D = D ◦Li .
(III.1)
The trivial defect is obviously C-symmetric, and so are the
generalized pinning defects (I.1) as long as the defining lo-
cal operator O commutes with Li. As we will see, the C-
symmetric condition produces nontrivial constraints on the
possible IR behaviors of the defects, analogous to what was
found for symmetric RG flows in the bulk CFT [78], such as
symmetry enforced degeneracies in the IR factorization.
Let us offer some intuition behind this connection between
defect and bulk symmetric RG flows as in Figure 1, which
also gives another way to see the factorization phenomena we
have proven in Section II. The pinning flow defined in the UV
by (I.1) can be alternatively described by turning on the same
T
T
h′ R
ddxO(x)
strip RG
T
T
Tgap
|ν⟩⟨ν|
topological fusion
resolve
T
T
|Bν⟩⟨Bν|
D = L
ν
|Bν⟩⟨Bν|
defect RG
T
T
D = eh
R
dd−1xO(x)
FIG. 1: IR factorization of the pinning flow via the strip flow
by resolution. Here it is assumed that strip flow of the CFT T
ends in a gapped phase (orange region) described by TQFT
Tgap with Cardy branes |ν⟩.
operator O on a strip of thickness δ in the limit of δ/L ≪1
where L is the typical size for a bulk observable (possibly with
fine-tuning when the OPE of O generate more relevant oper-
ators). If we follow the bulk RG flow on the strip (namely
taking µδ ≫1 with µ as the scale of the flow) and suppose
this flow gaps the bulk CFT, we conclude the strip region is
effectively described by a TQFT Tgap. A TQFT can be cut-
open by inserting a complete basis of Cardy branes |ν⟩and
further fusing each of these topological boundaries onto the
interface between T and Tgap produce a simple boundary con-
dition |Bν⟩for the CFT T . Assuming that the orders of the
limits commute, we conclude that the pinning defect in the IR
is described by the factorized product
D(O) =
M
ν
|Bν⟩⟨Bν| ,
(III.2)
where ν labels the Cardy branes in the TQFT Tgap. The Cardy
branes are in one-to-one correspondence with the vacua of the
TQFT (that obey cluster decomposition) [79, 80], and these
vacuum degeneracies are consequences of generalized anoma-
lies for C. Here we see how such constraints translate to the
pinning defects straightforwardly (in terms of the factorization
channels).
Note that in (III.2) we have not specified the conformal
boundaries |Bν⟩, which depend on the interface between T
and Tgap. These are known as RG interfaces and have been
determined explicitly in the 2d Ising and tricritical Ising CFTs
[68–70, 81]. We will see how to bootstrap this information
efficiently in Section IV A with general criteria from mono-
tonicity theorems and the C-symmetric condition.
As a sanity check, the indecomposable C-bimodule cat-
egory M labeling the conformal pinning defect should be
orientation-reversal invariant
M ∼= M ,
(III.3)
