6
Unit cell
Head-on
Single coupling
...
...
...
...
50 x 50 x 50 lattice
(periodic boundary)
FIG. 2. Schematic of the transport model. In a cubic lattice
of 50×50×50 masses with periodic boundary conditions, the
mobile particle interacts via a head-on collision with a single
mass (shown here as part of a unit cell). We numerically solve
for the motion of the mobile particle and the single mass, and
use these trajectories to validate the time-local equation.
the pairwise term,
we use the simplest physically-
motivated form: a screened Coulomb interaction U(x) =
U0 exp(−|x|/λ)/|x| that gives the correct diverging be-
havior as the separation goes to zero. In ab initio NEB
calculations using periodic boundary conditions, the in-
teraction between image charges becomes negligible with
supercells larger than a few unit cells in each direc-
tion.
This observation indicates that a realistic inter-
action must be screened on a comparable length scale—
unscreened Coulomb interactions are too long-range.
IV.
TIME-LOCALITY VALIDATION
Once we derived the approximate time-local solution
for r [Eq. (16)], we wanted to test how reasonable its pre-
dictions were. To this end, we considered a cubic system
described in Sec. III composed of 50 × 50 × 50 masses
with periodic boundary conditions and rH = ˙rH = 0.
With the framework at rest and undeformed, the mo-
bile particle was launched towards one of the framework
masses along one of the edges of a cubic unit cell, set to
interact only with its target framework mass, as shown in
Fig. 2. We then evolved the system using the full set of
equations of motion (full EOM) in Eqs. (2) and (3) using
the fifth order Runge-Kutta method, recording the po-
sitions and velocities of the particle and the interacting
mass. To assess the validity of the time-local approxi-
mation, we compare the “full EOM” trajectory r (the
left-hand side of Eq. (16)) to the “time-local” trajectory:
the right-hand side of Eq. (16) calculated by inserting the
“full EOM” r and R.
When we restrict our attention to a single framework
mass, Eq. (16) simplifies dramatically. In fact, because
L and
↔
W 0(0) are diagonal and the particle moves along
a high-symmetry direction, we need to consider only a
single component of the displacement vector, leading to
r = −wU ′(r −R) + lU ′′(r −R)

˙r −˙R

,
(25)
where w and l are the diagonal elements of
↔
W 0(0) and
L, respectively.
As a benchmark for the time-local approximation, we
numerically calculated “full EOM” trajectories for sev-
eral parameter values.
For those parameters where a
clear scale exists in common materials, we chose a rep-
resentative value, while for other parameters, we chose
multiple values to illustrate deviations from the “full
EOM” solutions.
We used an interaction amplitude
U0 = 14000 meV, corresponding the mobile and frame-
work ions carrying charges of about 1e. For the screen-
ing length, we used one of two values:
λ = 1/5 ˚A
or λ = 1/2 ˚A so that U(a) ≈1.4 × 10−3 meV or
U(a) ≈11.6 meV, respectively. We also checked the po-
tential energy difference between two mobile particle po-
sitions: in the middle of the unit cell and in the middle of
one of the faces. This difference gave a rough estimate of
the potential barrier that the particle needs to overcome
to move from one unit cell to another. For λ = 1/5 ˚A,
∆U ≈0.654 meV −0.098 meV = 0.556 meV and for
λ = 1/2 ˚A, ∆U ≈401.4 meV −242.1 meV = 159.3 meV.
The latter energy barrier is similar to typical values found
in ionic conductors, so λ = 1/2 ˚A represents a typical ma-
terial, while the former barrier is unrealistically low, so
λ = 1/5 ˚A represents a pathological extreme.
We set the starting speed of the mobile particle to ei-
ther 2 ˚A/ps or 10 ˚A/ps, giving a total of four simulation
runs. For each run, the particle was initialized 24λ away
from the interacting mass. The resulting trajectories of
the interacting mass obtained from the “full EOM” solu-
tion are shown in Fig. 3(a)–(d) as the light blue curves.
In these trajectories, we see two primary trends. First,
for the same interaction profile, faster-moving particles
produce a larger maximum deflection, as expected. On
the other hand, at a given initial speed, the maximum
deflection decreases with increasing interaction width.
Physically, for a very narrow potential, the mobile par-
ticle delivers an impulse to the framework mass and
bounces off before the rest of the framework has time to
respond. Consequently, during the brief time period of
contact between the two objects, the framework mass be-
haves like a free mass. Conversely, if the potential is very
wide, the particle exerts a smaller force on the framework
mass over a longer period of time, allowing the neighbor-
ing framework masses to respond and provide a restoring
force. This result is consistent with Eq. (25), where a
wider potential corresponds to a smaller derivative of U,
decreasing the magnitude of r.
After computing the positions and velocities of the par-
ticle and the framework mass, we insert them into the
right-hand side of Eq. (25) and plot the resultant “time-
local” solutions r, shown as green curves, along with the
“full EOM” results.
Naturally, because the time-local
formula predicts a deflection only when the mobile par-
ticle exerts force on the mass, the curve does not exhibit
the oscillations observed in the full solution. Except for
the most pathological case, in Fig. 3(a), both the magni-
tude of the deflection and its time dependence are similar
