4
FIG. 2.
Directed, weighted, and signed network of Kuramoto oscillators with motifs supporting monomial eigenfunctions,
conserved cross-ratios, and symmetry-generated constants of motion. (a) Examples for Thm. 1. (a1) A single source vertex
trivially satisfies all four conditions of Thm. 1. (a2) Two oscillators satisfying 1.1 and 1.2 always satisfy 1.3. (a3) A 5-cycle
illustrating 1.3. (a4) A more complex motif yielding a monomial eigenfunction. To construct such a motif, especially to satisfy
1.3, one can define a symmetric matrix and multiply it by a real, nonzero diagonal one to obtain a symmetrizable matrix
(1.2, 1.3). (a5) A source complete graph of oscillators with antisymmetric phase-lag matrix induces a monomial eigenfunction.
(b) Examples for Thm. 2. (b1) Eight globally coupled identical oscillators lead to 8 −3 = 5 conserved cross-ratios. If these
cross-ratios are to coexist with a monomial, the phase-lag matrix is null. If αjk = π/2, there are 8−2 = 6 WS integrals. (b2) An
empty subgraph (2.1) of oscillators with identical natural frequencies (2.3) yields a conserved cross-ratio. It can have incoming
edges (2.2) and influence the time evolution of other oscillators (no restriction on the outgoing edges). (b3) The smallest directed
star inducing a conserved cross-ratio. (b4) A non-complete, non-empty and non-star graph yielding a conserved cross-ratio.
(b5) Motif of 5 vertices admitting 5 −3 = 2 functionally independent cross-ratios. (c) Examples for Thm. 3. (c1) Four (blue
and green) vertices with identical natural frequencies (3.2A) only receiving from a source with identical weights (3.1A) and
distributed into 3 disjoint parts (3.3A) admit 3 distinct symmetry generators [Lem. S10]. Theorem 3A implies that symmetry
generators acting on a conserved cross-ratio yield new constants of motion. The green separation line is meant to include all
vertices below it, forming a disjoint part linked to a symmetry generator. (c2) Four (blue and green) vertices with identical
natural frequencies ωs −2 Im(As) (3.2B) receiving one edge from source s with weight As (3.1B) are distributed in 3 disjoint
parts (3.3B). This yields two conserved cross-ratios and 3 symmetries acting on them to form additional constants of motion.
(c3) The subgraph (i.e., the rest of the network) admits a symmetry generator but yields no new constant of motion.
binary) leading to N −3 integrals, and complex weights
satisfying 2A can be included.
Thus far, we have shown through Theorems 1 and 2
that the existence of constants of motion is intimately
related to the presence of specific motifs in the graph
connecting Kuramoto oscillators.
It is natural to ask
whether monomials and cross-ratios are associated to any
symmetry in the oscillators’ connections or dynamics. In
fact, the conditions in Theorems 1 and 2 are not condi-
tions on the existence of graph automorphisms (a.k.a.,
network symmetries [65]), known to have crucial impli-
cations for cluster synchronization [66–69]. We shall see
next that other types of symmetries are particularly use-
ful, that is, Lie symmetries (a.k.a., point symmetries,
continuous symmetries): transformations of a solution
to another solution of a system of differential equations
[Fig. 1 (b)] [60].
Lie symmetries.— For variational problems, Noether’s
theorem guarantees that Lie symmetries are associated to
constants of motion, thus allowing a reduction of the sys-
tem’s order [60, 70]. Yet, there is no guarantee that there
are symmetries underlying the presence of constants of
motion for non-Lagrangian and non-Hamiltonian sys-
tems. But finding a Lie symmetry may allow building
new functionally independent constants of motion from
known ones [71], which will be our goal.
The general method to derive Lie symmetries for any
smooth differential equations involves computing the pro-
longation of the symmetry group action or its genera-
tors S [60, Theorem 2.71], often requiring lengthy calcu-
lations. For Euler-Lagrange problems and Hamiltonian
systems, the prolongation condition amounts to identify-
ing commuting operators. As shown below, such simplifi-
cation is also possible for first-order ordinary differential
equations (ODEs). Indeed, for
˙yj = Fj(t, y1, ..., yN) ,
j ∈V
(7)
with Koopman generator U = ∂t + PN
j=1 Fj(t, y)∂j, the
