International Journal on “Technical and Physical Problems of Engineering” (IJTPE), Iss. 61, Vol. 16, No. 4, Dec. 2024 
191 
sections of the gas pipeline, the dispatcher station first 
determines whether this change occurred as a result of the 
accident based on the conditions of inequality (6). 
Sequentially, the values of the function p(t) are 
automatically calculated, and its maximum or minimum 
value is determined. 
The obtained values are assumed to be equal to t=t1. 
Based on the value of p(t) at t=t1 calculated according to 
the inequality (5), the value of θ is determined. As shown 
in Figure 8. If this value is less than 0.5 and p(t)>1, it is 
determined that the location of the accident is between 
the starting and middle sections of the gas pipeline, and 
based on the value of θ, the location of the gas leak            
2
(
)
L
θ = 
 is automatically identified. Also, the valves               
1
3
(
,
)


, whose locations are already known, are 
activated to isolate the damaged section of the pipeline 
from the main section of the gas pipeline. 
Based on the results of the research, it can be stated that 
using expressions (5) and (6), it is possible to distinguish 
between accidental and technological regimes. On the 
other hand, from the moment the occurrence of an 
accident is confirmed, it is possible to determine the 
location of gas leaks and the sequence of valve 
activations. Thus, it can be concluded that the values 
obtained at the fixed time t=t1 and from these expressions 
provide a reliable information base for monitoring and 
efficiently managing the technological regimes of gas 
distribution pipelines under extreme conditions. 
To ensure the comprehensive management of system 
integrity, it is essential that emergency dispatch center 
personnel 
accurately 
understand 
whether 
pressure 
fluctuations in the final segments of the gas pipeline are 
due to incidents or technological processes and can 
discern the relationships between these processes. In this 
context, modern control methods, particularly those 
enhanced by artificial intelligence (AI) technologies, 
should be prioritized. For instance, AI technologies, 
particularly hybrid models, provide a more resilient and 
effective approach by offering accurate predictions even 
with limited data. 
In this study, we compare the performance of 
algorithms by presenting tables that highlight the 
accuracy, efficiency, and other relevant metrics of each 
algorithm (Tables 3 and 4). Specifically, indicators that 
assess algorithms' capabilities in real-time incident 
detection and data augmentation for handling data 
insufficiencies have been presented. This approach lays a 
stronger foundation for addressing existing challenges in 
pipeline engineering. 
Furthermore, key tasks include tracking the evolution 
of incidents, using data augmentation to address data 
gaps, enhancing model interpretability, and improving the 
management of pipeline integrity. Future research should 
focus on the optimization and integration of AI models to 
support informed decision-making based on a reliable 
information base. Additionally, AI enables the analysis of 
large volumes of data from various sources to predict 
incident risks, optimize management processes, and 
provide critical insights that support engineering 
decisions. 
Consequently, 
prioritizing 
the 
broader 
application of hybrid models in real-time monitoring and 
predictive technologies is essential for advancing this 
field. 
 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
A highly efficient technological Figure with a high 
reliability indicator has been proposed, based on the 
principles 
of 
the 
reconstruction 
phase, 
for 
the 
management 
of 
technological 
processes 
in 
gas 
transportation. The application of modern technologies 
and equipment to the proposed gas transportation Figure 
is of particular importance for optimizing the gasification 
capabilities of consumers.  
Several mathematical models have been developed 
and an effective computational Figure has been devised 
to address a number of important new problems related to 
the management and regulation of technological 
processes in gas transportation. This will significantly 
enhance the reliability and efficiency of gas supply 
management during the reconstruction phase of complex 
gas pipelines. The calculation results showed that the 
error in comparing the obtained algorithm values does not 
exceed 4%. The developed computational Figure can be 
used to create an information database for the efficient 
management of gas transportation systems. 
To ensure the unconditional resolution of efficient 
management issues, a function characterized by the ratio 
of pressure drops has been defined and tested. The 
analysis of the p(t) function and parameters, which can 
perform multiple operations at the fixed time t=t1, 
demonstrated that considering this indicator during the 
reconstruction phase can optimize the minimization of the 
data transmission time from information and control 
systems to dispatcher control points. The established 
relationship enables the differentiation of technological 
(stationary) and non-stationary operating modes of gas 
pipelines based on the indicators of changes in the 
parameters of the gas flow's final sections. 
Based on the results of the analyses, individual 
problems related to the reconstruction of parallel main 
gas pipelines have been solved using the developed 
algorithms and methods, taking into account the non-
stationary regime. Consequently, targeted methods for the 
reconstruction processes of an efficiently managed gas 
transport system have been identified as the subject of the 
research. 
A technological Figure has been proposed that adopts 
the integration of new technologies and methodologies to 
ensure efficiency, safety, and reliability for the effective 
management of the reconstructed gas pipeline system. A 
method for the rapid detection of faults, which should 
become an integral part of the automated dispatch control 
system of the gas pipeline, is proposed. This method 
involves recording the gas flow pressure at the start and 
end of the pipeline at a fixed moment t=t1. 
The applied optimization algorithms not only enhance 
system reliability but also optimize interventions during 
emergencies. Future research could further advance by 
exploring the application of these methods in other 
