Fig. 4 Schematic of the diel changes in Planetary boundary layer (PBL) clouds in general and
response of clouds in ship-tracks specifically. Background PBL clouds are often thicker and more
likely to precipitate at night that during the day. PBL top (white dashed line) is deeper at night
than during the day (black dashed line). Reduced precipitation efficiency inside ship-tracks tend to
increase ∆CF and ∆CTH. Polluted cloud tops are outlined by solid black lines.
4 Diel changes in L adjustment
Cloud liquid water path (L) relative change ( ∆L
L ) to aerosols has non-monotonic diel
changes (Figure 3X). ∆L
L first increases in polluted clouds in the first couple of hours
and quickly drops to negative values with time. It then continues to decrease to about
10 hr mark, after which it reverses the trend and increases with time, while remaining
negative. The initial positive ∆L
L in the first hours might be an artifact because, unlike
Nd, the timescale of L adjustment cannot be instantaneous. The decrease of ∆L
L with
time afterwards agrees with both modeling and observational results [16, 19, 20, 24],
which indicates the effect of entrainment drying of clouds due to added aerosols and
smaller droplets. Precipitation suppression is likely the main driver of the observed
increasing trend in ∆L
L after 10 hr. The timing is again consistent with the precipitation
suppression hypothesis during nighttime and agrees with the timing of ∆CF increase.
The diel change of L adjustment, calcluated as dln L
dln Nd , has similar evolution, except
it plateaus after 10hrs. The plateauing is an offset between a decrease in ∆Nd
Nd
and a
decrease in the absolute value of ∆L
L , i.e., becoming less negative, with time. Similar
temporal dynamics of
dln L
dln Nd as ours have been found in observational and modeling
studies [19, 20, 24]. The initial decreasing trend of dln L
dln Nd with age is consistent with
results in Glassmeier et al. [18]. As clouds experiencing more nighttime conditions, L
in polluted clouds recover more relative to the background, which stops the decreasing
trend of
dln L
dln Nd , which explains the plateauing for nighttime clouds. Quantitatively,
8
