4
Induced gravitational waves
Now that we have computed the power spectrum of the gravitational potential induced
by the PBH density contrast, we can compute the associated GWs production due to the
PBH domination [62–66]. Before going into detail, it is important to make some remarks.
GWs are mainly produced in two ways:
• First-order GWs: This signal corresponds to the stochastic background generated
by the inflationary fluctuations Pinf
R , with an almost flat power spectrum and usually
very weak, which we call background gravitational waves (BGWs).
• Second-order GWs: Scalar perturbations couple to the tensor ones at second order
in perturbation theory and induce GWs. For this reason, these are called scalar-
induced gravitational waves (SIGWs). Several mechanisms can produce amplified
scalar perturbations3. However, in this work, we focus on the amplified scalar density
fluctuations from the PBH-dominated phase and apply the approach in Refs. [12–14].
When considering both scalar and tensor fluctuations in the second-order perturbed Ein-
stein equations, one derives the following equation of motion for the tensor perturbations
¨h(λ)
k (t) + 3H ˙h(λ)
k (t) + k2
a2 h(λ)
k (t) = S(k, t)
a2
,
(4.1)
where λ = +, × denotes the two polarization states of the tensor modes and S(k, t) is the
source term, computed as a convolution of different modes. Here and in what follows, we
work in the Newtonian gauge. The source term arises only at second order in perturbation
theory and shows that the SIGWs are no longer free-propagating waves but rather a metric
fluctuation arising from terms quadratic in the scalar perturbations [14]. In this case, it is
given by
S(k, t) = 4
Z
d3˜k
(2π)3/2 ˜k2(1 −µ2)ΦPBH,˜kΦPBH,|k−˜k|.
(4.2)
As one can observe from this expression, the source term reflects that the contribution
from any individual mode is diluted and mixed with the contributions coming from other
modes. The power spectrum of the tensor perturbations is given by
⟨h(λ)
k (t)h(λ)
k′ (t)⟩= 1
2
2π2
k3 δ3(k + k′)Ph(k, t),
(4.3)
where the 1/2 factor comes from the fact that Ph(k, t) includes contributions from both
polarizations. During a PBH-dominated phase, the gravitational potential is constant in
time for all scales, and so it is the source term (4.2). Therefore, one can attempt to obtain
a particular solution of (4.1) and compute the correlator in (4.3) to obtain the power
spectrum of GWs induced by PBH domination:
PPBH
h
(k, t) = 16g2(k, t)
k
Z kUV
keva
d˜k
Z 1
−1
dµ
˜k3 (1 −µ2)2
|k −˜k|3
PΦPBH(˜k)PΦPBH(|k −˜k|),
(4.4)
3SIGWs are also produced by the perturbations amplified during inflation [12–14] that collapse into
PBH, or even by the evaporation of these PBH [64, 65].
– 14 –
