5
Figure 2 shows an example of the configuration evolu-
tion for the CBO algorithm for 12 agents, 4 qubits and
a randomly sampled Htarg.
The initial configurations
are sampled, after which they start to concentrate and
eventually reach a consensus.
All results in this work
will initialize 12 agents, which is equal to the number
of available cores on our classical simulation system, but
the algorithm would obviously benefit from more agents.
A.
GHZ state preparation
As
a
first
illustrative
example,
we
investigate
the
preparation
of
a
maximally
entangled
Green-
berger–Horne–Zeilinger (GHZ) [37] state on 3 qubits
|GHZ⟩=
1
√
2(|000⟩+ |111⟩),
by taking Htarg = −|GHZ⟩⟨GHZ|. To show the result-
ing energies reached more clearly, we will solve the pulse
optimization for Nfinal ≫Nin iterations throughout this
work for both the initial and final configurations. Fig-
ure 3 shows that the pulse optimization for an equilateral
triangle configuration (red triangles) performs much bet-
ter than in a lattice configuration (red squares), which is
logical given the symmetry in Htarg. This indicates that
certain configurations exhibit significantly better perfor-
mance compared to others. The CBO algorithm can be
seen to take symmetry into account as it converges to
an equilateral triangle-like configuration. The optimized
interatomic distance in the equilateral triangle also con-
tributes to reaching convergence.
Figure 3. Energy error convergence for preparation of 3-qubit
GHZ state for initial lattice (squares) and triangle (triangles)
configurations (red). Random initial configurations (blue) are
optimized (gold) and reaching much faster energy error con-
vergence. Inset: lattice (red squares) and triangle (red tri-
angles) configurations with initial to optimized configuration
evolution. Nin = 100, Nout = 20. Colorized by qubit index.
B.
Interaction types
To investigate the performance of our algorithm for vary-
ing interaction types, we run our consensus-based posi-
tion optimization procedure for Dipole-Dipole, VdW gr-
qubit, and VdW gg-qubit interactions (see App. B). Fig-
ure 4 shows representative instances for each of these
interaction types. For both Dipole-Dipole (Fig. 4a) and
VdW gg-qubit interactions (Fig. 4c), we see a great de-
crease in energy error for the optimized positions (gold)
compared to the initial positions (blue).
In particu-
lar, pulse optimization is somewhat slower for VdW gg-
qubits due to the extra controls and the qutrit manifold
{|0⟩, |1⟩, |r⟩} (rather than qubit). Figure 4b shows a typ-
ical instant for VdW gr-qubits. When inside each other’s
Rydberg blockade radius, two interacting qubits can not
be excited to their |1⟩states simultaneously, and there-
fore the ground state can not be reached for most Htarg.
Nevertheless, this use case clearly illustrates another ad-
vantage of the position optimization, which is that con-
vergence is sped up. From Fig. 4b, we clearly see that
fewer pulse optimization iterations are needed to reach
the lowest possible energy. The advantage of the CBO is
thus two-fold: configurations are found that lead both to
lower energies and fewer necesary pulse iterations. For
the rest of this section we will use Dipole-Dipole inter-
acting qubits as these do not inhibit any part of the com-
putational state space from being reached and thus give
the clearest result on energy error improvement.
C.
Hyperparameter analysis
Next, the influence of the hyperparameters α, σ and λ on
the consensus algorithm is investigated, as in (2) and (4).
Figure 5 shows the results for varying hyperparameters,
but with the exact same initial configurations and target
Hamiltonians Htarg.
For all cases, solutions are found
below chemical accuracy. However, the behavior of the
solutions differs strongly. In Fig. 5c, the parameter α is
enhanced, leading to higher weights ωα
f for better solu-
tions. This results in a stronger and faster convergence
and less overall exploration of the configuration space. In
Fig. 5d, σ is enhanced, leading to more diffusion and to-
tal exploration of the configurations at the cost of slower
consensus. This can be seen in Fig. 5a, where the final
errors still vary quite strongly after 100 pulse optimiza-
tions. Lastly, in Fig. 5e, λ is enhanced, giving rise to
faster attraction to the weighted mean. For this case, we
see in Fig. 5a that all configurations have very similar
pulse optimizations that come at the cost of exploration.
In general, we empirically find that the hyperparameters
(α = 4, σ = 0.1, λ = 0.4) lead to good solutions. The
final configurations found for all of these different cases
are similar in configuration, with the exception of Fig. 5b,
indicating the existance of several well-performing con-
figurations for a particular instance of Htarg.
