13 
 
cannot be accounted for by sliding the top layer due to the requirement of multistage 
interlayer sliding which is energetically unfavorable (Fig. S20).    
We theoretically investigate the pathways for the interlayer sliding which are 
observed by our experiment (Figs. 3a-3f) using nudged elastic band (NEB) method. 
From the DFT-calculated switching pathways presented in Fig. 3i, it can be clearly seen 
that among the four stacking orders, nonpolar ABAB is the most stable one. Nonpolar 
ABCA and two polar stackings (which are energetically degenerate as they should be) 
are metastable phases, with the total energy of 0.07 meV/unit cell and of 0.13 meV/unit 
cell higher than that of ABAB, respectively. The calculated total energy difference in 
Fig. 3i is qualitatively consistent with previous reports [39, 52, 53]. From Fig. 3i we 
can also observe that although different stackings show slightly different 
thermodynamic stability, the calculated energy barriers for the four interlayer sliding 
pathways that characterize two types of DW motion observed in experiment (blue and 
green DWs and domain patterns in Fig. 3f) do not differ much (Fig. 3i), implying that 
there is little preference among the four pathways in terms of the energy barriers to 
surmount. This agrees with our observations in Figs. 3a-3f that two types of DWs both 
happen when gated without noticeable preference.  
Mechanical switching between two polar states 
We show the reversible mechanical switching between two adjacent polar ABAC and 
ABCB in another device (device 2) that exhibits identical domain and DW patterns as 
in device 1 shown in Figs. 2&3. We realize the mechanical switching through an AFM 
tip, which has been utilized to switch domains in vdW multilayer systems [9, 57, 58]. 
The experimental details are described in Methods. Figure 4a shows the SNOM image 
of device 2 prior to the tip manipulation. For this device, we can identify two adjacent 
polar ABAC and ABCB stackings from the near-field optical response without gating 
(assigned stacking orders are indicated in Fig. 4a). This is because this sample is 
unintentionally hole doped after mechanical exfoliation (Fig. S10c for Raman spectra 
and Fig. S12 for the gate-dependent SNOM data). We also show the measured KPFM 
data for device 2 in Fig. S11, being consistent with that of device 1 shown in Fig. S9. 
Comparing Fig. 2b and Fig. 4a, we can conclude that device 1 and device 2 have the 
identical pattern: a DW indicated by the blue dashed line in Fig. 4a is shared between 
two polar ABAC and ABCB stackings and between two pairs of nonpolar ABAB and 
ABCA stackings; a second DW indicated by the green dashed line in Fig. 4a is shared 
