17
Figure 7 Dependency of n2 (a) and Isat (b) as a function of
the beam waist w0. Orange dots are experimental data in ru-
bidium vapor. Blue dots are numerical model using (Aladjidi
et al., 2024). The fits provide the scalings described in the
main text.
Besides, due to optical pumping and to the transit time
of the atoms in the beam, the beam size plays a crucial
role in this saturation intensity which can therefore be
noted Isat(∆, w0). As described in (Aladjidi, 2023) and
shown in Fig. 7, Isat(∆, w0) varies as 1/w0 while n2 is
proportional to w0. Instead of describing the refractive
index n as n = n0 + n2I, a more realistic description
incorporates the saturation term in the form:
n = n0 + n2(∆, w0)
n0
I
1 + I/Isat(∆, w0).
(79)
A direct consequence of this saturation term is that the
speed of sound obtained within the Bogoliubov perturba-
tion theory (see Section II.E) gets modified as predicted
by (Huynh et al., 2024):
cs =
√n2I
1 + I/Isat
.
(80)
c. Linear losses
The linear susceptibility also includes an
imaginary part, that leads to absorption. As discussed
already, this is of critical importance when setting the
trade-off on the laser detuning between high losses (near
resonance) and low nonlinearity (far from resonance).
Within the two-level atoms model this is given by a lin-
ear imaginary term in the NLSE that scales as N/∆2.
As we will see in Section V.A.4, in the same model, χ(3)
scales as N/∆3. This would imply that for a constant
transmission (N/∆2 = constant), it is advantageous to
reduce both N and |∆| to maximize χ(3). This simple ar-
gument is actually not true in practice for warm vapors
since these scalings are only valid far detuned from reso-
nance. As already mentioned, a description of rubidium
vapor should consider (at least) three atomic levels and
account for the transit time of atoms through the laser
beams, which affects the average atomic response due to
optical pumping (Bord´e et al., 1976). The optimal de-
tuning and temperature are therefore dependent on the
beam’s transverse size and should be optimized for each
experiment.
4. How to use alkali vapors ?
Hot atomic vapors provide a versatile and tunable plat-
form for realizing paraxial fluids of light.
As we will
see, it has been used in many different experiments but
it requires a careful implementation to take full benefit
of this versatility. Importantly, in the simple case of a
single near resonant laser, the nonlinearity arises from
the third-order susceptibility χ(3), which, as derived in
Eq. (73), follows the scaling at large detuning:
ℜ

χ(3)
∝N
∆3 .
(81)
This scaling is particularly favorable for experimental
control.
The atomic density is directly related to the va-
por pressure of the atomic species, which follows the
Clausius-Clapeyron relation. For rubidium, an accurate
empirical model is provided by (Nesmeianov, 1963), giv-
ing the equilibrium vapor pressure PRb in torr as a func-
tion of temperature:
log10 PRb = 15.88 −4529
T
+ 0.000586 T −2.99 log10 T,
(82)
for temperatures satisfying T ≥312 K (liquid phase).
Below the melting point, a different set of coefficients ap-
plies (Alcock et al., 1984), but for typical experimental
conditions, this formula is sufficient. The atomic density
N is then given by the ideal gas law: N = PRb
kBT , where kB
is the Boltzmann constant. Fig. 6(c) presents the atomic
density of a rubidium vapor for typical experimental val-
ues.
To develop intuition about the atomic density, we
provide reference values at two typical temperatures. At
T = 300 K, the rubidium vapor pressure is approximately
PRb ∼10−7 Pa, corresponding to an atomic density of
N below 1016 atoms/m3. In contrast, at T = 400 K, the
density increases dramatically to N ∼1019 atoms/m3.
This represents a change of more than three orders
of magnitude over a temperature range of just 100 K,
highlighting the strong exponential dependence of N on
T. This sensitivity makes temperature a highly effective
control parameter for tuning the interaction strength in
fluids-of-light experiments.
Conversely, the inverted cubic dependence on detun-
ing (see Figure 6b) offers a flexible means to control both
the magnitude and sign of the nonlinearity (McCormick
et al., 2003).
A red-detuned laser (∆< 0) will lead
to repulsive photon-photon interaction (self-defocusing),
