In this equation, Cr is the leading colour factor (so, for example Cr = CF for the the
Drell-Yan soft, hard, and Iqq matching coefficient, whilst Cr = TF for the Iqg matching
coefficient), and θn+1 is varied by an amount of O(1). For beam functions one varies it
between ±1, for (colour-singlet production) hard functions one does the same but at the
level of the Wilson coefficient C, and for the dijet soft functions one varies it between ±2
(roughly speaking, this is because the single soft function ‘talks to’ two beam functions).
The total uncertainty is determined by adding the uncertainties from individual TNPs in
quadrature.
Here we do not want to shift our central NnLL′ predictions, but rather to generate
an alternative uncertainty band for these predictions. Thus, we only include and vary the
TNP terms for the boundary terms and anomalous dimensions, omitting the step where
the terms determined from the RGE are included. In essence, we are then simply taking
the fundamental pieces of the resummation formula at NnLL′, and adding a term which
is a coefficient multiplied by αn+1
s
to each (or αn+2
s
in the case of Γ), which is supposed
to represent the collection of terms appearing at the next order in perturbation theory.
Each coefficient is then varied by an appropriate amount centred on zero to determine the
uncertainty band. We did check at the NLL′ level that the ‘shift’ in the central prediction
from including the terms determined from the RGE was in any case smaller than the final
TNP uncertainty band presented below, and expect the same to hold true at NNLL′. Note
that since we do not want to shift the central predictions, we also maintain the NnLO
PDFs and central NnLL′ profile scales in our NnLL′ predictions.
4.3.2
NLL′ Implementation
The TNPs we need here are boundary constants related to the 2-loop factorization functions
{I(c)
qq , I(c)
qg , S(c), H(c)} and the anomalous dimensions {Γq
2, γq
S1, γq
B1} (note that although we
write H(c), the TNP is implemented at the level of the Wilson coefficient). The c superscript
indicates that these are boundary conditions. We do not have a nuisance parameter for the
hard anomalous dimension γH as it is set by RG consistency. Several of these quantities are
actually functions of the jet radius R, but here we simply fix R = 0.5 and do not concern
ourselves with the R-dependence. The beam function matching coefficients I(c)
qq and I(c)
qg
should also be functions of z, but we also ignore this for the corresponding TNPs, taking
them to be constant in z.
At NLL′ we actually know how big the TNP variations ‘should be’ since we have the
actual results for the NNLL′ resummation ingredients. We can adjust the range of variation
of each TNP from the ‘default’ of section 4.3.1 such that its maximum magnitude corre-
sponds to the actual value of the NNLL′ ingredient. For the I(c)
qq/qg matching coefficients,
we adjust the maximum size of the TNP so that the convolution of this with the PDFs is
of the same size as the convolution of the actual NNLO matching coefficient with the PDF,
for typical x values probed in the Drell-Yan process. At this point we are of course forcing
the TNP variations to be reasonable and cover the difference between the NLL′ and NNLL′
predictions ‘by hand’ using information from the NNLL′ order. The idea here is to take
some lessons from this exercise to use at NNLL′ (where we don’t know the ingredients at
– 12 –
