3 
 
global warming. Therefore, OHUE is a key metric for understanding the ocean’s buffering capacity 
against anthropogenic forcing.  
In previous studies, OHUE has been considered as a single number by a given model, quantified 
in strongly forced scenarios. The factors found to influence or at least correlate with OHUE have 
been wide-ranging, and include ocean stratification, pycnocline depth, Atlantic meridional 
overturning circulation, ocean ventilation, mesoscale eddy diffusivity, and vertical diffusivity 
(e.g., Bourgeois et al., 2022; Kuhlbrodt & Gregory, 2012; Marshall & Zanna, 2014; Newsom et 
al., 2023; Saenko et al., 2018; Winton et al., 2014). For instance, there are notable correlations 
between the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation strength and OHUE (Kostov et al., 2014; 
Winton et al., 2014). This correlation is found to be due to the shared dependence on the transient 
ocean eddies (Saenko et al., 2018). From a more generalized perspective on regional influences, it 
has been found that the OHUE is primarily controlled by mid-latitude ventilation strength in the 
background climate, which is itself related to pycnocline depth and stratification (Newsom et al., 
2023). The pycnocline can serve as a proxy for mid-latitude ventilation depth in the background 
state, and these same ventilation processes contribute most significantly to the global OHUE under 
anthropogenic forcing. 
However, OHUE is not constant over time; it changes in response to a combination of internal 
ocean processes, external climate forcing, and feedback mechanisms (Gregory et al., 2015). These 
changes in OHUE may have profound implications for the pace of climate change and the 
predictability of future warming. Recent studies have highlighted significant changes in OHUE 
over the historical periods (Cael, 2022; Sohail et al., 2023). For instance, OHUE increased over 
the past five decades since 1970 by 0.19 ± 0.04 Wm⁻² K⁻¹ and was on average 0.58 ± 0.08 Wm⁻² 
K⁻¹ during this period (Cael, 2022). This rate of change has been diagnosed from the observed 
ocean heat content and global temperature records. Based on climate models, Sohail et al. (2023) 
focused on the anthropogenic effects over the historical period, such as greenhouse gas and 
anthropogenic aerosol emissions, on the changes in OHUE. In aerosol-only simulations, the OHUE 
has declined by 43 ± 14% since 1980, and is suggested to be linked to the slowdown of aerosol 
forcing during this period. The associated pattern is characterized by the reduction of OHUE in 
the tropics and subtropics, while it remains efficient in polar and sub-polar regions (Sohail et al. 
2023). 
This study focuses on the temporal evolution and external drivers of OHUE change during 
recent decades in observations and models. By analyzing simulations from the CMIP6 archive and 
associated single-forcing experiments from DAMIP (Detection and Attribution Model 
Intercomparison Project), we seek to unravel the mechanisms behind the recent evolution of 
OHUE and their broader climate implications. The findings aim to advance our understanding of 
the ocean’s role in moderating global warming and contribute to reducing uncertainties in climate 
projections. 
