18 atom lattice is encoded as a fully-connected
QUBO and executed on quantum annealers. In
our work we execute this on larger lattice sizes,
using quantum annealers as well as gate-based
quantum computers and classical methods. An-
other related piece of work [25] studies a slightly
different formulation of the problem where the
goal is to minimise the number of dangling bonds
(i.e. connections between vacancies and carbon
atoms in the lattice), again executed on a quan-
tum annealer. The same DkS problem as in [6]
has also been investigated in a biology-inspired
test-case [26] on randomised bipartite graphs,
where the topology of the D-Wave device is iden-
tified as the main limitation for applying it on
quantum hardware.
Ref. [5] provides a comprehensive review of
the current state of quantum optimisation, high-
lighting the challenges and future prospects of
the field. The review outlines best practices for
making fair comparisons when solving optimisa-
tion problems with different methods. The au-
thors showcase recent publications where optimi-
sation problems with varying numbers of qubits
and problem connectivity (known as density) are
solved using VQAs, comparing each solution’s
quality through the approximation ratio metric.
The most common problem connectivity involves
3-regular graphs (where each node is connected
to three others), which aligns well with quantum
hardware layouts.
Studies that explore higher
qubit counts typically maintain this low problem
connectivity.
Increasing connectivity for larger
qubit systems requires additional SWAP gates,
leading to increased hardware noise.
However,
Refs. [27–30] all consider Sherrington-Kirkpatrick
problems with 100% density, which can be refor-
mulated as QUBO problems. These studies em-
phasize both the challenge and the importance
of choosing standardised metrics to ensure that
benchmarks are fair and results are comparable.
The chosen set of metrics must fully capture the
diverse behaviors of different algorithms.
Our
work applies the best practices outlined in this re-
view to a particular problem, which stands out in
terms of qubit count and high density compared
to the other highlighted studies.
We achieve a
competitive mean approximation ratio with VQE
on a QPU relative to the results reported in Table
IV of Ref. [5]. While Ref. [5] primarily focuses on
gate-based algorithms, we also address questions
regarding how QAAs can be fairly compared to
variational gate-based methods.
Other studies [31,32] compare QAAs and gate-
based variational methods for specific use-cases.
However, a comprehensive study that includes
time comparisons, solution quality, and scaling
analysis has yet to be conducted. A recent pa-
per [33] compares the Quantum Approximate Op-
timisation Algorithm (QAOA) to quantum an-
nealing and claims that QAOA, when run on a
real gate-based device, can outperform quantum
annealing on a 5-regular max-cut graph problem.
On the other hand, Ref. [34] argues that these
comparisons could be seen as ambiguous, explain-
ing that the reported results from QAOA were
enhanced by post-selection.
These studies fur-
ther highlight the need for transparent and fair
benchmarking.
3
Problem Formulation
We are focusing on the problem of finding the
minimum energy of defective graphene structures.
This problem is discussed in more detail in Ap-
pendix A. We model the system as an N-site
hexagonal structure, as shown visually in Figure
1 (N = 18 in this example). The first graphene
structure explored is a 3 × 3 supercell, a unit cell
containing two carbon atoms repeated in a 3 × 3
arrangement, which corresponds to an 18 variable
QUBO. We also investigate other n × n super-
cells, which translate to QUBOs of varying size.
Each (binary) QUBO variable represents a site
containing either a carbon atom or a vacancy.
Each of the carbon atoms in Figure 1 can be
removed, creating a vacancy that results in the
breaking of carbon-carbon bonds. The breaking
of these bonds increases the energy of the sys-
tem’s ground state configuration. The energy in-
crease depends on where the vacancies are intro-
duced. In particular, and following Ref. [6], the
energy of the system depends only on the number
of remaining carbon-carbon bonds. In this model
we impose periodic boundary conditions, making
this structure a 3-regular graph. The supercell’s
2D geometry is maintained for all configurations.
The optimisation problem is, therefore, trans-
lated to finding the lowest energy configuration of
the system, subject to the constraint of a certain
number of vacancies. We work with three vacan-
cies, the highest studied in Ref. [6], treating this
3
