2
GUI-QIANG G. CHEN, MIKHAIL FELDMAN, AND WEI XIANG
More recently, the existence of global regular reflection solutions was established for the
Euler system for potential flow in [14,15], and further properties of these solutions were proved
in [1, 17]. In particular, the solution has a high regularity in the subsonic domain Ω(where
the solution is not a constant state); see Figs. 4.1–4.2 in which density ρ and velocity v are
in Cα(Ω) ∩C∞(Ω) for some α ∈(0, 1). More precisely, solution (ρ, v) is in a weighted H¨older
space which implies that (ρ, v) is in the Sobolev space W 1,p(Ω) for some p > 2. In addition, the
regularity of the curved reflected-diffracted shock was shown to be C∞in the interior and C2,α up
to the endpoints, which is also expected to hold for the case of the isentropic Euler system. See
also [2,3,26] for the Prandtl reflection-diffraction configuration, [13] for the Lighthill diffraction
problem, and [12] for the four-shock Riemann problem.
In contrast, a remarkable phenomenon was first observed by Serre in [44] which showed by a
formal calculation that, in the case of the isentropic Euler system, the regular shock reflection
solutions develop vortical singularity, specifically that the vorticity cannot be in L2(Ω). This
implies that the velocity cannot be in W 1,2(Ω), i.e., H1(Ω), which is lower than the regularity
of the velocity for the case of potential flow discussed above. This in particular allows that the
velocity can be discontinuous, which at least can not be excluded by the Sobolev embeddings.
Since the calculation is formal, it is important to find out whether the low regularity indeed
necessarily holds for the regular shock reflection solutions.
In this paper, under the natural assumptions on the regularity of the self-similar solutions in
the subsonic domain Ωnear the shocks, we rigorously prove that it is not possible indeed that
both the density and the velocity are in H1(Ω). The argument is based on the vortical singularity
calculation in [44]. We first apply this calculation to the regularized solutions carefully for which
the calculation can be rigorously justified; however, the additional error terms appear due to
the regularization. Then we develop DiPerna-Lions-type commutator estimates to control the
error terms when the regularization parameter tends to zero. With this, we then prove the lower
regularity property of the self-similar solutions, by employing renormalization argument. These
self-similar solutions include the above-mentioned shock reflection problems: the regular shock
reflection problem, the Prandtl reflection problem, the Lighthill diffraction problem, and the
four-shock Riemann problem.
This indicates that the self-similar solutions of the Riemann problems with shocks for the
isentropic Euler system have much more complicated structure than the corresponding solutions
for the Euler system for potential flow; in particular, the density and the velocity are not
necessarily continuous in Ω, at least their continuity can not be obtained directly by the Sobolev
embeddings. On the other hand, this argument allows the possibility that (ρ, v) ∈W 1,p(Ω) for
some or even all p ∈[1, 2), in which case there are no shocks in Ω.
This paper is organized as follows: In §2, we derive the isentropic Euler system in self-similar
coordinates and then present the notion of entropy solutions in the new coordinates. In §3, we
first formulate a general framework for analyzing the low regularity of entropy solutions of the
Riemann problems in Definition 3.1 and then establish our main theorem of this paper, Theorem
3.2, for the entropy solutions. Then, in §4, we employ the main theorem, Theorem 3.2, for the
general framework established in §3 to several fundamental transonic shock problems including
the regular shock reflection problem, the Prandtl reflection problem, the Lighthill diffraction
problem, and the Riemann problem with four-shock interactions in §4.1–§4.4, respectively. The
general framework and the main theorem, as well as ideas and approaches, developed in this
paper should be useful for solving other similar low regularity problems for solutions of nonlinear
partial differential equations.
2. The Isentropic Euler System and Entropy Solutions with Shocks
In this section, we first derive the isentropic Euler system in self-similar coordinates and then
present the notion of entropy solutions, as well as the Rankine-Hugoniot conditions and the
corresponding entropy condition across a shock (as a free boundary), in self-similar coordinates.
