Orb-v3 Models
Orb-v3 is a family of models that share the same basic architecture as Orb-v2 [28, 9] as well
as the same diffusion pretraining scheme. Despite this similar top-level training strategy, we
find that there is a range of often subtle design choices that affect a model’s performance. We
enumerate the full list of these in Appendix C, focusing here on the three most significant
choices: conservatism, maximum neighbor limits and choice of dataset.
These three key variables chart a path across the performance-speed-memory Pareto frontier.
Thus, our publicly released models* use suffixed names of the form orb-v3-X-Y-Z, where
X ∈{direct, conservative},
Y ∈{20, inf},
Z ∈{omat, mpa}
where X denotes whether forces and stress are computed as gradients of the energy, Y refers to a
maximum number of neighbors per atom, and Z is the final dataset that a model was trained on.
Conservatism and equigrad
Orb-v2 demonstrated that non-conservative potentials can be fast, low-memory and performant.
However, as shown by Bigi, Langer, and Ceriotti [22], they may have inherent limitations such
as not conserving energy in NVE molecular dynamics. We argue that the choice of direct versus
conservative models may ultimately be workflow-dependent, and thus release both types.
During training, our conservative models benefit from equigrad, a new roto-equivariance-
inducing regularization scheme. The key insight is that we can quantify and improve the
rotational invariance of the energy prediction by regularizing the gradient of 𝐸with respect to
an identity rotation matrix applied to atomic positions. See the corresponding Section below for
more information.
Neighbor limits
Orb-v2 defined atomic neighborhoods by a max radius of 10 Å and a limit of 20 neighbors.
We have since discovered that neighbor limits come with performance penalties for certain
calculations—likely due to the discontinuities they create in the PES—corroborating the findings
of Fu et al. [40]. However, unlike Fu et al. [40], we still release models that use neighbor limits,
because they occupy a different part of the performance-speed-memory Pareto frontier.
Datasets and distillation
The OMat24 dataset [20] has quickly become the default dataset for universal MLIPs [29].
Roughly half of its 100M datapoints come from AIMD, and the other half from ‘rattling’
existing low-energy structures. Early in development, we found that these rattled systems
had deleterious effects on our models when evaluated on out-of-distribution hetero-diatomic
systems (see Appendix I). Thus, all orb-v3-*-omat models are only trained on the AIMD subset
of OMat24.
We also release models trained on mpa, which is shorthand for the combination of MPTraj [5] and
Alexandria (PBE) [16]. These datasets have been instrumental in the development of universal
MLIPs, but in our view have now been supplanted by OMat24, which is much larger, more
diverse in terms of off-equilibrium structures, and uses newer pseudo-potentials. We release
mpa models for compatibility with existing benchmarks such as Matbench-Discovery, but advise
users of orb-v3 to default to the -omat versions.
*Available under an Apache 2.0 License at https://github.com/orbital-materials/orb-models.
3
