Quantum hydrodynamics of a polariton fluid: pure energy relaxation terms
D. A. Saltykova,1 A. V. Yulin,1 and I. A. Shelykh2
1ITMO University, St.
Petersburg 197101, Russia
2Science Institute, University of Iceland, Dunhagi 3, IS-107 Reykjavik, Iceland
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
Cavity polaritons, hybrid half-light half-matter excitations in quantum microcavities in the strong-
coupling regime demonstrate clear signatures of quantum collective behavior, such as analogues
of BEC and superfluidity at surprisingly high temperatures.
The analysis of the formation of
these states demands an account of the relaxation processes in the system.
Although there are
well-established approaches for the description of some of them, such as finite lifetime polariton,
an external optical pump, and coupling with an incoherent excitonic reservoir, the treatment of
pure energy relaxation in a polariton fluid still remains a puzzle.
Here, based on the quantum
hydrodynamics approach, we derive the corresponding equations where the energy relaxation term
appears naturally. We analyze in detail how it affects the dynamics of polariton droplets and the
dispersion of elementary excitations of a uniform polariton condensate. Although we focus on the
case of cavity polaritons, our approach can be applied to other cases of bosonic condensates, where
the processes of energy relaxation play an important role.
The physics of quantum fluids represents a major part
of modern condensed matter and atomic physics. In the
low-temperature limit the ensembles of identical quan-
tum particles can form macroscopically coherent states
corresponding to Bose-Einstein condensates (BECs) and
demonstrate the remarkable property of superfluidity.
This phenomenon is well studied in the domain of cold
atomic gases, where the dynamics of condensate droplets
can be modeled by the Gross-Pitaevskii equation for the
macroscopic wavefunction (order parameter) of the con-
densate [1]:
iℏ∂ψ
∂t = −ℏ2
2m∇2ψ + Uψ + g|ψ|2ψ.
(1)
The first term on the right-hand side corresponds to
a kinetic energy of the condensed particles, the second
term describes an interaction with an external poten-
tial corresponding to an optical or magnetic trap, and
the last non-linear term corresponds to interatomic in-
teractions treated within the framework of the mean-field
and s-wave scattering approximations. Gross-Pitaevskii
equation gives a perfect description of the evolution of
a conservative system with both the number of particles
N =
R
|ψ(r, t)|2d2r and the total energy:
H =
Z  ℏ2
2m|∇ψ|2 + U|ψ|2 + g
2|ψ|4

d2r.
(2)
The characteristic temperatures of the BEC phase
transition for cold atomic gases lie in the nanokelvin di-
apason, which is related to the large mass of condens-
ing atoms, such as isotopes of sodium and rubidium.
This motivated the search of analogues of BECs in con-
densed matter systems, where effective masses of vari-
ous bosonic quasiparticles are several orders of magni-
tude smaller, and one can expect formation of quantum
collective states at much higher temperatures.
One of the attractive possibilities is the use of ensem-
bles of exciton polaritons (also known as cavity polari-
tons), which appear when a strong coupling regime be-
tween excitonic and photonic modes is realized in an opti-
cal microresonator [2, 3]. Being composite half-light-half-
matter particles, polaritons inherit an extremely small
effective mass (about 10−5 of the mass of free elec-
trons) and large coherence length (in the mm scale) [4]
from their photonic component. However, the presence
of an excitonic component results in efficient polariton-
polariton interactions, which lead to an extremely strong
nonlinear optical response. The polariton BEC and su-
perfluidity were experimentally observed at surprisingly
high temperatures under both optical [5–8] and electrical
[9] excitation.
In addition to the difference in effective masses, there
are several important distinctions between polaritonic
and atomic systems.
First, polaritons can be directly created optically and
have finite lifetimes because of the possibility for the pho-
tons to leave the system through the partially transparent
Bragg mirrors.
Second, the presence of the excitonic fraction in a po-
lariton makes possible efficient polariton-phonon interac-
tion, which can both couple polaritons to an ensemble
of incoherent excitons and lead to the energy relaxation
within the polariton liquid itself.
These differences require substantial modifications of
the dynamic equation 1. The finite lifetime of polaritons
and an external coherent pump can also be introduced
straightforwardly as a simple linear decay term and a
complex time exponent source on the right-hand side of
the equation 1 [10]. The incoherent pump and the cou-
pling between polaritons and incoherent excitons are usu-
ally described in the framework of the Wouters-Carusotto
model, which was first formulated for scaler polaritons
[11] and then generalized for the spinor case [12].
arXiv:2504.06360v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  8 Apr 2025
