4
FIG. 2. Top Row: Example images of the focused beam spot taken with a 4.8 µm-pixel CCD camera and λ = 625 nm
photons. The setup included only the reflective focusing unit (OAP and collimator) and not the MEMS mirror. The central
image shows the best focus, where the spot is round with a (4σ) full width of 90 µm. The left and right images show the effect
on spot size and shape of defocusing the beam by ±1.2 mm, illustrating the slight astigmatism in our system. The source
of this astigmatism was later found to be caused by slight angular misalignments within the focusing unit. See Appendix C
for details on how this issue was mitigated. Bottom Left: Measurements of the spot size from the reflective focusing unit
(only) at 625 nm as a function of distance from the expected focal length, based on the calculated spot size for M = 6.16,
NA=0.1, and mean fiber diameter of 10 µm. The gray bar is the range of spot sizes expected within the quoted range of
Thorlabs fiber diameter, which is only accurate to the 3 µm level. Astigmatism in the focusing unit is evident in the top plots,
where the best focus is located where X and Y have the same width, yet each (X and Y) has a focus shifted relative to this
nominal focal point. For a system with astigmatism corrected, we thus expect this system to be diffraction limited at 625 nm
to 65 µm, which is in agreement with the lower range estimate of the theory band. We have demonstrated this correction to
the astigmatism and present initial results in Appendix C. Bottom Right: Spot size vs wavelength for the range of optical
diodes used in this study, where the mean radius, semi-major and semi-minor axes are as-measured values, obtained in the
full MEMS system during warm checkouts. The absolute minimum spot size, set by the magnified size of the 10 micron fiber,
is shown as a horizontal dashed line. The best focus shows the spot size at the respective X and Y focuses from the left
figure, which are much closer to the divergence limit. The gray points show the imputed spot size using a system with a larger
magnification, which reduces diffraction and astigmatism effects. Finally, the black points show the major and minor axes of
the spot produced by a newer collimator design that largely corrects the astigmatism seen in this system. The grey band shows
the expected diffraction-limited performance assuming a 4σ fiber diameter of 10µm. The fact that the imputed spot size at
1µm is below this band reflects the fact that the fiber is approaching the single-mode limit.
A.
CCD Measurements
Bench-top measurements of beam spot diameter pro-
duced by the two-part reflective focusing unit were made
using 625-nm photons and a CCD camera with 4.8 µm
pixel pitch (Thorlabs Model CS235MU). The focal plane
of the camera was moved through the expected focal
point of the full MEMS scanner, using a micrometer
stage.
Typical results of the CCD measurements are
shown as intensity contour plots in the three upper pan-
els of Figure 2. The “best-focus” data is shown in the
center. Images obtained with the camera ± 1.2 mm away
from the focus along the optical axis are also shown (to
the left and right). The beam spots were characterized by
