6
Recalling that under parallel transport along V µ, the
vector U µ changes according to
V α∂αU µ = −Γµ
αβV αU β ∗= −Kµ
αβV αU β ,
(42)
we can write the deficit around the closed circuits as
δµ = −δλ2h
−V αKµ
αβ(x1)U β
+ U αKµ
αβ(x2)(U β + V β)
+ V αKµ
αβ(x3)V βi
+ O(δλ3) .
(43)
The scaling with δλ2 originates from the fact that we fol-
low the autoparallels only for a short amount of proper
time δλ, and further supports the interpretation of this
visualization technique as a holonomy since it approxi-
mately scales with the area enclosed by the circuit.
At the same time, the above expression is approximate
in nature and only holds for autoparallels with a maxi-
mum proper time δλ ≪1, making this method semi-local
(that is, valid in a spacetime region of size δλ around a
fiducial point x0). This means for practical purposes (we
choose δλ = 0.4) that the resulting circuits appear rather
small when superimposed with the streamline plot of the
background torsion field. For this reason we scale the cir-
cuit by the factor δλ−1 when visualizing. For the above
example torsion configurations (35)–(37) we plot the four
scaled autoparallels with the corresponding scaled dis-
placement vector in Fig. 4.
C.
Autoparallel visualization (semi-global)
Moving away from the local notion of torsion and in-
finitesimal parallelograms and the semi-local notion of
autoparallel circuits and their holonomies, we would now
like to focus on global properties of torsion fields. Gener-
ically, without any additional assumptions on its sym-
metry properties, torsion in two-dimensional space(time)
corresponds to a vector field. As such, in two-dimensional
settings it can be visualized straightforwardly via stream-
line plots. However, this is not always satisfactory since
the properties of autoparallel curves—and how their
shape is affected by the presence of torsion—does not
follow intuitively from the streamlines of the torsion vec-
tor field. Formulated in the two-dimensional setting, the
autoparallel equation is
¨t = +(ϵχ ˙x −τ ˙t) ˙x ,
(44)
¨x = −(ϵτ ˙t −χ ˙x)˙t .
(45)
The flat metric enters these expressions via the factor ϵ
that stems from the raising and lowering of torsion in-
dices in the contortion tensor, cf.
Eq. (6).
If the ex-
pressions in parentheses were constant coefficients, the
motion would correspond to that of a particle under in-
fluence of a Lorentz-type force, as one may expect in the
presence of a vector field.
However, since torsion is a
2-form-valued vector, it instead couples to a bilinear of
velocities, somewhat obfuscating a physical intuition for
autoparallel motion.
For this reason, we propose a visualization of tor-
sion fields that superimposes the streamplot of the tor-
sion background together with finite-range autoparallels.
These autoparallels are defined to originate at each fidu-
cial coordinate point in two arbitrarily chosen directions;
however, since the background spacetime is flat, it is sug-
gestive to take the vector fields (1, 0 and (0, 1) as initial
velocities. By comparing how the autoparallels’ shapes
change as one varies the fiducial coordinate point x0, one
is then able to infer properties of autoparallel motion,
how it depends on the background torsion field, and how
it changes semi-globally. We plot this for the three tor-
sion example configurations in Fig. 5.
This concludes the section on torsion visualizations
in two space(time) dimensions.
We close by pointing
out that these methods can also be applied to higher-
dimensional torsion fields of a certain symmetry (say,
four-dimensional spherically symmetric fields) since one
would be able to suppress spherical directions and focus
solely on the temporal-radial sector. We will leave such
investigations and possible further developments of the
three visualization techniques to the future.
V.
CONSTANT TORSION: SYMMETRIES
From now on, we focus on constant torsion.
Equa-
tion (25) tells us that the curvature is hence zero, which
simplifies the subsequent considerations. To that end, let
us briefly set torsion to zero and recall the isometries of
the resulting flat spacetime. It is encoded by the three
Killing vectors
eAµ = (1, 0) ,
eBµ = (0, 1) ,
eCµ = (x, ϵ t) .
(46)
While the Killing vectors eAµ and eBµ encode translation
invariance, the third Killing vector eCµ is a result of boost
invariance. This is also highlighted by the norms of these
vectors:
eA · eA = −ϵ ,
eB · eB = 1 ,
eC · eC = t2 −ϵx2 .
(47)
In the spacetime setting we have ϵ = 1 and hence eAµ
is timelike, corresponding to time translation invariance.
Similarly, eCµ becomes null on the surface t2 = x2, im-
plying that in the spacetime setting it corresponds to the
boost Killing vector. These three Killing vectors satisfy
the algebra
[ eA, eB] = 0 ,
[ eA, eC] = ϵ eB ,
[ eB, eC] = eA ,
(48)
which is the Poincar´e algebra in two-dimensional space-
time (ϵ = +1) or two-dimensional space (ϵ = −1). For
any Killing vector Kµ one may compute the antisymmet-
ric generator matrix ∇µKν that, when exponentiated,
