provides a geometric interpretation of EE on the gravity side, which allows for computations
directly from the gravitational action. The computational power of gauge/gravity duality
is unfolded by relating the partition function of the CFT to the on–shell Euclidean action
Igrav of the gravitational dual [9, 10]
ln ZCFT ≃−Igrav .
(2.2)
Ref. [23] established a direct connection between EE and the gravitational action, by eval-
uating the latter on a manifold M with a squashed conical singularity. In this approach,
the n–fold cover Cn on the boundary is dual to a regular Euclidean n–fold cover Mn in
the bulk. Assuming the Zn symmetry holds for the bulk geometry Mn, one can construct
an orbifold M(n) = Mn/Zn. The bulk on–shell action for this orbifold is then related to
that of the original manifold by the relation I[Mn] = nI

M(n)
. Thus, in the holographic
context, the entanglement entropy of a region A can be computed as
S(A) = −∂ϑI
h
M(ϑ)i
ϑ=1 ,
(2.3)
where ϑ = 1/n is the inverse replica parameter, and the orbifold geometry has an angular
deficit of 2π(1 −ϑ). On general grounds, the bulk action evaluated on an orbifold can be
decomposed into a regular and a singular contribution. In the case of Einstein gravity, the
corresponding action takes the form
1
16πGN
Z
M(ϑ)
d4X√gR(ϑ) =
1
16πGN
Z
M
d4X√gR + (1 −ϑ)
4GN
A [Σ] ,
(2.4)
where
A (Σ) =
Z
Σ
d2Y √γ ,
(2.5)
is the area of the codimension–2 surface Σ located at the conical singularity, where the
induced metric is denoted as γab, with the indices (a, b, · · · ) referring to the intrinsic coor-
dinates. Indeed, the first term corresponds to the Einstein–Hilbert action, evaluated on a
smooth manifold M, while the second term can be identified as the Nambu–Goto action
which described a codimension–2 cosmic brane with tension T = (1−ϑ)
4G , embedded in the
spacetime geometry
[31]. By substituting this expression into Eq.(2.3) and taking the
tensionless limit ϑ = 1, the well–known Ryu–Takayanagi formula (1.1) for EE is recovered
for a minimal surface Σmin.
The LM prescription can be extended to gravitational theories, which include higher-
curvature corrections [31–33].
In the next section, we examine a modification to Einstein gravity in the form of
quadratic terms in the curvature and explore the codimension–2 functional derived from
this class of theories. Particularly remarkable is the case where the quadratic couplings in
the curvature produce Conformal Gravity in the bulk, which is the only theory which is
invariant under Weyl rescaling of the metric. For that particular theory, the LM procedure
unveils the connection between a Weyl invariant in the bulk with another residing on a
– 4 –
