Figure 2: The hierarchy among the symmetry breaking scales of the models and the gauge
groups that hold on each energy regime. For scenario A we have MX = MB, for scenario B
we have MB < MPl, while for scenario C we have MB = MPl.
The RG evolution of the couplings below the GUT scale is clear and we calculate the
RGEs as usual. On the contrary, regarding the running of gauge theories based on non-
compact groups, the situation is certainly not that clear. There exist very serious calcu-
lations of the β-functions of the various terms of Stelle’s R2 gravity, which was proven to
be renormalizable [87, 88]. However, all calculations are done in Euclidean space [89–94].
Therefore, strictly speaking, the calculation of the β-function of a gauge theory based on
a non-compact group has not been done. We speculate, though, that at least at one-loop
level, the β-functions of gauge theories based on such groups could be well approximated by
the respective ones of their compact counterparts. This finds support from suggestions of
Donoghue [95–97], which we adapt when calculating β-functions (see [60])).
Scenario A: the SO(10) gauge coupling runs until the MX scale, where it has to match the
value of both the SO(6) and SO(12) gauge couplings:
α(1)
10 (MX) = α(1)
CG(MX) .
(142)
Substituting the above relation into (71) and considering its last term, we can compare this
term with the SO(12) contributions to the cosmological constant. Thus, we have an estimate
of the scale (its precise value will depend on various parameters):
MX ∼1018 GeV .
(143)
Unfortunately, if we try to run the SO(18) gauge coupling up to MPl, it becomes clear that
its steep β-function pushes it rapidly in the non-perturbative regime and it has a Landau pole
before it reaches the Planck scale. A drastic change of the field content and/or additional
new physics phenomena below MPl could in principle ameliorate the situation.
Scenaria B & C: in the former we break SO(18) below the Planck scale, MB < MPl, while
in the latter SO(18) breaks at the Planck scale, MB = MPl. Consequently, in both scenaria,
the SO(6) × SO(12) gauge group runs until MX, below which only SO(10) and EG are left
(and the global U(1) that ignore throughout the study). We remind that SO(6) and SO(12)
should always break at the same scale, in order to fine tune the cosmological constant.
We cannot use a matching condition like 142 in either case, as we now have α(1)
10 (MX) =
α(1)
12 (MX). Therefore, employing both the SO(10) and SO(12) gauge β-functions and the
30
