Unlimited quantum correlation advantage from bound entanglement
Armin Tavakoli,1, ∗Carles Roch i Carceller,1 Lucas Tendick,2, 3, 4 and Tamás Vértesi5
1Physics Department and NanoLund, Lund University, Box 118, 22100 Lund, Sweden
2Inria, Université Paris-Saclay Palaiseau, France
3CPHT, CNRS, Ecole Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France
4LIX, CNRS, Ecole Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France
5HUN-REN Institute for Nuclear Research, P.O. Box 51, H-4001 Debrecen, Hungary
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
Entangled states that cannot be distilled to maximal entanglement are called bound entangled and they are
often viewed as too weak to break the limitations of classical models. Here, we show a strongly contrasting result:
that bound entangled states, when deployed as resources between two senders who communicate with a receiver,
can generate correlation advantages of unlimited magnitude. The proof is based on using many copies of a bound
entangled state to assist quantum communication. We show that in order to simulate the correlations predicted by
bound entanglement, one requires in the many-copy limit either an entanglement visibility that tends to zero or a
diverging amount of overhead communication. This capability of bound entanglement is unlocked by only using
elementary single-qubit operations. The result shows that bound entanglement can be a scalable resource for
breaking the limitations of physical models without access to entanglement.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Entanglement is the paradigmatic resource for quantum in-
formation. Although most useful forms of entanglement can
be converted into maximally entangled states by the process
of entanglement distillation, there exist also entangled states
for which distillation is impossible, even when the state is
available in infinitely many copies. These states are called
bound entangled [1]; see Fig 1. In practice, bound entangled
states are classified as the entangled states that fail to be de-
tected by the seminal positive partial-transpose (PPT) criterion,
as the existence of other bound entangled states remains a
long-standing open problem [2, 3]. Bound entangled states
are remarkably common in high-dimensional Hilbert spaces:
their volume becomes superexponentially larger than that of
separable states [4], and their distance to the separable set can
become arbitrarily large [5].
Nevertheless, bound entangled states are often too weakly
entangled to be useful for quantum information protocols, let
alone to generate correlations that break the limitations of
generic classical models (see the review [6]). For example,
bound entangled states can neither be used to beat the classical
capacity limit in quantum communication [7] nor the classical
fidelity limit in teleportation [8]. Moreover, they have been
conjectured to be useless for device-independent quantum key
distribution [9]. For 15 years, the conjecture stood that bound
entanglement also cannot violate any Bell inequality [10], be-
fore being falsified in 2014 by an explicit counter example
[11]. However, the degree of violation, which is of the order
10−4, is too small to make it practically relevant. Despite later
works exploring nonlocality from bipartite bound entangled
states, no significantly larger violation has been found [12, 13].
Similar trends have also been observed in quantum steering
scenarios [14]. This may suggest that it is a rare occurance that
a bound entangled state can violate, even by a tiny margin, a
∗armin.tavakoli@fysik.lu.se
FIG. 1: Bipartite quantum states. The sets of separable states, bound
entangled states and entangled states. All states that are not separable
are entangled. The subset of entangled states that are bound
entangled cannot be distilled to maximal entanglement when
available in any number of copies.
Bell inequality or steering inequality.
In contrast, it was recently shown that three-dimensional
bound entangled states can generate significant correlation ad-
vantages in scenarios that involve communication between
senders and receivers [15].
Subsequently, numerical evi-
dence has shown that the correlation advantages can become
even more pronounced in communication tasks using four-
dimensional bound entanglement [16]. These results pave the
way for a much stronger and conceptually important question:
Can high-dimensional bound entanglement generate unlimited
correlation advantages over any possible communication
model that has no access to entanglement?
This question is the focus of this article, and we answer it
affirmatively.
We consider a scenario with two independent senders and
one receiver [17]. The formers respectively hold private clas-
sical data and encode it into quantum messages that are sent
to the receiver. The receiver decodes the two messages with
the aim of learning some binary property of their combined
data. This is illustrated in Fig 2. Importantly, no limitations
arXiv:2504.06395v1  [quant-ph]  8 Apr 2025
