resetting, with and without MetaD. Section 6 overviews anticipated future development of
the resetting method. We conclude the review with a practical discussion of when and how
should practitioners use resetting for enhanced sampling.
2
What is stochastic resetting?
Before reviewing the theory of resetting in detail, and outlining suﬃcient and universal
conditions for accelerating a stochastic process, we qualitatively discuss the typical behavior
of stochastic processes that are accelerated under resetting.
Resetting is the procedure of occasionally stopping and restarting a random process,
subject to the resampling of independent and identically distributed initial conditions. It
has drawn much attention for over a decade,43,44 since the pioneering work of Evans and
Majumdar.45 They studied a particle diﬀusing in one dimension, which is returned to its
initial position (reset) at random times, sampled from an exponential distribution with a
ﬁxed rate r. Evans and Madjumadar showed this system is fundamentally diﬀerent than the
corresponding process without resetting: While the position distribution without resetting
is a Gaussian with time-dependent width, under resetting the system reaches a steady state
with a Laplace position distribution. Furthermore, the mean time for the particle to reach
an absorbing boundary at a distance L from the origin diverges without resetting but is
ﬁnite under resetting at a ﬁnite rate.
Figure 1(a) illustrates the setup of Evans and Majumdar. The blue line shows a random
trajectory without resetting along a coordinate x.
The particle is initiated at the black
dashed line, and ﬁrst reaches the target gray dashed line located at L at time t = τ. We
will refer to the time in which the system ﬁrst reaches the target (with or without resetting)
as the ﬁrst-passage time (FPT). Alternatively, under resetting, the particle returns to the
initial position at some random time, as indicated by the dotted orange line. In this speciﬁc
example, the trajectory is composed of two independent segments separated by a resetting
event, but it can generally be composed of any number of segments.
The ﬁrst segment
follows the blue line until the restart and the second segment follows the orange solid line
until reaching the target at time τr. Note that τr is the cumulative duration of all segments
in the trajectory under resetting. In this particular case, the total time it took the particle to
reach the absorbing boundary is shorter with resetting, i.e., τr < τ. Evans and Madjumdar
showed that for a diﬀusing Brownian particle introducing resetting at a small ﬁnite rate
makes the mean FPT (MFPT) under restart ﬁnite. Therefore, ⟨τ⟩r ≪⟨τ⟩for all ﬁnite r.
As we will discuss in the next section, resetting will not always accelerate a stochastic pro-
cess. However, this powerful result, that introducing resetting lowers the MFPT, was found
to be widespread, as demonstrated in various recent applications of resetting for accelerating
stochastic processes: from queuing systems46,47 and randomized computer algorithms,48,49
to ﬁrst-passage and search processes,50–59 and recently, by us, in enhanced sampling of MD
simulations.5,39–41 Apart from applications, resetting also emerged as a theoretical frame-
work for a better understanding of biological phenomena such as enzymatic catalysis and
inhibition,60,61 and backtrack recovery by RNA polymerases.62,63 In addition, its ability to
generate non-trivial non-equilibrium steady states recently encouraged novel experimental
studies in non-equilibrium statistical mechanics.64–66 The ability to reduce the MFPT of
4
