Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
14
Human Activity Recognition using RGB-Event based Sensors
improving overall performance. This process can be expressed as,
F3 = Concat(wR ∗FR, wE ∗FE),
wR, wE = σ(Conv(Concat(FR, FE))).
(9)
where wR and wE denote the adaptively optimal weights, σ is the Sigmoid
activation function.
Regarding the three optional fusion methods discussed above, previous
approaches typically involve manually setting a fixed threshold to evaluate
the quality of each modality and making a selection accordingly. In contrast,
this work explores the use of a policy network for adaptive selection, thereby
eliminating the need for introducing additional hyperparameters. Concretely,
our policy network is built using Multilayer Perceptrons (MLPs), which map
the features extracted from the multi-modal HCO layer to F ∈RB×3. Here,
B represents the batch size and 3 indicates the number of possible selection
paths. To maintain differentiability during the network’s backward process, we
employ the Gumbel-Softmax [63] technique to obtain the one-hot vector rep-
resentations. By optimizing the network, it is possible for the policy network
to dynamically route a suitable path for multi-modal fusion, thereby achiev-
ing a better performance while eliminating the need for redundant manual
configuration.
3.4 Classification Head & Loss Function
Following the processing through multi-modal HCO blocks, we can achieve
a robust multi-modal feature representation. Then, we input the fused features
into the classification head to realize activity recognition. In particular, we
initially acquire features Fout ∈RB×C by applying a LayerNorm layer and
average pooling layer. Subsequently, the features are mapped to the predicted
scores ˆyi ∈RB×C′ through a linear layer, where C′ is the number of action
categories. Finally, we calculate the cross entropy loss between the predicted
results and the ground truth labels, which can be formulated as,
L = −1
N
N
X
i=1
yi log ˆyi + (1 −yi) log(1 −ˆyi).
(10)
where ˆyi is the predicted scores and yi is the ground truth.
4 HARDVS 2.0 Benchmark Dataset
4.1 Protocols
We aim to provide a good platform for the training and evaluation of
multi-modal RGB-Event human activity recognition. When constructing the
HARDVS 2.0 benchmark dataset, the following attributes/highlights are con-
sidered: 1). Large-scale: As we all know, large-scale datasets play a very
