Finally, we report error bars on all of our met-
rics to enable proper statistical interpretation.
We have two distinct sources of error in our meth-
ods. For our optimal solution probability metric,
we have the standard error, SE, which takes into
account shot noise when sampling from the out-
put distribution:
SE =
s
Ps(1 −Ps)
Nsolutions
.
(5)
Here we create our collection of solutions
by aggregating shots across many experiments.
This means that the total number of solutions
for quantum annealing and VQE is equal to
Nsolutions = Nexperiments×Nshots, with Nexperiments
being the number of times the experiment is re-
peated and Nshots the number of shots per exper-
iment. While in simulated annealing and random
sampling it is equal to the number of times we run
the algorithm. For the definitions of shots and
experiments see Section 4.1.
This is necessary
with quantum annealing as the D-Wave devices
have a maximum QPU access time, and in order
to increase the number of shots to a sufficiently
large number, one needs to run the experiment
again [57].
We also compute the standard deviation, σ:
σ =
v
u
u
t
PNexperiments
i=1
(xi −µ)2
Nexperiments
,
(6)
where xi is a value obtained from the experiment
and µ is the experiment mean. The resulting er-
ror bar takes into account errors due to imperfect
preparation of the ground state.
We therefore
repeat ‘experiments’: the entire process of state
preparation and generating Nshots samples sev-
eral times (Nexperiments).
For each experiment,
we compute the values of our quality of solution
metrics, and then report the mean and standard
deviation as above to capture this variation in
state preparation. Note that we also use σ for our
time metrics. Finally, we note that we could sim-
ply aggregate all shots across all experiments into
one big distribution and not discuss two sources
of error. We choose to separate out the two error
sources to achieve more detailed insight into these
methods, and to allow us to meaningfully char-
acterise the runtime. As σ is the more dominant
error source (notice SE will be small as Nsolutions
is large) we report this as our error bars in the
main text and report the SE in Appendix C, Ta-
ble 2.
5
Results
We first solve the 18 variable QUBO and anal-
yse our methods’ performance using the metrics
defined in Section 4.3.
Figure 3 shows the en-
ergy probability distributions obtained by each
method before post-selection.
For VQE on the state vector simulator and
quantum annealing, the experiment was carried
out 10 times, the output samples were accumu-
lated and the distributions renormalised.
For
VQE on the IBM QPU the experiment was car-
ried out 5 times due to time constraints. We re-
port our metrics averaged across repeat experi-
ments and their error bars as described in the
previous section. Finally, as brute force is an ex-
act method, we take it to have idealised values of
our quality of solution metrics, a value of 1 for Ps
and AR. Figure 4 shows the post-selected distri-
butions, in which solutions that violate the con-
straint on the number of vacancies are excluded.
We see that the distributions have more weight
over a range of energies close to the minimum.
To produce the quantum annealing results pre-
sented, D-Wave’s 5612 physical qubit Advantage
System 6.4 was used. The VQE results were pro-
duced using the local noiseless IBM state vector
solver and the real 156 qubit device ibm_fez, ac-
cessible via the cloud from the IBM Quantum
Platform.
Not all of the physical qubits from
the quantum annealing device and gate-based
QPU are used: for further details of the qubit
embedding procedure see Appendices D and E.
The classical brute force, simulated annealing and
random sampling were performed on a machine
with 32 CPUs and 123 GB RAM. However, multi-
threading was not configured which would better
utilize the machine’s capabilities.
Acceleration
through the use of GPUs would also likely have
been beneficial.
We now discuss the results for each method and
how they scale for larger sizes of the problem in
detail. In the following sub-sections we first fo-
cus on the results of quantum annealing (Section
5.1), and then the results of VQE (Section 5.2).
Classical results are discussed throughout both
sections.
10
