1
Introduction
Solving for the gauge dynamics of quantum field theories (QFT)s is paramount to properly
describe the dynamics of different critical phenomena from cosmology to particle and con-
densed matter physics. Of particular interest are quantum field theories developing fixed
points (FP)s dynamics. Here the theories are typically conformal and display universal
behaviors captured by their conformal data such as scaling exponents.
It is therefore interesting to explore relations among different QFTs. These can emerge
in several ways, from gauge-gauge dualities [1–5] to holography [6, 7]. Another way, the
one we investigate here, is to relate QFTs across different space-time dimensions [8–12].
Here the idea is to derive exact non-perturbative relations between scaling exponents in
d −ϵ dimensional theories and the d dimensional beta functions of associated QFTs. The
resulting self-consistent relation will allow us to show that, in order to capture the infrared
dynamics of an interacting fixed point for the d-dimensional theory, the scaling exponent
of the d −ϵ sister theory must be multi-valued in ϵ. More generally we will show that is
possible to capture the overall behavior of the d-dimensional beta function in terms of the
multi-valued nature of the scaling exponent of the d −ϵ sister theory.
Various time-honored examples are considered to highlight different features of the self-
consistent relation. For example, the Banks-Zaks [13] perturbative nature of the Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD) infrared fixed point is reflected in the double valued behavior
of the 4 −ϵ critical exponent. We further show that for QCD at large number of flavors
the single valued nature of the d −ϵ scaling exponent prevents to determine whether an
ultraviolet fixed point is excluded, contrary to the statement made in [14] but in agreement
with [15]. For the O(N) model we demonstrate that although the 1/N corrections prevent
the reconstruction of the renormalization group (RG) flow, this is possible when adding
the 1/N2 contributions.
The paper is organized as follows.
In Sec.2 we derive the self-consistency relation
between the critical exponent and the beta function of the theory and study its general
properties. In Sec.3 we apply our findings to the gauge theories at one- and two-loop order
and to the gauge and O(N) models with a large number of degrees of freedom N, in which
perturbative expansion for the RG functions is re-organized in powers of 1/N. We present
our conclusions in Sec.4.
2
The Self Consistency Relation
We consider a single coupling QFT in dimensions d −ϵ where d is the critical dimension
of its bare coupling α0 with the associated operator being marginal. In the process of
renormalization one introduces RG scale µ and Z-factors relating the renormalized fields
and coupling α to the bare ones. Imposing the bare coupling to be µ-independent,
µ d
dµ [α Z µϵ] = 0
yields the beta function:
∆(α, ϵ) =
d α
d ln µ = −αϵ + β (α)
(1)
where β (α) denotes the beta function in d dimensions.
At criticality the deformed theory reaches a fixed point α∗, i.e. ∆(α∗, ϵ) = 0 with the
