Evanescent Orbital Pumping by Magnetization Dynamics Without Spin-Orbit
Coupling
Chengyuan Cai,1 Hanchen Wang,2 and Tao Yu1, ∗
1School of Physics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
2Department of Materials, ETH Zurich, Zurich 8093, Switzerland
(Dated: April 9, 2025)
Converting magnetization spin to orbital current often relies on strong spin-orbit interaction that
may cause additional angular momentum dissipation. We report that coherent magnetization dy-
namics in magnetic nanostructures can evanescently pump an orbital current into adjacent semicon-
ductors due to the Zeeman coupling between its stray magnetic field and electron orbitals without
relying on spin-orbit interaction. The underlying photonic spin of the AC magnetic field governs
the orbital polarization that flows along the gradient of the driven field. Due to the orbital texture,
the orbital Hall current that flows perpendicularly to the gradient of the AC field is also generated
and does not suffer from the orbital torque. These findings extend the paradigm of orbital pumping
to include photonic spin and pave the way for developing low-dissipation orbitronic devices.
Introduction.—Controlling and harnessing angular mo-
mentum in quantum materials is a central theme in spin-
tronics [1–9]. Spin pumping is the generation of spin cur-
rent driven by coherent magnetization dynamics [10, 11]
that leads to significant advances in controlling magne-
tization and practical applications of spintronics [12–23].
While spin degrees of freedom have traditionally occu-
pied the spotlight, recent studies suggest that the or-
bital degrees of freedom in solids can play an equally
crucial role in angular momentum transport.
Indeed,
in many crystalline materials, such as those with dia-
mond or zinc-blende structures, the valence bands pos-
sess rich orbital textures inherited from the underlying
lattice symmetries [24–31]. The emerging field of “orbi-
tronics” aims to exploit the intrinsic orbital character of
electronic bands for new device functionalities in systems
where conventional spin-orbit coupling (SOC) is weak or
absent [24, 32–41].
The orbital pumping, whereby a dynamic perturbation
(e.g., a time-dependent magnetization) injects orbital an-
gular momentum (OAM) into an adjacent nonmagnetic
medium, has been proposed and recently observed [42–
51]. The orbital Hall effect and orbital torque [52–65]
have been performed recently in the light nonmagnetic
metals [38, 39, 57, 65], heavy nonmagnetic metals [57],
semiconductor materials (Si, Ge) [66, 67], and antifer-
romagnetic materials [42].
It turns out that the SOC
cannot be avoided when generating orbital current by
magnetization dynamics and orbital torques to the mag-
netization [68], which may cause an additional dissipa-
tion of angular momentum. Indeed, the electron orbitals
cannot directly interact with magnetization through the
exchange that renders the pumping of orbital current by
the magnetization dynamics relies on the conversion be-
tween the spin and orbital currents by SOC. On the other
hand, the SOC is needed to convert orbital accumulation
into spin accumulation that creates a torque [52–65].
In this Letter, we propose a mechanism entirely free of
the SOC for directly pumping the orbital current by the
semiconductor
OAM 
current
dipolar 
field
xˆ
zˆ
yˆ
w
d
Ms
Ly
OAM Hall 
current
Figure 1. Pumping of longitudinal and Hall OAM currents in
semiconductors by the AC magnetic field generated by, e.g.,
the magnetic radiation of magnetic nanostructures.
magnetization dynamics (or local AC magnetic field of an
antenna) that is feasible in a hybrid structure with mag-
netic/metallic nanostructures coupled to the semiconduc-
tors, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
We go beyond the con-
ventional orbital pumping paradigm by predicting that
via the Zeeman interaction between the time-dependent
magnetic field and the orbital magnetic moments of elec-
trons, the local dynamic magnetization can effectively
transfer its photonic spin to the OAM of electronic states
in semiconductors/metals. The injected DC orbital cur-
rent, polarized along the photonic spin of the AC mag-
netic field, flows along the gradient of the AC field. Such
a flow is accompanied by an intrinsic orbital torque to the
OAM, arising from the OAM’s non-conservation due to
the crystal field. Crucially, we find an orbital Hall current
is also pumped that flows perpendicularly to the gradi-
ent of the AC magnetic field, which does not suffer from
the orbital torque. Such orbital pumping is evanescent
without requesting direct contact between the magnetic
nanostructures and semiconductors, providing a promis-
ing basis for designing novel orbitronic devices with en-
arXiv:2504.05827v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  8 Apr 2025
