“pseudoscalar” (eq. (2.4)) model. To follow the conventional notation in the literature, we
also introduce the dimensionless coupling gaℓvia the relation
Cℓ
Λ = gaℓ
mℓ
,
(2.5)
such that the pseudoscalar interactions can be written as LP ⊃−igaℓaψℓγ5ψℓ. In order
to clearly distinguish between derivative and pseudoscalar leptophilic models, we use the
notation Cℓ/Λ exclusively for the derivative interaction and the coupling gaℓ/mℓexclusively
for the pseudoscalar interaction. Moreover, we will discuss below four different scenarios,
depending on the values of Cℓfor the three families. Either the ALP couples to a single
lepton species, e.g. Ce ̸= 0, while Cµ = Cτ = 0, or it has flavour-universal couplings in the
derivative basis, i.e. Ce = Cµ = Cτ, corresponding to universal PQ charges.
Finally, we briefly discuss the question of which type of leptophilic interaction (eq. (2.1)
or eq. (2.4)) is best motivated from a UV perspective. Simple UV completions seem to
suggest the pseudoscalar form, which can arise from a renormalisable Yukawa coupling
with a non-linearly realised Goldstone boson in a straightforward way. For example, one
can imagine a standard QCD axion scenario like the DFSZ model [56, 57], in addition to
some small explicitly PQ breaking mass term, for example induced by MPlanck-suppressed
operators that generally spoil the solution to the Strong CP Problem in QCD axion models
(the so-called PQ Quality Problem [58]). In DFSZ scenarios, SM fermions are charged
under the PQ symmetry, which is spontaneously broken by the Higgs fields (at least two)
and a SM singlet scalar.
The axion is then a linear combination of the pseudoscalar
components in the Higgs fields and the singlet and couples to fermions through the Yukawa
interactions (see e.g. refs. [59, 60] for the explicit construction of generalised DFSZ models)
LDFSZ ⊃−¯uLmUuRe
iχHu
a
vPQ −¯dLmDdRe
iχHd
a
vPQ −¯eLmEeRe
iχHd
a
vPQ + h.c. ,
(2.6)
where χHu,d are the PQ charges of the Higgs doublets Hu,d and vPQ ∝Λ is the PQ breaking
scale.
Expanding the exponential functions, one obtains mass terms for the fermions as well
as pseudoscalar ALP-fermion interaction terms, while a tree-level coupling between ALPs
and photons is absent in this basis. A chiral redefinition of the fermion fields would trade
the pseudoscalar couplings of eq. (2.6) for derivative couplings and generally non-vanishing
couplings to gauge bosons, unless the PQ charges are such that the electromagnetic (EM)
anomaly coefficient vanishes. In the four leptophilic scenarios discussed above, this anomaly
is indeed non-vanishing since, by construction, only leptons contribute, and the leptonic
PQ charge matrix is not traceless. Thus, in order to obtain one of these scenarios with
derivative lepton couplings and a vanishing photon coupling, one would need to extend the
simple DFSZ UV model with new heavy fermions that have suitable PQ charges to cancel
the EM anomaly, along the lines of common KSVZ models [61, 62].
On the other hand, since the derivative coupling is the only dimension-5 operator that
preserves the shift-symmetry of the ALP, other shift-symmetric couplings (such as those to
gauge bosons, e.g. in a KSVZ model) will generally induce this form of coupling through
– 5 –
