2
has been known to be true for the Engle-Pereira-Rovelli-Livine (EPRL) model [4] and Freidel-Krasnov (FK) model
[5], which both describe transition amplitudes on four-dimensional spacetime with a vanishing cosmological constant
Λ. Technically speaking, the semi-classical approximation relies on the stationary point analysis of the spinfoam
amplitude, and the Regge action appears at the critical points [6–8]. We, therefore, say that the critical points of
spinfoam model with Λ = 0 correspond to (discrete) flat geometry.
The critical point properties have been recently shown to be generalized to the Lorentzian spinfoam model with
a non-zero Λ firstly introduced in [9] and further studied in [1, 10, 11]. Namely, the stationary phase analysis can
be applied to the semi-classical approximation of the spinfoam amplitude as an oscillatory action shows up at the
exponent of the integrand in this approximation.
The critical points reproduce the Regge action for constantly
curved 4-complex, which means they correspond to (discrete) constantly curved geometry [1, 11]. Other welcoming
properties of this spinfoam model include that the spinfoam amplitude for any spacetime triangulation is finite by
construction, and that the amplitude can be explicitly realized using Chern-Simons phase space coordinates on a
3-manifold generated by the spacetime 4-manifold and a particular graph.
This spinfoam model is the center of study of this paper. We are interested in the realization of the semi-classical
approximation of the spinfoam amplitude for a general 4-complex. Given a 4-complex that is composed of a large
number of 4-simplices, the expression of the amplitude takes an involved form as it is built with numerous vertex
amplitudes, edge amplitudes and face amplitudes, each of which takes a non-trivial form. It is, practically speaking, a
non-trivial task to extract the critical points from the stationary phase analysis for the spinfoam amplitude. However,
as we have learnt from formal analysis [1] that each critical point gives rise to a constantly curved geometry with fixed
boundary conditions, one can go over the stationary phase analysis can reproduce the critical points directly from
the geometry data of a constantly curved 4-complex, which in turn computes the semi-classical approximation of the
amplitude at the zero-order. We call this process the geometrical reconstruction of the spinfoam critical points. This
is also the spirit behind the series of work [12–15] on the numerical realization of the leading order and next-to-leading
order spinfoam amplitudes for EPRL model at large-j approximation.
In this paper, we study the spinfoam model recently defined in [1], which is an improved version of the one introduced
in [9] and studied in [10, 11]. In the improved model, the vertex amplitude is defined differently compared to [9] by
using a new set of phase space coordinates, making it possible to define a simple and universal face amplitude. The
new vertex amplitude is defined based on the Chern-Simons theory with level k ∈8Z+, which is related to the
value of the cosmological constant Λ, on a graph-complement of 3-sphere S3. The spinfoam amplitude is generalized
to spinfoam graphs corresponding to colored graphs used in the colored tensor model [16, 17]. For these spinfoam
amplitudes, it has also been shown in [1] that the semi-classical approximation (k →∞) of the improved model can
be computed systematically.
This paper is organized as follows. We first discuss why 4D constantly curved geometry can be implemented in
moduli space of flat connection on a 3-manifold, where Chern-Simons theory is defined. This sets the basis for using
Chern-Simons theory on this 3-manifold to construct spinfoam amplitude on a 4-simplex. In particular, in Sections II,
we review the holonomy representation of the fundamental group of the 1-skeleton of a 4-simplex and the isomorphic
fundamental group of a related 3-manifold. Using this isomorphism, Section III delves into extracting the 4-simplex
geometries from the holonomies defined by the Chern-Simons theory. In Sections IV, we review the construction of
the spinfoam amplitudes and their critical points introduced in [1]. In Section V, we reproduce these critical points
using the geometrical data extracted in the Section II –III. We conclude and discuss possible applications of this
framework in Section VI.
II.
FLAT CONNECTION ON 3-MANIFOLD AND CURVED 4-SIMPLEX GEOMETRY
A 4-simplex, topologically isomorphic to a 4-ball, is bounded by 5 tetrahedra whose boundary triangles are glued
together pairwise. In this paper, we consider oriented convex constantly curved 4-simplex bounded by constantly
curved tetrahedra whose global curvature can be positive or negative and the curvature R is given by the value of the
cosmological constant: R = ν
p
3/|Λ| with ν := sgn(Λ).
The geometry of a constantly curved convex tetrahedron can be uniquely determined (up to orientation) by four
SU(2) group elements, denoted by {Hi}i=1,··· ,4, which satisfy the closure condition:
H4H3H2H1 = 1SU(2) .
(1)
This is called the curved Minkowski Theorem proven in [18]. Each Hi = Hi(ωspin) describes the holonomy of the spin
connection ωspin along a simple path pi as shown in fig.1 based at the same vertex. The fundamental group of the
one-skeleton of a tetrahedron is constructed by these simple paths
π1(sk1(tetra)) = {p1, p2, p3, p4|p4 ◦p3 ◦p2 ◦p1 = 1} ,
(2)
