contributions [8].
The direct problem involves predicting the outcome of a scattering experiment – the distribution of outgoing
particles by modeling the description of the nuclear interaction potential using mathematical functions and solving
the TISE to obtain wavefunction from the S-matrix that describe various scattering variables.
In inverse scattering theory, instead of deriving the scattering S-matrix from the interaction potential between
the scattering particles, we reverse the process and calculate the interaction potential directly from the S-matrix
[9]. In essence, inverse scattering involves determining the interaction potential solely from the available scattering
observables. Inverse scattering theory constructs a separable model potential that serves as an adequate input to
calculate many-nucleon properties [10].
Typically, one requires all the bound state energies (E < 0) and the scattering phase shifts at all energies E> 0 up
to inf, to be able to exactly solve inverse scattering problems. Thus, inverse scattering problems are generally more
challenging and less developed than the corresponding direct methods, as they require reconstructing an unknown
system from limited observed data. The process involves solving an ill-posed problem, often requiring regularization
techniques and optimization methods[9].
Recently, Muzafarov[11] proposed a comprehensive solution to the case of nonlocal separable potentials, pro-
viding a rather intricate algorithm that encompasses the entire class of phase equivalent potentials within a single
parial wave channel. Several studies have shown that machine learning (ML) approaches are effective in solving
inverse scattering problems[12].
Deep neural networks that have been highly successful in uncovering the underlying relationships in the model
usually need large datasets, which are typically scarce in scattering problems[13]. Instead, these networks can be
trained using additional information by enforcing physical laws. Physics-informed machine learning integrates data
with mathematical models, guiding solutions toward physical plausibility while improving accuracy and efficiency
[14]. Researchers have proposed leveraging ML to optimize the parameters in model simulations and to directly
tackle many-body problems by enhancing traditional Monte-Carlo simulation methods [15, 16].
In this paper, we will use a genetic algorithm based global optimization to obtain the reference potential model
parameters using the available experimental energy data up to 14 MeV . The optimization procedure utilizes the
scattering phase shifts obtained by numerical solution of the phase equation for a chosen ℓ-channel, and minimizes
a loss function, which quantifies the discrepancy between the simulated and expected data. The crucial part of this
procedure is the choice of reference potential whose parameters are optimized to obtain the inverse potential.
In charged particle scattering, the Coulomb interaction plays a significant role alongside the nuclear interaction.
The phase function method involves matching spherical Bessel functions at the boundary where the interaction
becomes negligible. To model the electromagnetic interaction, various screened Coulomb potentials, such as the
error function (erf ) and the atomic Hulth´en potential, have been employed in the literature [18, 19].
However, the long-range nature of the erf function requires it to be abruptly truncated at large distances, and
the atomic Hulth´en potential demands fine-tuning of the screening parameter a, which alters the potential depth for
2
