Accepted Version 
Accetped date: 7 April 2025 
1 
This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-4.0 license 
 
Extended study of crystal structures, optical properties and vibrational spectra of polar 
2-aminopyrimidinium hydrogen phosphite and three centrosymmetric salts - bis(2-
aminopyrimidinium) sulfate monohydrate and two 2-aminopyrimidinium hydrogen 
sulfate polymorphs 
 
Irena Matulkováa, Ladislav Bohatýb, Petra Beckerb, Ivana Císařováa, Róbert Gyepesc, Michaela 
Fridrichováa, Jan Kroupad, Petr Němece and Ivan Němeca* 
 
a Charles University, Faculty of Science, Department of Inorganic Chemistry, Hlavova 8, 
128 40 Prague 2, Czech Republic. 
b University of Cologne, Institute of Geology and Mineralogy, Section Crystallography, 
Zülpicher Str. 49b, 50674 Köln, Germany. 
c Czech Academy of Sciences, J. Heyrovsky Institute of Physical Chemistry, Department of 
Molecular Electrochemistry and Catalysis, Dolejškova 2155, 182 00 Prague 8, Czech Republic. 
d Czech Academy of Sciences, Institute of Physics, Na Slovance 2, 182 21 Prague 8, Czech 
Republic. 
e Charles University, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Department of Chemical Physics 
and Optics, Ke Karlovu 3, 121 16 Prague 2, Czech Republic. 
 
* Corresponding author. E-mail address: ivan.nemec@natur.cuni.cz 
 
Abstract 
This study aimed primarily at completing and extending the characterization of the 
crystallographic, spectroscopic and optical properties of polar, biaxial, optically negative 2-
aminopyrimidinium(1+) hydrogen phosphite. Besides the redetermination of the low-
temperature crystal structure (space group P21), high-quality single crystals of this salt were 
grown from an aqueous solution, and their optical properties were studied. The determination 
of the refractive indices in the wavelength range of 435–1083 nm showed anomalous dispersion 
of the refractive indices, resulting in a point of uniaxiality. The crystal allows phase matching 
for collinear second harmonic generation (SHG) processes of both type I and type II in a broad 
wavelength range. SHG properties were studied for powdered size-fractioned samples and 
oriented single-crystal cuts.  The optical damage threshold experiments confirmed excellent 
optical resistance - at least 220 TWm-2 and 70 TWm-2 for 800 and 1000 nm irradiation, 
respectively. The low-temperature crystallographic study was also extended for three 
monoclinic salts of 2-aminopyrimidine and sulfuric acid - i.e. bis(2-aminopyrimidinium(1+) 
sulfate monohydrate (space group P21/n) and two polymorphs of 2-aminopyrimidinium(1+) 
hydrogen sulfate (both with space group P21/c). The vibrational spectra of all title compounds 
were assigned using single-molecule quantum chemical computations (including Potential 
