The NCSM basis states are constructed as Slater determinants of single-
particle harmonic oscillator wave functions. The NCSM parameters are the
oscillator energy ℏΩand the size of the model space, characterized by the
maximum number of excitation quanta Nmax allowed for in the calculation.
The NCSM basis functions for a nucleus with A nucleons include all possible
combinations of nucleons with total oscillator quanta ranging from Nmin to
Nmin + Nmax, where Nmin is the minimal oscillator quanta allowed for the
nucleus as dictated by the Pauli exclusion principle.
The NCSM results are exact in the limit Nmax →∞.
However, the
dimensionality of the many-body basis grows exponentially with increasing
Nmax, which restricts calculations with a reasonable precision, even on mod-
ern supercomputers, to light nuclei with mass numbers A ≲20. Therefore,
developing robust methods for extrapolating results to inﬁnitely large model
spaces remains a pressing challenge.
Most extrapolation methods developed to date [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
lack rigorous theoretical justiﬁcation limiting their applicability. The most
theoretically grounded approach [10] involves localizing the poles of the S-
matrix for bound states.
Machine learning oﬀers a promising alternative for addressing this prob-
lem. This direction is also of independent interest as an application of the
machine learning to extrapolation problems requires the development of novel
algorithms and theoretical approaches, opening new avenues for research.
The ﬁrst study of the machine learning extrapolation of variational cal-
culation results to the inﬁnite model space was presented in Ref. [11]. The
extrapolation method of Ref. [11] (ISU) involves training an ensemble of ar-
tiﬁcial neural networks to predict the target observable (e. g., energy E, rms
point-proton radius rp, etc.) based on a set of calculations of a nucleus of
interest performed within the NCSM. Each neural network is a single-layer
perceptron. The inputs are the NCSM parameters, Nmax and ℏΩ, while the
outputs are the NCSM results for the observable of interest obtained with
these input parameters. The trained neural networks are used to predict the
results at very large values of Nmax where the convergence of the NCSM cal-
culations is supposed to be achieved. Later a similar approach was employed
for the NCSM result extrapolations in Refs. [12, 13].
There is an alternative machine learning approach TUDa to the extrapo-
lation of NCSM calculations developed in Refs. [14, 15]. Instead of training
neural networks for each particular nucleus, TUDa suggests an universal
neural network ensemble trained on NCSM results for light nuclei where a
2
