an electric field, we provide a new mechanism for self-strengthening and an example of using 
electro-chemo-mechanical interplay to create an adaptive modulus response. 
Since thermal rise was unmeasured in our bulk reaction, we wanted to perform a more careful 
analysis to understand how each element contributed to the thermodynamics of the process. To 
achieve this, we employed real-time electrorheology using a discovery hybrid rheometer (DHR) 
equipped with a dielectric accessory in shear mode at 20 °C (Fig. 3a). A volume of 0.25 mL of the 
same formulation of thiol-ene pre-reaction solution was placed on the rheometer plates and the 
plates placed at 0.5 mm gap distance. With the shortened gap distance, we calculated the field 
strength would be increased four times compared to the bulk experiment, so we conducted these 
experiments at 2 Vrms. We observed that the material had a surprisingly rapid onset time (600 s) at 
2 Vrms, 2 kHz while the control group lacking ZnO remained in a liquid state (Fig. 3b). Next, we 
measured the storage modulus and the temperature of the material during the experiment. Our goal 
was to test if the onset of voltage led to increased heating and therefore either accelerated reactivity 
or triggered it. As in the previous experiment, the experimental group showed increased storage 
modulus from 0.02 kPa to 179 kPa but at an onset time of 270 s (Fig. 3c). The mechanical property 
of E-thiol-ene sample, as determined by strain-stress behavior and frequency-independent moduli, 
conformed the formation of a robust gel after only 600 s (Supplementary Fig. 19). The control 
group again did not show the increase of modulus. More notably, coincident with the faster onset 
time, the ZnO showed an increase in temperature (0.5 degrees Celsius over the control) as the 
cross-linking reaction released heat (Fig. 3d). From this, we concluded that at very high voltages, 
there is very modest heating that results from an applied electric field, but it is not enough to greatly 
alter reaction kinetics. The majority of the temperature increase was originated from the 
exothermic nature of the rapid onset of reaction.  
 
Programmable multiple-modulus gel   
 
After observing that mechanical behavior could be controlled by an electric field, we postulated 
that the precise placement of varied electric fields could be used to “program” the spatial stiffness 
of a single bulk material. To demonstrate this concept, we designed a parallel PTFE plate mold 
with adjustable ends to accommodate larger volumes and placement of multiple electrodes. 
Multiple electrodes were placed along a parallel axis allowing addressable AC voltage in different 
configurations at these points in the sample (Fig. 4a). Based on our earlier experiments, three pairs 
of electrodes were addressed with configurable voltages (4, 12, and 8 Vrms from left to right at 500 
Hz) into the pre-casted organo-gel mixture composed of 7.8 wt% ZnO, 20 mmol TTT, 30 mmol 
EDT and 0.1 M Et4NBF4 in 15 mL DMF.  
To model the changes in the material modules, we employed finite element analysis (FEA; Fig. 
4b) – assuming a linear relationship between the electric field strength and the applied voltage 
observed in our results (Fig. 2). The model showed that neighboring electric fields had little 
influence on each other. In the simulation, the direction of the electric field is neglected as direction 
should not affect the randomly oriented nanoparticles in the material. Using the model to guide the 
placement, the electrodes were located on three distinct regions with different electric field 
strengths. Upon triggering the electric field in specific locations for 5 h, the thiol-ene crosslinking 
was programmed to occur at the desired speed to achieve regions of controlled stiffness in one 
