2 
 
1. Introduction 
Halide perovskites, a class of popular optoelectronic and semiconductor materials, are widely 
employed in photovoltaics, light-emitting diodes (LEDs), X-ray detectors, and flexible electronics 
[1-5]. As a sub-class of the halide perovskite family, organic-inorganic halide perovskites (OIHPs) 
are represented by a general chemical formula ABX3, where A is the organic group cation, B is the 
inorganic cation, and X is the halide anion [6,7]. OIHPs exhibit structural flexibility and tunable 
functionality that cannot be achieved in all-inorganic halide perovskites [8,9]. The organic 
components in OIHPs, however, may suffer from low intrinsic and thermodynamic stabilities 
[8,10]. For example, experimental calorimetric measurements on MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 (MA = 
CH3NH3+) reveal that they are thermodynamically unstable [11]. The instability and corresponding 
short lifetime of OIHPs is one of the major obstacles that impede their commercial viability for 
long-period operations [12,13]. Therefore, the evaluation and characterization of the instability of 
OIHPs under various external stimuli is essential to understand the underlying mechanisms and 
pave the way for enhancing their stability for long-duration applications. 
 
Recent studies reported that grain-boundary cracks were observed in MAPbI3, MAPbBr3, and 
FAPbI3 (FA = CH(NH2)2+) OIHP polycrystalline thin films when they were imaged in scanning 
electron microscopy (SEM) [14,15]. Such a phenomenon suggests that the polycrystalline OIHPs 
are not stable under the electron beam (e-beam), and in turn, e-beam radiation degrades the 
performance of OIHPs. These studies indicate that e-beam might induce organic species 
volatilization and localized shrinkage at grain boundaries to generate ‘mud-cracking’ patterns [14]. 
Compared to polycrystalline thin films, OIHP single crystals are free of grain boundaries and 
exhibit lower defect density, higher carrier mobility, longer carrier lifetimes, and larger absorption 
coefficients [16-18]. The e-beam effect on OIHP single crystals is significant, as their morphology, 
orientation, and crystal growth process are based on SEM and transmission electron microscopy 
(TEM) characterization [19-22]. However, the e-beam could damage OIHP single crystals as well. 
For example, the e-beam radiation has been reported to induce defects and decomposition in 
MAPbBr3 single crystals [23,24]. Besides, the instability and decomposition of single crystalline 
MAPbI3 have been observed in TEM at the atomic level [25,26]. In addition, the stability and 
performance of OIHP single crystals under the X-ray beam radiation are also critical issues as they 
are effective photo-imaging and X-ray candidates [3,27]. For instance, the X-ray degradation of 
MAPbBr3 single crystals was inevitable when the samples were tested under X-ray radiation with 
monitoring by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) [28,29]. Although many previous studies 
have investigated the instability issues of OIHP single crystals under e-beam and X-ray beam 
radiations, further in-situ exploration is needed to capture the real-time evolution of these 
processes and to understand the disparities among crystals with varying compositions, as well as 
the distinctions and interconnections between different types of radiations. Additionally, the impact 
