14
advantageous in low-temperature systems, as instabilities may
arise from the thermal contraction of mechanical parts. Sev-
eral techniques have been developed to excite AFM can-
tilevers at low temperatures. One effective technique is pho-
tothermal excitation of the cantilever using two laser sources.
In this technique, one beam is focused at the end of the can-
tilever for deflection measurement, while the second beam is
focused near the base of the cantilever for excitation induced
by the photothermal effect141,142. Celik et al. recently intro-
duced a novel pressure-based method for exciting cantilevers
in dynamic AFM mode143. This method was demonstrated to
perform well by imaging magnetic domains in Co/Pt multilay-
ers and an Abrikosov vortex lattice in a BSCCO (2212) single
crystal at 4 K. Additionally, the authors proposed a simplifi-
cation to the optical design of cryogenic AFM/MFM by using
a single laser beam for both radiation pressure excitation and
detection of cantilever deflection in AFM imaging. For high-
temperature imaging of magnetic phenomena and transitions,
Peltier or resistive heaters are employed, enabling measure-
ments to be conducted in situ over a wide temperature range
from room temperature to 520 K144.
In MFM experiments, it is crucial to separate electrostatic
influences from the MFM signal. At typical probe-sample
working distances, magnetic and electrostatic interactions can
have comparable values depending on the electric and mag-
netic properties of the sample.
An electrostatic contribu-
tion is present whenever the probe and sample exhibit dif-
ferent work functions, resulting in a contact potential differ-
ence (CPD). This electrostatic interaction can obscure other
long- or short-range interactions143,145. While applying an
appropriate voltage bias between the tip and sample can com-
pensate for CPD in a homogeneous sample, it is not applica-
ble when the sample surface consists of more than one mate-
rial, as the CPD value varies across the surface. In heteroge-
neous samples, it is crucial to consider this problem for cor-
rect image interpretation, particularly for low magnetic mo-
ment materials146. One of the methods involves a combination
of Kelvin probe force microscopy and MFM (KPFM/MFM),
which distinguishes between electrostatic and magnetic con-
tributions. This method records both the CPD map and the
real compensated MFM image, as it cancels the electrostatic
interaction between the probe and sample at every point of the
image, thus obtaining a pure magnetic signal147.
In order to enhance the lateral resolution and sensitivity
beyond the limit of commercial MFM probes, custom-made
MFM probes have been developed. These probes allow for the
modification of stray field distribution and intensity, thereby
enabling more precise quantitative MFM studies. One of the
most common approaches involves customizing the magnetic
coatings, where the magnetic properties of the materials are
varied148–151. This is particularly beneficial because partially
coating MFM probes or depositing multiple layers help con-
trol low/high moment states and confines the eminent stray-
field primarily to the probe’s apex148,152.
The interpretation of MFM images is most straightforward
for samples with a magnetization orientation perpendicular
to the imaged surface.
The applications of MFM include
thin films with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA),
FIG. 8. (a) Illustration of the nanomagnet configuration used to cre-
ate artificial square lattice. The arrows indicate the magnetic mo-
ments revealed by the corresponding MFM image shown in (e). (b)
A pair of moments on a vertex illustrating energetically favorable and
unfavorable dipole interactions between the pairs. (c) Four distinct
topologies for the moment configurations on a vertex of four islands
with a total multiplicity of 16. (d) and (e) An AFM and the corre-
sponding MFM image. The single-domain character of the islands is
depicted by the division of each island into white and black halves,
representing north and south poles. Adapted from Ref. [153].
patterned magnetic structures154, and nanodot and antidot
arrays155–158. Among the most extensively studied magnetic
patterned structures is ASI. In particular, MFM has been used
to study geometric frustration, ordering of effective magnetic
charges and various collective dynamics13,159,160; see also
Sec. V. In their ground state, some of the most commonly
studied structures such as square and honeycomb lattices obey
the ice-rule161, but can be excited into higher energy states
by external stimuli, for instance, by applying a magnetic field
(see Sec. V B). As discussed in Sec. V C, another possibil-
ity is writing and erasing of individual bits by applying in-
plane field below the nanoisland saturation-field and selec-
tively switching nanoislands with an MFM probe162 or to in-
troduce topological defect-driven magnetic writing163.
In square ASI (Fig. 8), a pair of moments on a vertex can
be oriented in a manner either to maximize or minimize the
dipole interaction energy between them, see Fig. 8(b). The
most energetically favorable configuration is when the mo-
ments of the pair of islands are oriented such that one is di-
rected towards the center of the vertex and the other is ori-
ented outwards. In contrast, it is energetically unfavorable
when both moments are directed inward or both are directed
outward. For the vertex as a whole, there are four distinct
