The impulse response of the LTSI system Σ is the
operator-valued map G : R+ →B(U, Y) given by
G(t) = C exp A(t)B.
(14)
The output of Σ is given by the convolution
y(t) =
Z t
−∞
G(t −τ)u(τ) dτ,
(15)
where we have assumed that z(−∞) = 0, i.e., the system is
initially at rest. Since A, B and C are translation-invariant,
their Fourier transforms
ˆ
A,
ˆB and ˆC are multiplication
operators with symbols
ˆA,
ˆB and ˆC. Consequently, the
Fourier transform of (13) yields the family of LTI systems
ˆΣω :



d
dt ˆzω(t) = ˆAωˆzω(t) + ˆBωˆuω(t),
ˆyω(t) = ˆCωˆzω(t),
(16)
parametrized by the frequency variable ω ∈Rs. The Fourier
transform ˆG(t) of G(t) is a multiplication operator with
symbol ˆg(t) given by ˆgω(t) = ˆCωe ˆ
Aωt ˆBω, where ˆgω is the
impulse response of the LTI system ˆΣω. We assume that
the symbols ˆA, ˆB and ˆC are continuous, so that ˆg(t) is
continuous for all t ∈R+.
The fact that an LTSI system can be viewed as a family
of LTI systems greatly simpliﬁes its analysis. Indeed, many
system theoretic properties of Σ can be veriﬁed pointwise
by verifying the analogous property for all ˆΣω, ω ∈Rs, see,
e.g., [16], [17]. This will be the overarching theme in this
paper. With this in mind, as a natural generalization of the
deﬁnition of relaxation for LTI systems, we deﬁne relaxation
for LTSI systems as follows.
Deﬁnition 1: The LTSI system Σ is of relaxation type if
U = Y and the impulse response G is completely monotone.
The impulse response G is completely monotone if its k-th
strong derivative satisﬁes
(−1)k dk
dtk G(t) ≥0
(17)
for all t > 0 and k ∈R+. Since the Fourier transform
is unitary, completely monotonicity of G is equivalent to
complete monotonicity of ˆG. The latter is a multiplication
operator, hence its properties can be inferred from its symbol,
i.e., the impulse responses ˆgω, ω ∈Rs. Consequently,
relaxation can be veriﬁed pointwise, as shown below.
Theorem 1: The LTSI system Σ is of relaxation type if
and only if the LTI system ˆΣω is of relaxation type for all
ω ∈Rs.
Proof: As shown in [15, Theorem 2.1.13], the semi-
group exp(At) is strongly differentiable and the k-th strong
derivative is given by exp(At)Ak for all t > 0 on the dense
domain D(Ak) ⊂Z . Therefore, the impulse response G(t)
is strongly differentiable with k-th strong derivative given by
dk
dtk G(t) = C exp(At)AkB
(18)
The Fourier transform of the latter is a multiplication oper-
ator ˆGk(t) with continuous symbol ˆgk(t) given by
ˆgk
ω(t) = dk
dtk ˆgω(t) = ˆCωe
ˆ
Aωt ˆAk
ω ˆBω
(19)
Therefore, (−1)k ˆGk(t) ≥0 if and only if (−1)kˆgk
ω(t) ≥0
for all ω ∈Rs. Moreover, since the Fourier transform is
unitary, (−1)k ˆGk(t) ≥0 if and only if (17) holds. Combining
the latter two statements, it follows that G(t) is completely
monotone if and only if ˆgω is completely monotone for all
ω ∈Rs, which concludes the proof.
Recall that LTI relaxation systems have state-space real-
izations that are internally of relaxation type [14]. This is
not necessarily true for LTSI relaxation systems, mainly due
to the technical assumptions on the operators that deﬁne
an LTSI system, see Remark 1. Whenever necessary, we
avoid this issue by simply assuming that Σ is internally of
relaxation type, deﬁned below.
Deﬁnition 2: The LTSI system Σ is internally of relax-
ation type if A ≤0 and B = C∗.
Analogously to Theorem 1, we obtain the following char-
acterization of internal relaxation.
Theorem 2: The LTSI system Σ is internally of relaxation
type if and only if the LTI system ˆΣω is internally of
relaxation type for all ω ∈Rs.
Proof: Since the Fourier transform is unitary, A ≤0
and B = C∗if and only if ˆ
A ≤0 and ˆB = ˆC∗. Since the
symbols ˆA, ˆB, and ˆC of the multiplication operators ˆ
A, ˆB
and ˆC are continuous, ˆ
A ≤0 and ˆB = ˆC∗if and only if
ˆAω ≤0 and ˆBω = ˆC∗
ω for all ω ∈Rs.
We now go back to the diffusion equation as an example,
after which we conclude this section with a couple of
remarks.
Example 1: As expected, diffusion is an example of LTSI
relaxation. Indeed, note that the diffusion equation (2) is an
LTSI system of the form (13) with A = α ∂2
∂x2 and C = B
given by the identity operator. We have already seen that the
impulse response (6) is completely monotone for all ω ∈Rs,
hence the diffusion equation is an LTSI system of relaxation
type due to Theorem 1. Furthermore, it is well-known that
the second-order differential operator
∂2
∂x2 is self-adjoint and
nonpositive, hence the diffusion equation is an example of
an LTSI system that is internally of relaxation type.
Remark 1: It is easily seen that internal relaxation implies
relaxation. For the converse, suppose that the LTSI system
Σ is of relaxation type, hence, due to Theorem 1, the LTI
system ˆΣω is of relaxation type for all ω ∈Rs. This means
that ˆΣω has a state-space realization that is internally of
relaxation type, i.e., ˆgω(t) = ¯B∗
ωe ¯
Aωt ¯Bω, where ¯Aω ≤0.
Using this, we can deﬁne ¯
A and ¯B as the translation-invariant
operators whose Fourier transforms are the multiplicative
operators with symbols ¯A and ¯B. Then, we can write G(t) =
¯B∗exp( ¯
At) ¯B so that G can be seen as the impulse response
of an LTSI system that is internally of relaxation type. The
issue here is that ¯
A is not guaranteed to be the inﬁnitesimal
generator of a C0-semigroup, and ¯B is not guaranteed to
be bounded. Nevertheless, examples where these conditions
