Accepted Version 
Accetped date: 7 April 2025 
3 
This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-4.0 license 
 
Among these compounds, 2-aminopyrimidine (2-Amp) and the 2-aminopyrimidinium(1+) 
cation (2-Amp(1+) stand out as promising 2D moieties for new NLO materials. In previous 
studies, we have predicted and experimentally confirmed the potential of 2-Amp and 2-
Amp(1+) for χ(2) NLO processes through quantum-chemical computations and hyper-Rayleigh 
scattering measurements [18], highlighting their protonation-dependent NLO properties. The 
uncharged 2-Amp molecule has approximately 1.5 times higher overall hyperpolarizability 
(tot) than the protonated 2-Amp(1+) cation. In addition, protonation of the 2-Amp heterocycle 
also strongly affects linear optical properties, such as birefringence [17]. Based on these 
findings, we have previously prepared 2-Amp cocrystals with a weak inorganic acid, i.e., boric 
acid, based on the “pKa rule for acid-base complexes” [19] and studied their structural, 
spectroscopic and optical properties [20].  
In turn, salts with stronger inorganic acids, containing a protonated 2-Amp(1+) cation, may 
also be promising candidates for new NLO materials [21-23]. Given their high variability of 
symmetries and different donor-acceptor potentials for hydrogen bonding, inorganic anions can 
yield phases with appropriate crystal symmetry [1-4]. Unfortunately, in the group of 2-Amp 
salts and cocrystals with inorganic acids (including structures of pure 2-Amp) characterized so 
far, which are listed in Table S1 (Supplementary material), the centrosymmetric arrangement 
prevails, excluding the symmetry conditions required for χ(2) NLO effects. Crystallographic 
data is the only information available for most of these compounds, and only in refs. [20, 24, 
25], which concern 2-aminopyrimidinium(1+) dihydrogen phosphate monohydrate 2-
AmpH2PO4H2O and the cocrystals 2-aminopyrimidine–boric acid (3/2) (2-Amp)3(H3BO3)2 
and 2-aminopyrimidine–boric acid (1/2) 2-Amp(H3BO3)2, the study was also extended to 
vibrational spectroscopic methods. 
As the most exciting representative of 2-aminopyrimidine salts, the polar crystal of 2-
aminopyrimidinium(1+) hydrogen phosphite 2-AmpH2PO3 was first characterized in our study 
on inorganic salts of aminopyrimidines [21] and subsequently further investigated with respect 
to the growth of bulk single crystals as well as spectroscopic and non-linear optical properties 
[22]. Obtained crystallographic data were deposited with the Cambridge Crystallographic Data 
Centre as a supplementary publication CCDC 1503404 in 2017. More recently, Zhang et al. 
[23] reported their characterization of 2-AmpH2PO3 as a promising NLO material while we 
were drafting the present manuscript.  
In this context, the present study primarily aims to extend and refine the experimental 
analysis of the structural, vibrational spectroscopic and optical (linear and nonlinear) properties 
