process (Supplementary Table 3)24. A second question was if an AC electric field was necessary 
to activate ZnO, therefore, we switched the power from AC to DC voltage (8 V, 500 V/m) for 3 h 
to explore how the reaction responded when only experiencing a constant electric field. Under DC, 
we observed less reaction and that after 3 h the reaction ceased coincident with a small amount of 
reactive material fouling the bulk electrode surface (Supplementary Fig. 7). This result indicated 
that indeed a DC induction was possible, but resulted in possible side reactions. A final question 
was whether the process was driven by electron transport (current) or electric field. To avoid direct 
electrical contact between the electrodes and the reaction mixture, we placed the Pt electrodes 
outside the plastic reaction cell. We conducted the same, initial linear thiol-ene reaction in a black 
Faraday cage. The GPC results from Supplementary Fig. 8 confirm the formation of an oligomeric 
species with Mn of 3200 Da in the presence of the E-field without direct electrical contact. This 
adds evidence that current or electron chemistry is not required to mediate a reaction. The summary 
of the evidence indicates that this process is predominantly mediated by electric field.  
We have also observed that the mechanical activation of ZnO can occur via mechanical stirring 
(500 rpm), as we have previously described (see Supplementary Fig. 7). However, the mechanical 
activation of piezo-particles from stirring does not achieve nearly the same reactivity as the electric 
field. In the current approach, we hypothesize that a potential mechanism is that the external AC 
electric field induces the deformation of ZnO nanoparticles following the mechanism of the 
converse piezoelectric effect wherein the nanoparticles expand and contract25,26. In this way, the 
strains in ZnO nanoparticles may modulate the local electric field promoting the generation of thiyl 
radicals. This proposed mechanism is similar to that of the electrostatic catalysis studied by Coote 
et al., where properly oriented electric fields can catalyze originally improbable Diels-Alder 
reactions through stabilizing the resonance structures of transition states. In our case, the 
orientation of electric field was fixed by the direct contact of thiols with the ZnO surface and the 
local piezoelectrically generated electric field at the ZnO surface, all of which resembles the 
scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) setup used by Coote et al27.  
To determine the role atmospheric oxygen played in the E-thiol-ene reaction, we conducted 
additional experiments in a glove-box environment. The chemical kinetics data indicates that 
oxygen does not play a major role in the polymerization mechanism since we observed comparable 
conversions and molecular weights when the reaction was carried out in a glove-box versus 
exposed to the air (Supplementary Fig. 9). We conclude therefore that the necessary radicals for 
the propagation are produced from piezochemical reactivity between ZnO and the thiol monomer. 
In addition, we explored how different exposure times to the electric field affected the 
polymerization kinetics. Kinetics data from Supplementary Figure 10 shows that the reaction 
proceeds only when the electric field is applied for over 5 min. Additionally, we found that the 
overall conversion percentage increases with increased length or power of electric field input. 
These results show that the generation of radicals is positively correlated to the application of an 
electric field. Nevertheless, we observe a minimum amount of time that the electric field must be 
applied to generate enough radicals to trigger the polymerization. Additionally, there appears to 
be a process by which radicals are either consumed or inactivated for further reactivity since we 
obtain higher conversions when the electric field is applied for longer. Critically, our E-thiol-ene 
polymerization kinetics is similar to those thiol-ene which are initiated by light – indicating that 
this process is of similar efficiency and rate as light-based approaches of similar power28–30.  
With this further understanding of the reaction kinetics and potential mechanism, we were eager 
to explore other potential reactions. It seemed possible that both acrylate polymerization and other 
