8
missed by the proper motion cut. However, only
∼2% of Gaia singly matched quasars have > 3σ
proper motion detections, as mentioned in Sec-
tion2.1, and only ∼2% of companions fall within
the 3 ≤PMSIG2 ≤4 range. Therefore, this ef-
fect is unavoidable but negligible for the overall
statistics.
• The final system, J165043.44+425149.3, has a
companion with PMSIG2 = 0.96, which suggests
it should be classified as a double quasar system.
However, the PCA results show some plausible
stellar features, leading to its initial reclassifica-
tion as a quasar-star pair after inspection. This
system is matched with a known lensed quasar
system, and the misclassification may have been
caused by contamination from the foreground lens-
ing galaxy located between the two lensed quasars
(Morgan et al. 2003).
As our double quasar sample is primarily selected
based on the PMSIG criterion, to maintain homoge-
neous selection, we opt to only reinstate the last sys-
tem (J165043.44+425149.3) in our double quasar sam-
ple since it has PMSIG < 3. Additionally, we excluded
J003337.58+201538.1 (with a 1.′′69 separation), a re-
ported quasar-star pair (More et al. 2016), from the dou-
ble quasar sample for further analysis. As a result, the
“final pair sample” with z > 0.5 and G < 20.5 has 136
double quasars and 984 quasar-star pairs as reported in
Table 1. And the final classification decision for each
pair is provided in the “TYPE” column.
Figure 6 shows the distribution of the 136 pairs of final
double quasar sample in redshift-separation space. The
double quasars have pair separations ranging from 0.′′4 to
∼3′′, forming the basis of our subsequent analyses. At
the sample’s median redshift of z = 1.7, these pairs cor-
respond to projected separations of 3 kpc ≲rp ≲30 kpc,
i.e., on galactic scales. While individual pairs may have
3D separations exceeding 30 kpc, this population statis-
tically traces the radial distribution of quasar pairs.
2.3. Foreground Star Superposition Rate
The PCA analysis effectively removes most stellar
contamination for pairs with separations less than 1.′′5,
as they fall within a single SDSS fiber.
However, for
wider pairs, PCA cannot estimate contamination due
to the lack of fiber coverage. While Gaia’s resolution
largely ensures reliable proper motion measurements for
such pairs, foreground contamination can still be sig-
nificant. Although only a small fraction of stars have
insignificant proper motion measurements (PM = NA,
or PMSIG ≤3), the number of foreground stars far ex-
ceeds that of intrinsic quasar companions, as shown in
Table 1 and Figure 7, potentially leading to high con-
tamination.
To estimate stellar contamination, we perform a ran-
dom offset test by shuffling SDSS quasar positions in
the input DR16Q sample by 10′′ and searching for Gaia
sources within a 3′′ radius. This test preserves the fore-
ground stellar density distribution relevant to the SDSS
quasar sample. We assume the newly matched sources
represent the foreground superpositions, calculate their
proper motion significance, and apply a magnitude cut
of 14.5 < G < 20.5.
As shown in the lower panel
of Figure 7, the magnitude cut mimics the magnitude
distribution of companions in the parent pair sample.
Moreover, the proper motion significance distribution of
newly matched offset sources closely matches that of the
SDSS star catalog for G < 20.5, as shown in Figure 1,
suggesting that the matched sources in the shuffle test
are predominantly stars. We also present the fraction
of newly matched sources with insignificant proper mo-
tion as a function of magnitude in the upper panel of
Figure 7. Both the fraction of newly matched sources
with insignificant proper motion and the number of star-
like companions rise at fainter magnitudes, highlighting
the unavoidable foreground contamination despite the
proper motion cut.
It is challenging to precisely quantify the star contam-
ination in the wide separation pairs in our refined quasar
pair sample. Here, we provide an approximate estimate
of the stellar contamination for pairs with separations
larger than 1.′′5.
We derive the fraction of matched sources with signif-
icant proper motion in the initially matched DR16 QSO
sample over the total number of sources in the sample.
And we also compute this fraction for the newly matched
sample constrained by 14.5 < G < 20.5 in shuffle test to
represent the significant proper motion ratio of the fore-
ground sample. The two ratios are denoted as a1 and
a2 respectively. Then, we count the number of double
quasars and quasar-star pairs in the refined pair sam-
ple with z > 0.5, G < 20.5, and PAIR SEP ≥1.′′5 as
NPMSIG>3 and NINSIG. The expected numbers of double
quasars and quasar-star pairs (Nq and Ns respectively)
are



NPMSIG>3 = a1Nq + a2Ns ,
NINSIG = (1 −a1)Nq + (1 −a2)Ns ,
(2)
where a1 = 97.7%, a2 = 94.9%, NPMSIG>3 = 85,
and NINSIG = 965. The estimated contamination ra-
tio for quasar-like companions with z > 0.5, G <
