Entropy 2024, 26, 612
73 of 84
equipartition properties are still not well understood. Whether or not the OGS can attain a
true equilibrium state from arbitrary initial conditions is also not clear. These issues remain
outstanding in large part because the attractive interactions are cumulatively long range,
unlike typical thermodynamic systems that have repulsive and short-range interactions
between their constituents.
However, some statistical properties of the OGS are known. The single-particle distri-
bution function in both the canonical and microcanonical ensemble has been derived [4].
These distribution functions reduce to the isothermal solution of the Vlasov equation in the
large N limit.
Even less is known about the N-body ROGS, with only one study of its statistical
properties having been carried out to date [126]. In this section, a few of the basic results of
this system will be summarized.
8.1. Motion Classiﬁcation
Braid operators {σ1, σ2, . . . , σN} can be used to classify the motion in the N-body
system. A sequence of m pair crossings will be described by
σf (1)σf (2)σf (3) . . . σf (m)
(209)
where 1 ≤f (x) ≤(N −1) for all 1 ≤x ≤m is a discrete integer function and σf (x) means
that the bodies currently in the positions f (x) and f (x) + 1 cross. Crossing directions are
irrelevant, and for a given trajectory, any given sequence of m braid operators forms a
unique ordered list of crossings.
It is possible to deﬁne a metric that describes the relative “distance” between any pair
of crossings via
g(x) ≡|∆f (x)| = | f (x + 1) −f (x)|
(210)
which implies that 0 ≤g(x) ≤(N −2) for all 1 ≤x ≤(m −1). The motion can be then
classiﬁed as follows:
g(x)
Motion Class
0
A
1
B
2
C
3
D
. . .
(211)
denoting each type by increasing the letters of the alphabet. A-motion corresponds to any
two crossings in nearest proximity—two particles cross each other twice in succession.
B-motion corresponds to any two crossings in the next-nearest proximity–two particles
cross each other, and then one of them crosses its other nearest neighbour. C-motion
corresponds to any two crossings in the next-to-next-nearest proximity: two particles cross
each other and then a neighbouring pair cross each other. This continues until the left-most
pair of particles cross one another followed by the crossing of the right-most pair (or vice
versa), which is the extreme case. In the four-body case, for example, σ1σ2σ1σ3σ2, yields
from (205), the symbol sequence BBCB. Computing successive values of g(x) ( 1, 1, 2, 1)
gives same result.
A collision of m particles simultaneously corresponds to a single-particle crossing
through an (N −m)-dimensional surface in the interior of the (N −1) simplex. Such
collisions can be further classiﬁed by extending the braid group notation with the set
{σ1m, σ2m, . . . , σ(N+1−m)m}. The subscript denotes which set of particles is involved, begin-
ning with the left-most; the superscripts denote the number of particles in the collision,
with the superscript “2” dropped when pairwise collisions occur. For example, σ85 denotes
a ﬁve-particle collision that involves particles 8–12. All collisions yield crossings with the
exception of the initial conditions causing m particles to occupy the same point throughout
the motion (as in the upper left panel of Figure 55 in the four-body case). In this situation,
the system reduces to that of an (unequal mass) (N −m)-body problem.
