see Appendix A: the one-loop corrections make nk steeper than the background state nk ∼k−γ.
For a negative coupling, the positivity of the beta function means that the coupling increases in
the IR: the interaction is marginally relevant. An increasing coupling means a decreasing nk: the
one-loop corrections make nk less steep than the background state nk ∼k−γ. At the scale at which
the coupling becomes order-one, we lose perturbative control and can no longer trust that the state
has occupation numbers nk. Finally, we note that one typically fixes the prefactor in front of the
power law in nk by imposing that the flux Q (A.5) is constant. This gives nk ∝Q1/3k−γ, which
adds a factor of Q1/3 to the right-hand side of the beta function (3.22).
To recover the zero-temperature beta function, in (3.15) we set n5 to zero, giving 1/2 of
the answer in (3.16), while (3.17) vanishes. This is consistent with what one obtains when com-
puting directly at zero temperature, without the Keldysh formalism: the Feynman propagator
is ⟨TΨ†
k(t2)Ψk(t1)⟩= θ(t12)eiωkt12, and only the s-channel diagram is nonvanishing, since in the
t-channel diagram there is a θ(t12)θ(t21) = 0.
Effective action
As one integrates out modes, lowering the scale µ, the action Sµ will contain two classes of
other terms, in addition to the interaction of the form (3.13) that one starts with in the UV.
The first are terms which, in position space, have higher powers of derivatives or, equivalently, in
momentum space are of the form (3.13) multiplied by powers of pi. These are simple to obtain:
in computing, for example, Ls in (3.15), we neglected the pi under the assumption that pi ≪µ.
One could have been more systematic, perturbatively expanding the integrand in powers of pi/µ,
which would yield the higher derivative terms. Since these terms are higher derivative, they are
irrelevant and not important in the IR.
Figure 3: Sextic interaction terms generated under RG flow.
The effective action Sµ should contain, in addition, terms that are higher order in the number
of fields. For instance, the quartic interaction ληψ3 in (3.13) will generate an interaction of the
form λ3ηψ5, see Fig. 3. Ordinarily, interactions with more fields are manifestly irrelevant, since
each field comes with a positive dimension. However, in this case, d+∆ψ (3.6) is negative. More
11
