96
Evidence for Intrinsic charm in the proton
proportional to xc−(see Eq. (1.44)), hence provides a direct constraint on valence charm.
Predictions for this observable, are presented in Fig. 3.24. Even in the absence of detailed
predictions for prospective EIC measurements of this observable, it is clear that its measurement
would significantly constrain the charm valence PDF. Similarly, if we consider the CC DIS a
possible charm asymmetry can be probed by the measurements of F c¯c
2
(see Eq. (1.50)) in
neutrino, anti-neutrino DIS, although the experimental uncertainties are expected to be larger.
Aσc¯c computational settings.
The projected statistical uncertainties for the future EIC mea-
surement of the charm-tagged asymmetry Aσc¯c shown in Fig. 3.23 are obtained as follows.
We adopt the projections from [267] for the kinematic coverage in the (x, Q2) plane and the
expected statistical precision, based on running at a center-of-mass energy of √s = 63 GeV
for L = 10 fb−1. These projections entail that measurements of charm production at the EIC
will cover the region 1.3 GeV2 ≲Q2 ≲120 GeV2 and 5 × 10−4 ≲x ≲0.5. Charm production
is tagged from the reconstruction of D0 and ¯D0 exclusive decays, and a detailed estimate of
experimental uncertainties would require a full detector simulation. Here, however, we limit
ourselves to estimating the statistical accuracy on the asymmetry Eq. (3.12), which is expressed
in terms of reduced cross-sections, defined as in Ref. [134] in terms of charm structure functions.
For this, we take the statistical uncertainties provided in [267] and increase them by a factor
√
2 since the measured sample has to be separated into D- and ¯D-tagged subsamples.
3.4. Summary
In this chapter we have presented a first evidence for intrinsic charm quarks in the proton. By
carefully disentangling the perturbative component, we obtain unambiguous evidence for total
intrinsic charm c+(x), which turns out to be in qualitative agreement with the expectations
from model calculations. Our determination of the charm PDF, driven by indirect constraints
from the latest high-precision LHC data, is perfectly consistent with direct constraints both from
EMC charm production data taken forty years ago, and with more recent Z+charm production
data in the forward region from LHCb. Combining all data, we find local significance for total
intrinsic charm in the large-x region just above the 3σ level.
Regarding a possible intrinsic charm asymmetry c−(x), our main conclusion is that current
experimental data provide support for the hypothesis that the valence charm PDF may be
nonzero, even though with the NNPDF4.0 dataset it is not possible to reach three-sigma
evidence. Whereas the situation may improve somewhat with future PDF determinations based
on the full LHC Run-3 dataset, dedicated observables such as the LHCb charm asymmetry
Eq. (3.11) as well as charm production at the EIC Eq. (3.12) will be needed in order to achieve
firm evidence or discovery.
Our results motivate further dedicated studies of intrinsic charm through a wide range of
nuclear, particle and astroparticle physics experiments. These can include: the High-Luminosity
