Probing Remote Nuclear Magnetic Moments in hBN with V −
B Electron Spin
G.V. Mamin,1 E.V. Dmitrieva,1 F.F. Murzakhanov,1 I.N. Gracheva,1 E.N.
Mokhov,2 I.I. Vlasov,3 M.R. Gafurov,1 U. Gerstmann,4 and V.A. Soltamov2, ∗
1Institute of Physics, Kazan Federal University, Kremlyovskaya 18, Kazan 420008, Russia
2Ioffe Institute, Polytekhnicheskaya, 26, St.
Petersburg 194021, Russia
3Prokhorov General Physics Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences, 119991 Moscow, Russia
4Lehrstuhl f¨ur Theoretische Materialphysik, Universit¨at Paderborn, 33098 Paderborn, Germany
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
Since the initial discovery of optically addressable spins of the negatively charged boron vacancy
defect (V −
B ) in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), substantial progress has been made, enabling promis-
ing applications in quantum sensing, information processing, and simulations. A deep understanding
of the V −
B (electron): hBN (nuclear) spin systems is crucial for realizing these potentials. In this
article, we employ Electron Nuclear Double Resonance (ENDOR) to demonstrate the sensing of dis-
tant nuclear spins via the V −
B electron spin. We identify the nature and localization of the probed
nuclear magnetic moments as 14N spins localized ≈0.4 nm away from the vacancy and resolve the
energies of the corresponding interactions. Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations further
confirm these findings, providing a detailed description of the interactions between the V −
B electron
spin and surrounding nitrogen atoms in different shells. The results establish the V −
B electron spin
as a promising tool for developing novel van der Waals material-based nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) probes, advancing the understanding of spin physics in hBN, and unlocking its potential to
study distant nuclear spin interactions in the host.
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), a prominent repre-
sentative of van der Waals (vdW) materials, possesses
exceptional potential as a platform for quantum tech-
nologies utilizing solid-state spin defects [1–3]. Its ultra-
wide bandgap (Eg ≈6 eV) [4], exceeding that of di-
amond (Eg ≈5.5 eV), enables the incorporation of a
diverse range of optically active defects emitting across
a broad spectral range, from deep ultraviolet (UV) to
near-infrared (NIR), with the ability to study individual
defects [5–7].
The structural properties of hBN, char-
acterized by honeycomb planes formed of strongly sp2-
hybridized boron and nitrogen atoms bound by weak
vdW forces, enable precise nanoscale engineering down
to the two-dimensional (2D) monolayer level [8]. This,
coupled with its exceptional thermal and chemical sta-
bility, positions hBN as a versatile platform for a wide
range of advanced materials applications, including the
synthesis of vdW heterostructures and the development
of nanoelectronics and optoelectronic devices [9, 10].
The discovery of optically addressable triplet (S = 1)
spin states of negatively charged boron vacancy (V −
B )
defects in hBN (Fig. 1a,b) [1, 11], along with the abil-
ity to read out these spins using optically detected mag-
netic resonance (ODMR), has driven significant research
into the V −
B spin-optical properties and their applica-
tions in quantum technologies. This line of investigation
has also led to the identification of other defect systems
in hBN, such as carbon-related defects, which also en-
able ODMR detection [2, 12–14]. These defect systems
in hBN pave the way for applications in sensing [15–19]
and computation [7, 13, 14, 16, 20–23], while also mark-
ing the first steps toward developing quantum simulators
based on the inherent nuclear spins of hBN [21–23]. In-
teractions between the electron spin of defects and sur-
rounding nuclear magnetic moments, mediated by hy-
perfine (HF) and nuclear quadrupole (NQ) interactions,
play a central role in all aspects mentioned above. This is
particularly significant since the hBN lattice exclusively
comprises chemical elements with nonzero nuclear spins:
99.9% 14N (I = 1), 19.9% 10B (I = 3), and 80.1% 11B
(I = 3/2). To date, microwave spectroscopy has resolved
and studied these interactions in detail for the three near-
est nitrogen atoms around the boron vacancy (N(1) group
in Fig. 1a), yielding results consistent with DFT calcula-
tions [1, 24–26]. Also, HF interactions originating from
13C atoms intrinsically forming the carbon-related defect
have been investigated in Ref. [14] using a combination
of Electron Nuclear Double Resonance (ENDOR) and
ODMR spectroscopy.
In this study, using high-frequency (94 GHz) EN-
DOR, we probe remote 14N magnetic moments, through
the V −
B electron spin. Analysis of the ENDOR spectra
recorded for distinct magnetic field orientations enables
us to assign the probed nitrogen atoms to the third ni-
trogen shell, N(3). The variation in ENDOR frequencies
across different orientations was then used to extract the
corresponding HF and NQ tensors, with both the val-
ues and sources of these interactions confirmed by DFT
calculations. This approach establishes the foundation
for implementing the V −
B defect as a nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) probe, identifying distant 14N spins
for electron-nuclear register, and contributing critical in-
sights into V −
B spin-Hamiltonian.
Commercial hBN single crystal (hq Graphene) irra-
diated at room temperature with 2 MeV electrons to
a dose of 6 × 1018 cm−2 to generate V −
B
defects [27]
arXiv:2504.06798v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  9 Apr 2025
