Radiatively-Cooled Moist Convection under an Idealised Climate
Change Scenario: Linear Analysis
G. N. Dritschel1∗, S. M. Tobias1, D. J. Parker1,2,3 and L. Tomassini4
1School of Mathematics, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK
2NORCE Norwegian Research Centre AS, Bergen NO-5838, NO
3National Centre for Atmospheric Science (NCAS), Leeds LS2 9JT
4Met Office, Exeter EX1 3PB, UK
ABSTRACT
In order to explore the effects of climate change on atmospheric convection and
the water cycle, we develop and analyse an extension of the Rainy-B´enard model,
which is itself a moist version of the Rayleigh-B´enard model of dry convection.
Including moisture changes the character of the convection, with condensation
providing a source of buoyancy via latent heating. The climate change model is set
up by imposing a variable radiative cooling rate, prescribing surface temperature
and relative humidity, and imposing a moist-pseudoadiabatic profile at the top
boundary (a flux boundary condition). The model is analysed across the climate
parameter space by examining diagnostics of the model’s basic state, and its
stability, with Convective Available Potential Energy (CAPE) calculations and
a linear stability analysis. We use the linear stability results to identify new
parameters relevant for this moist convective system, and to understand how the
linear instability responds to the climate parameters. In particular, we define the
”Rainy number” as a scaled ratio of positive-area CAPE and diffusion parameters.
An alternative radiative-based Rainy number also is shown to describe the
parameter space, especially for problems relating to changes in flux conditions.
The analysis provides a novel theoretical understanding of how the dynamics and
scales of moist convection and hence precipitation will change under climate change.
KEYWORDS
Moist Convection; Climate Change; Precipitation; Linear Stability Analysis
1.
Introduction
The changes in atmospheric deep convection, and the character of its associated
rainfall, are uncertain in future climate (O’Gorman 2015). Moist convection is a key
source of uncertainty in climate model simulations, due to its small scale processes,
and its feedback on large scale climate processes, such as the Hadley circulation
(Tomassini and Yang 2022). Understanding changes in the intensity, structure and
organisation of moist convection under climate change are key for improving climate
model projections, which are pertinent tools for protecting vulnerable communities
in the future. How moist convection changes under climate change is therefore a
∗Corresponding author. Email: mmgnd@leeds.ac.uk
arXiv:2504.06019v1  [physics.flu-dyn]  8 Apr 2025
