anomaly inflow of the topological M-theory terms on a single boundary, reviewing the well-
known supersymmetric E8 M9-brane. In Section 3 we neglect supersymmetry and carry out
a similar analysis for a G gauge theory, with G a simple Lie group, obtaining a set of linear
equations that allow us to determine the appropriate boundary matter content for anomaly
cancellation. From this, we give explicit results for various Lie algebras. Finally, we conclude
in Section 4 and briefly comment on possible future directions.
There are two appendices. In Appendix A we summarize a set of anomaly polynomials
for G2 and Sp(6), with appealing Green-Schwarz factorization, which however cannot be
emebedded within M-theory. Appendix B contains technical details on computing indices of
representations of relevance to our calculations.
2
Review of anomaly inflow on M9 brane
In this Section we review the miraculous anomaly inflow mechanism in the Hoˇrava-Witten
compactification of M-theory, [2, 3]. In these references, the compactification of M-theory on
an interval S1/Z2 (where the Z2 acts by reflecting the S1 coordinate) is discussed. Compacti-
fication of M-theory on a manifold in boundary, such as an interval, is potentially problematic
for the following reason. At low energies, M-theory is well approximated by 11d supergravity
coupled together with a topological higher-derivative term,
S ⊃2πi
Z
Y11
1
6 C3 ∧G4 ∧G4 −C3 ∧I8

,
(2.1)
where I8 is a particular characteristic polynomial in terms of the first and second Pontryagin
classes. Its explicit form is
I8 = 1
48

p2 −1
4p2
1

.
(2.2)
The quantities pi (the Pontryagin classes) are certain combinations of powers of traces of
the Riemann tensor; our conventions for these, as well as a quick survey of our techniques
to study anomaly cancellation, are given in Appendix B. A priori, it is not clear that (2.1)
is well-defined, since it involves fractional coefficients for the Chern-Simons like couplings.
Whenever Y11 together with the three-form profile C3 can be extended to a 12-dimensional
manifold Z12, such that Y11 = ∂Z12, one can use Stokes’ theorem to write the term (2.1) as
2πi
Z
Z12
1
6 G4 ∧G4 ∧G4 −G4 ∧I8

,
(2.3)
where the integral is evaluated on a manifold with boundary. The problem is now to show that
this expression is independent of the choice of Z12 and extension of the three-form field. To do
this, one needs to show that (2.1) is properly quantized on closed 12-dimensional manifolds, a
feat achieved in full generality in [1], and only in combination with a gravitino contribution.
In any case, the term is still problematic on a manifold with boundary, such as an interval;
– 3 –
