description of 3ηs
ion coordinates Rs rather than the abstract shape coordinates used for theoretical clarity in
Sec. 4.2, giving rise to explicit formulae for the shape coordinates.22
The dominant (classical) cost in the PES analysis is finding the equilibrium configuration, since QR
decomposition and diagonalization of force matrix for a range of typical molecules/clusters ηs
ion ∼1 −100
is negligible (scaling as O((ηs
ion)3) classically). However, equilibrium configurations for many molecules are
either already known, or very good guesses are known leading to fast convergence. In practice, these classical
computations are routine and are not of practical concern.
Grid Matching
The initial state is prepared in the set of normal coordinates Ξs discretized as discussed in Sec. 4.4.1.
We must perform a coordinate transformation mapping coordinates Ξs →Rs where Rs are the original
3ηs
ion Cartesian coordinates of the chemical species discretized on a spatial grid given by the inverse Fourier
transformation of the finite plane wave basis defined in Sec. 3. Noting that ∆Rs
αI =
1
√MI
P3ηs
ion−6
k=1
es
αI,kqs,k,
we explicitly write the Euclidean transformation,
¯Rs
αI := Rs
CoM,αI +
X
α
Ss
αβ

Rs,0
αI +
1
√MI
3ηs
ion−6
X
k=1
es
βI,kqs,k


where Ss
αβ are the elements of the 3D rotation matrix formed from the Euler angles in Ss. The coordinates
¯Rs
I take values on a non-Euclidean spatial grid distinct from the uniform spatial grid Rs
I. We classically
precompute a map R to suitably assign each value of ¯Rs
I to a unique value Rs
I, in order to injectively
match every point of the discretized Ξs coordinates to a point of the discretized Rs coordinates. This R
is required as part of the definition of the preparation oracle Ocoord used in the initial state preparation.
Given a sufficient resolution on each grid we expect the physical realism of the initial state to be not very
sensitive to this choice of assignment.23 Once a solution is obtained, it is loaded on the quantum computer
at a cost of O(ηs
ion|G|) quantum operations. More broadly, the quantum state preparation is agnostic to the
grid matching prescription and ultimately the choice is left to the user.
In summary, the classical pre-processing required for the initial state preparation are as follows.
• The classically-computed (e.g.
using DFT) approximate electronic wavefunction at equilibrium is
required to prepare the electronic state.
• The angular frequencies ωs,k =
p
fs,k are required to prepare the truncated thermal state of vibrations.
• The motional information about the vibrational modes ˆes
k and the grid-matching prescription R :
¯Rs
I →Rs
I are required to classically compute the map Ξs →Rs that is loaded as the oracle Ocoord.
5
Quantum simulation of time evolution using pseudoions
In this section, we describe the quantum algorithm for simulating time-evolution using the Hamiltonian with
pseudoions. The core piece of time evolution algorithm is the (unitary) block-encoding of the pseudoion
Hamiltonian H. This is a unitary Usa, acting on the extended Hilbert space Hsa = Hs ⊗Ha, where the
subscripts s and a denote the system and the required ancilla space, respectively. Usa is constructed such
that it satisfies
H
λ = ⟨G|Usa|G⟩a
(77)
22As mentioned in Sec. 2.2, substrates (slabs) do not have rotational modes and so for these species, we just omit the rotation
vectors and perform the calculation as before. The result will be 3ηs
ion −3 shape coordinates instead.
23For example, we could (classically) map each point from normal to Cartesian coordinates, divide each coordinate by the
lattice spacing and round up or down to find a representative on the lattice. This may map two shape coordinates into the
same lattice representative, so a separate subroutine should be introduced to resolve the clashes.
31
