 
14
With a closer examination of Figure 7, an increase in cohesion from 200 Pa to 1,000 Pa results 
in a roughly 63% decrease in volumetric erosion rate for mass flow rates of 170 and 215 slpm. 
Similarly, increasing cohesion from roughly 300 Pa to 1000 Pa results in a roughly 86% decrease 
in observed volumetric erosion rate for a mass flow rate of 125 slpm. Taken together, these 
values can be used with eq. 5 to determine the relative size of constants a and b. For all 
examined mass flow rates, such a calculation reveals that a is roughly 1.6 times larger than b in 
eq. 5, specifically in the range where cohesion is less than 1,000 Pa. By comparing eqs. 1 and 5 
directly, this suggests that the potential energy terms (𝜌𝑚𝑔𝐷𝛽) in the denominator of eq. 1 is 
roughly 1.6 times greater than the cohesive terms (, in this case set equal to cohesion). 
 
However, for cohesion values greater than 1,000 Pa in Figure 7, a further increase in 
sample cohesion results in higher observed volumetric erosion rates, not predicted by previous 
theory. For examined mass flow rates greater than 170 slpm, increasing the cohesion from 
1,000 Pa to 2,000 Pa results in roughly a 60% increase in volumetric erosion rate. For a mass 
flow rate of 125 slpm, an increase in cohesion from 2,000 Pa to 3,000 Pa results in a similar 60% 
increase in volumetric erosion rate. Using these additional values in eq. 5 to calculate relative 
sizes of terms reveals that a (similar to potential energy terms in eq. 1) is roughly 3-3.6 times 
greater than b (similar to cohesion terms in eq. 1) for cohesion values above 1,000 Pa. When 
comparing such relative sizes of terms, it is clear that the relationship between volumetric 
erosion rate and cohesion is not linear and likely depends on mass flow rate.  
As flow is impinged on a granular surface, higher levels of cohesion can help to reduce 
the volumetric erosion rate to an extent, but its influence is ultimately reduced for samples 
with very high cohesion (generally greater than 1,000-2,000 Pa). This likely results from the 
effect of interparticle forces, which can work to bind the granular material together to resist 
viscous erosion or shearing forces (Lee, 1995). At higher levels of cohesion, however, tightly 
bound groupings of particles may be liberated from the surface in clumps, owing to an increase 
in the overall amount of eroded material. Yet, for lower mass flow rates (near 125 slpm), the 
potential energy of lifting a particle over a neighboring particle tends to dominate. Previous 
investigation of the lunar surface shows that inherent cohesion of the regolith can vary greatly 
depending on location but is generally between 200 to 1,000 Pa (Ming, 1992). Thus, the 
inherent cohesion lunar regolith may help to reduce viscous erosion rates when landing or 
launching rockets from the surface of the Moon by roughly 63-86%, for mass flow rates 
between 125 and 215 slpm.  
While the cohesion values presented in this study were determined by leveraging the 
generalized equations developed by Dotson et al. (2024), these models were derived from 
maximum shearing force only. As such, this study did not account for dilation of granular 
material from shearing forces, non-linear effects of reduced gravity, or reduced normal loads 
which may change the overall cohesive nature of a sample. Such effects would likely cause the 
data in Figure 7 to change only the calculated cohesion values (X-axis) shrinking the range of 
observed cohesion values. Therefore, when accounting for dilation or non-linear effects, the 
calculated cohesion value may be less than reported in this investigation, but the overall 
inverse relationship to viscous erosion is expected to remain the same. 
Future studies should examine the relationship between erosion rate, cohesion, and 
cohesive energy density as initially theorized by Metzger (2024a). To calculate cohesive energy 
density, a more substantial understanding of sample density and cohesion as a function of 
