8
D.
Axiomatic approach
Since for a given data set of length n, epsilons with
history length bigger than n do not contain any informa-
tion (they are always equal to 0.5) we will, without the
loss of generality, restrict ourselves to the sequence of the
functions Ψh for h ≤n. Furthermore, based on Eq. (19),
it is enough to investigate only functions ψh that have a
finite number of arguments.
Now, since we have established mathematical language
to work with, we can enumerate some necessary and de-
sirable properties that the functions ψh should satisfy.
We will state them as a set of axioms. We use name
axioms for this set of definitions describing desired prop-
erties to highlight their importance and state that they
can be used to set the theoretical background for the es-
timation of the single epsilon. Furthermore, we give four
separate axioms even though they can be combined into
a smaller set. We see this distinction as useful since one
can try to drop one or more of the axioms in the future to
investigate a broader set of epsilon-combining functions.
Axiom 1 (Zero condition). Each function ψh has to be
equal to zero if the input is the sequence of only zeros
ψh(0, 0, . . . , 0) = 0.
(20)
The first axiom makes sure that if all estimated ϵh
are zeros then the value of the final epsilon is also zero.
That condition is self-explanatory, although it should be
considered together with the previous comments that we
take into account only a finite number of ϵh up to some
hmax. Additionally, one could strengthen this axiom by
also imposing its reverse.
Axiom 2 (Monotonicity). Each function ψh has to be
monotone for all of the variables, namely
∀
ϵ0,...,ϵh
∀
i∈{0,...,h}
∀
ϵ′
i>ϵi
ψh(ϵ0, . . . , ϵi−1, ϵ′
i, ϵi+1, . . . , ϵh)
≥ψh(ϵ0, . . . , ϵi−1, ϵi, ϵi+1, . . . , ϵh).
(21)
The second axiom ensures that an increase in any ϵh
cannot lead to a decrease in the final epsilon. The func-
tions that do not fulfill this axiom are clearly against
the spirit of the single-epsilon estimation. Also, here, it
is possible to strengthen this axiom by imposing strong
inequality.
Axiom 3 (Position influentiality).
∀
ϵ0,...,ϵh
∀
i,j∈{0,...,h}:i<j ∀
δ>0
ψh(ϵ0, . . . , ϵi−1, ϵi −δ, ϵi+1, . . . , ϵj−1, ϵj + δ, ϵj+1, . . . , ϵh)
≤ψh(ϵ0, . . . , ϵi−1, ϵi, ϵi+1, . . . , ϵj−1, ϵj, ϵj+1, . . . , ϵh)
where the quantifier for all δ means here for all δ that
makes sense, i.e., such that added to or subtracted from
specific epsilon do not extend [0, 1/2] interval: ϵi −δ ≥
0 and ϵj + δ ≤
1
2 The idea behind this axiom is that
epsilon with a longer history should have less influence
than previous ones (in the spirit of Remark IV.1).
The third axiom, despite its complicated formulation,
has a simple meaning. We demand here that ϵh with a
smaller h index should not have a smaller impact on the
final epsilon than the one with a bigger h index. It is
in the spirit of the already mentioned decrease in estima-
tion accuracy when history length increases. Once again,
one could make this axiom stronger by imposing strong
inequality.
Axiom 4 (Normalization). Let a ∈(0, 1/2] then
ψh(a, a, . . . , a) = a.
(22)
Finally, the fourth axiom reflects the fact that if all
of the appropriate ϵh are equal, then the final epsilon
should have the same value. Although, as we stated in
the introduction, this axiom could be easily combined
with the first one, we want to separate them for a few
reasons. Firstly, contrary to the first axiom, an attempt
to strengthen the fourth axiom by imposing its inverse is
not reasonable. Secondly, the fourth axiom is the least
important one and is the first candidate to omit if one
would like to allow a broader set of epsilon-combining
functions. Nevertheless, we strongly recommend not to
omit it at all but rather replace it with some weaker con-
dition so that, for example, the range of the final epsilon
is still correct. Third, in the case of weighted averages,
we will focus on in the next section, we will see that each
of the four axioms imposes different conditions on these
averages.
E.
Weighted averages
Let us note here that the proposed axioms still allow
for a variety of functions of epsilons to form the final
epsilon value. We focus here on particular examples of
such functions and compare their performance. Namely,
we will consider weighted averages of the form
ϵ =
hmax
X
h=0
whϵh
(23)
where wh are some weights.
In the Observation below, we provide sufficient condi-
tions for the weights to fulfill Axioms 1–4 given in Section
IV D.
Observation 1. The weighted average from Eq. (23)
with positive, non-increasing, and normalized weights ful-
fills Axioms 1–4.
Proof. Axiom 1 is true for all weighted averages based
on the definition given in Eq. (23). Additionally, if all
of the weights are nonzero, the conversion of Axiom 1
is also true, nevertheless, we do not necessarily impose
that. Furthermore, to fulfill the other axioms, we need
to impose some additional conditions on the weights. If
all weights are positive, then the Axiom 2 is fulfilled. If
