6
A. K. Maity et al.
4.1. The massive star-forming activity in the
filamentary cloud
Massive stars form inside hot molecular cores (Mayra
et al. 1999; van der Tak 2004; Paron 2024). Later, the
intense ultraviolet radiation from massive stars, beyond
the Lyman limit, ionizes the surrounding gas (Panagia
1973). The size of H ii regions increases over time; thus,
the compact H ii regions (< 0.5 pc) are associated with
the early stages of MSF. In this study, we have detected
a pc-scale HFS candidate (i.e., C-HFS) at the center
of the filament, which is associated with ATL-5 and an
UC H ii region. The presence of the UC H ii region and
the absence of any extended H ii regions suggest that
C-HFS represents an early stage of HFS. Assuming that
the H ii region expanding in a uniform medium, we cal-
culated the dynamical age for the UC H ii region to be
about 0.01–0.04 Myr for the initial densities n = 104 to
105 cm−3, respectively, using the formula from Dyson &
Williams (1980). In this calculation, the sound speed in
the ionized region (∼10 km s−1; Bisbas et al. 2009), as
well as its effective radius (∼0.05 pc) and Str¨omgren ra-
dius, are provided as inputs. For densities ranging from
n = 104 to 105 cm−3, the Str¨omgren radius of the H ii
region varies from 0.006 to 0.001 pc. It is possible that
the target IRDC hosts several UC H ii regions and 6.7
GHz MMEs toward the edge of the N59-North bubble.
Recently, Chen et al. (2024) calculated the dynamical
timescale for the extended H ii region associated with
N59-North to be about 2 Myr and proposed that the
expansion of the H ii is responsible for the star-forming
activity near N59-North. This study supports their pro-
posed idea by revealing the expanding gas motion near
the N59-North bubble by detecting blue- and red-shifted
velocity components. Therefore, taking all the informa-
tion together, we find that our target IRDC has been
active in MSF for the last few Myr.
The presence of several pc-scale filaments associated
with C-HFS at the central part of the large-scale fil-
ament indicates the importance of multiple scales fil-
amentary mass accretion related to MSF as proposed
by Zhou et al. (2022).
The gas flow in the filaments
on small scale is primarily driven by gravity, whereas
the large-scale gas flow is possibly caused by both tur-
bulence (as inertial flow) and gravitational contraction
(e.g., Zhou et al. 2022; Bhadari et al. 2024). Thus, the
hubs accumulate a large amount of material and become
suitable for MSF. The observed large-scale velocity gra-
dients toward the filament hosting N59-North possibly
suggest a converging gas flow, which is providing ma-
terial to C-HFS (e.g., Kirk et al. 2013). More details
about the large-scale gas motion and its possible origin
are given in Section 4.2. The GRS and CHIMPS line
data have insufficient resolution to trace C-HFS; there-
fore, small-scale gas motion remains unexplored in this
work. It is important to note that although all ATLAS-
GAL clumps satisfy the condition for MSF, we have not
observed pc-scale HFS systems associated with them,
except for ATL-5.
This suggests that, in the case of
these clumps, the HFS configuration may arise at later
stages or may be too weak to be detected with the cur-
rent sensitivity of the data.
As demonstrated by the
recent observational work by Bhadari et al. (2024), a
combination of ALMA and JWST observations can be
extremely useful for hunting such early stages of mas-
sive star-forming regions and understanding the driving
mechanisms of gas flow in small-scale.
4.2. The possible origin and evolution of the
filamentary cloud
The PV/PPV diagrams show significant velocity vari-
ation (∼few km s−1) along the filament, which can be
very important for inferring the possible mechanisms
driving the large-scale gas motion. In Figures 6a, 6b,
and 6c, we provide schematic diagrams explaining how
the PV diagrams would appear under different processes
of gas flow, such as rotation, central collapse, and end-
dominated collapse (EDC), respectively. The PV dia-
grams are shown for cylindrical filaments and line of ob-
servation making significant angle (∼45◦) relative to the
filament. For a rotating filament with constant angular
velocity, the observed velocity will be proportional to
the distance along the spine of the filament. A centrally
collapsing filament will develop a massive clump toward
its central region, exhibiting both blue- and red-shifted
velocity components directed toward the filament’s cen-
ter. This kinematic signature can be inferred from the
study by Liu et al. (2019). According to Clarke & Whit-
worth (2015), due to varying gravitational acceleration
along the length of the isolated filaments, they undergo
EDC. In the EDC process, massive clumps are exclu-
sively found at the opposite edges of the filament, having
blue- and red-shifted velocity components. It is impor-
tant to note that if the filament is parallel to the line of
observation, its filamentary nature will not be observed.
Whereas, if the filament is perpendicular to the line of
observation, blue- or red-shifted components will only
be visible for rotation. The PV/PPV diagrams of the
filament hosting N59-North do not correspond to any of
the PV diagrams shown in Figure 6. Therefore, rotation,
central collapse, and EDC are unlikely to be responsible
for the large-scale gas flow in this filament.
Interestingly, the PV diagram for the target fila-
ment matches perfectly with that of the compressed
layer observed in the cloud-cloud collision (CCC) sce-
