6
Diamond
Outer Aluminium Tape
10 mm
Thermal 
paste
RF Loop
Fibre
Bias Magnets
12 mm
Coaxial Cable
Aluminium foil
FIG. 5: A previous design that was larger but still
endoscopic utilized two bias magnets, aluminum foil and
tape to help with reflecting fluorescence and making the
sensor head light tight.
where a is the baseline shift, b is the peak amplitude and
c is the growth parameter.
A value of the fitting parameter a plus one standard devi-
ation was used as a threshold value and the point at which
the fitted curve went above this threshold value was used as
the point at which the signal was deemed above the noise
floor and therefore detected.
This was called the maxi-
mum working distance. The standard deviation value was
found by measuring the background signal (i.e. no sample
in place) over the same height line profile and taking the
standard deviation.
This was repeated for each of the five profiles taken. The
average maximum working distance was then used as well
as the standard deviations of these distances as the error.
Appendix C: Larger sensor head design and changes
in ODMR spectra
Previous designs to the one shown in the main paper used
two bias magnets placed back from the diamond but not
in line with each other. The magnets were rotated around
the diameter of the fiber in opposite directions (Fig. 5).
This was again to achieve a [100] bias field alignment with
the diamond. The diamond, although still glued directly
to the front of the fiber, was in a different position than
where it was for the work in the main paper.
This configuration of magnet position relative to the
probe head, diamond and the samples caused a different
response in fluorescence where a Gaussian dip was seen
rather than a derivative shape (Fig. 6). The pair of mag-
nets were positioned so that both the north poles were in
the same direction, which resulted in an increase in overall
field amplitude around the sensor head. This increase in
field around the sensor tip would have caused an induced
field on the sample that was larger than with the current
single magnet setup, producing a larger response signal to
detect. The extra magnet was removed however to reduce
the overall diameter of the probe. Although the induced
field would have been larger, the measurement contrast and
maximum working distance calculated from this data set
was lower than that of this current configuration. This was
due to the broader ODMR spectrum obtained from this
configuration. Although the bias field alignment with the
two magnets was such that a [100] alignment was seen, a
much broader frequency modulation of 5 MHz amplitude
was used, compared with 0.5 MHz for the current sensor
head design. This broader ODMR spectrum caused the flu-
orescence response to be both weaker and non-linear due
to the convolution of the now broadened individual peaks
creating a single broad peak (Fig. 7a).
The ODMR used in Fig.2, where a single peak can be se-
lected at a particular frequency that corresponds to one of
four possible sensitive axes in the diamond, responds pro-
portionally to the field strength along the corresponding
NV symmetry axis as described by the Zeeman effect. How-
ever with the single broad peak being made of an overlap
of four separate broad peaks, signal response is not simply
from the increase or decrease in resonance frequency but is
now due to the four separate peaks moving up and down
the resonance frequency range in different directions rela-
tive to each other. This then means the signal response
measured is due to the overall broadness of the single peak
changing as the convolution of these four separate peaks
changes. A simulation that solves the NV centre ground
state Hamiltonian to calculate the resonance frequencies
for an applied bias field and test field was used to generate
ODMR spectra. The ODMR simulation was used to gen-
erate spectra for both a 0.5 MHz and a 5 MHz line width,
to simulate broadening from an increased modulation am-
plitude. An initial [100] bias field with a small off-axis field
was applied, to simulate the imperfect position of the bias
(a)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
250
260
270
280
290
LIA Output (mV)
Position (mm)
(b)
FIG. 6: A change in the magnet configuration results in a
change in the measured field pattern while scanning over
samples. (a) A 20 x 20 mm scan of a 100% concentration
sample using the old probe configuration. (b) The
Gaussian fits for the horizontal (black) and vertical (red)
line profiles over the signal.
