theory, since we have shown that only possibilities or solutions that embed into the E8 N = 1
theory exist.
We also analyzed the problem with the assumption of a fully chiral spectrum in other cases
where we could not be exhaustive. For the algebra C2, there exist certainly solutions with
embedding within M-theory since this is a subgroup of E8. For the algebras An≤5, Bn≥6, Dn≤7,
there is room to find solutions that can be embedded in M-theory as well; however, we did
not perform an exhaustive search. Although one could think that these algebras are much
easier to deal with due to the lack of genuine sixth-order Casimir invariants [39], the larger
the number of representations that need to be considered increases the complexity of the
problem; so some chiral solutions not coming from the E8 could exist for these groups, in
principle.
We also find some solutions with a purely chiral spectrum, particularly for G2 and
C3, where the anomaly polynomial factorizes, but not in a way compatible with M-
theory.
Whether this is a mere curiosity, or these solutions will find some place in the
non-supersymmetric Landscape of string theory is a question that remains open.
Perhaps our most interesting result comes from the case of the exceptional groups
G2, F4, E6, E7, where we extended our search to fermion spectra of both chiralities. We did
not find any new solutions for E6, E7 and F4, but for G2 we found a non-chiral spectrum,
involving just four different representations (the singlet 1, the adjoint 14, the 27, and the
77), whose anomaly polynomial factorizes exactly in the manner required to match M-theory
anomaly inflow.
In this case, there are five non-trivial anomaly cancellation conditions
taking the form of Diophantine equations, solved simultaneously by only four matter fields.
The resulting matter spectrum is extremely interesting, and one is left to wonder whether it
could correspond to a non-supersymmetric boundary of M-theory. If so, its small instanton
transition (where a worldvolume gauge instanton becomes five M5 branes) would describe
a non-supersymmetric CFT in six dimensions. The worldvolume content of the associated
“G2 × G2” heterotic-like string, obtained from M2’s suspended between two G2 boundaries,
would have a current algebra at level 5 and an internal CFT central charge above 20, so if it
indeed exists it would be a non-perturbative string. Perhaps the most interesting concrete
research question coming out of the simple analysis in this note is to find out whether
this G2 end of the world brane belongs to the Landscape or the Swampland.
If it did
exist, it would open up a whole new swath of the non-supersymmetric string Landscape,
including the possibility of mixed E8 × G2 compactifications where the G2 brane constitutes
a SUSY-breaking dark sector which is only weaky transmitted to the E8 brane4.
More
generally, it would be good to understanding the full space of non-chiral space of solutions,
and elucidate whether exotic boundary conditions of M-theory actually exist.
Acknowledgements: We are indebted to Bobby Samir Acharya, Fernando Quevedo,
and Angel Uranga for useful discussions and comments on the manuscript. The authors thank
CERN for hospitality during the Strings 2024 conference, in which this work was very much
4We thank A. Uranga for raising this interesting possibility.
– 20 –
