Figure 13.
Dispersion relationship for the highest frequency mode (left), and the highest frequency mode
calculated by solving the eigenvalue problem (right). The curves are all calculated at criticality (Ra = Rac).
The different line colours represent different surface temperature increases, and the different line styles represent
different radiative cooling rates. The idealised climate change scenario involves going from the black solid line
to the red dashed line, keeping the surface relative humidity fixed.
effect, with the updraft and subsiding regions becoming narrower.
Recall that the waves associated with the damped maximum frequency mode
are damped (linear) dry internal gravity waves. The bottom right panel of Figure 12
shows the (maximum) frequency associated with the dry internal gravity waves, as
a function of the parameters. We see that under a typical climate change scenario
(going from black solid to red dashed line, with RHsurf fixed), the maximum frequency
increases, which is associated with an increase in the triggering of convection.
However, the triggering is reduced by increased CIN levels in the lower unsaturated
region of the domain under climate change. In Section 4.2, we derived an estimate for
the frequency of these moisture modified internal gravity waves. That approximate
dispersion relationship is shown against the calculated maximum frequency values
in Figure 13. We see a qualitative agreement between the approximate and actual
values of the maximum frequency. The approximate maximum frequency does tend
towards zero in the saturated limit, and also captures the decrease in frequency as
RHsurf →0.25. There are discrepancies in the position and magnitude of the peak
between the approximate and actual values of the maximum frequency. Note that
the dispersion relationship is the best fit for the lines with bsurf = 0, in which domain
moisture is at a minimum (relative to the other curves). The moisture modified
internal gravity waves are responsible for triggering convection in the non-linear
system (Vallis et al. 2019), and so understanding how their frequency changes under
climate change gives us some initial insight into how we may expect the non-linear
behaviour to respond.
We could regard the (most unstable) linear mode as large scale on a global do-
main, and consider how it would effect the conditional instability of embedded
storms. The effect of the linear perturbation on the conditional instability is shown
by looking at the structure of the buoyancy eigenvectors. Since the parcel profile is
not influenced by ˆb, the vertical regions where ˆb < 0 cool the environment and result
in a reduction of inhibition (if bp < bE) or increase in instability (if bp > bE) in the
region. Similarly, the vertical regions where ˆb > 0 cause the environment to warm,
which causes an increase in inhibition or a decrease in instability in that region. The
buoyancy eigenvectors shown in Figure 14 represent the linear perturbation updraft
25
