Chapter 3.
Evidence for Intrinsic charm in the proton
This chapter is based my result presented in Refs. [1, 2]. In these works my contribution has
focused to develop the theoretical framework allowing us to extract the nf = 3 charm PDF and to
the phenomenology computations.
Motivation.
The description of electron-proton and proton-proton collisions at high momen-
tum transfers in terms of collisions between partons is now rooted in the theory of QCD, and it
provides the basis of modern-day precision phenomenology at proton accelerators such as the
LHC as well as for future facilities including the EIC [229, 230], the FPF [231], and neutrino
telescopes [232].
Knowledge of the structure of the proton, which is necessary in order to obtain quantitative
prediction for physics processes at the LHC and other experiments, is encoded in the distribution
of momentum carried by partons of each type (gluons, up quarks, down quarks, up antiquarks,
etc.): parton distribution functions (PDFs). These PDFs could be in principle computed from
first principles, but in practice even their determination from numerical simulations [233] is
extremely challenging. Consequently, the only strategy currently available for obtaining the
reliable determination of the proton PDFs which is required to evaluate LHC predictions is
empirical, through the global analysis of data for which precise theoretical predictions and
experimental measurements are available, so that the PDFs are the only unknown [234].
While the successful framework of PDF has by now been worked through in great detail,
several key open questions remain open. One of the most controversial of these concerns the
treatment of so-called heavy quarks, i.e. those whose mass is greater than that of the proton
(mp = 0.94 GeV). Indeed, virtual quantum effects and energy-mass considerations suggest that
the three light quarks and antiquarks (up, down, and strange) should all be present in the
proton wave-function. Their PDFs are therefore surely determined by the low-energy dynamics
that controls the nature of the proton as a bound state. However, it is a well-known fact [235,
236, 234, 237] that in high enough energy collisions all species of quarks can be excited and
hence observed inside the proton, so their PDFs are nonzero. This excitation follows from
standard QCD radiation and it can be computed accurately in perturbation theory.
But then the question arises: do heavy quarks also contribute to the proton wave-function? Such
a contribution is called “intrinsic”, to distinguish it from that computable in perturbation theory,
which originates from QCD radiation. Already since the dawn of QCD, it was argued that all
kinds of intrinsic heavy quarks must be present in the proton wave-function [238]. In particular,
it was suggested [239] that the intrinsic component could be non-negligible for the charm
65
