 
11
4.0 DISCUSSION 
 
4.1 Flow measurements 
 
As discussed in Section 3.1 above, the calculated Reynolds number for the measured 
exhaust velocities is usually associated with a fully developed turbulent jet. Such a turbulent jet 
will have irregular and chaotic mixing that could lead to larger boundary layers when impinging 
on a surface or when flowing along the splitter plate. However, previous observations by Phares 
et al. (2000) suggests that impinged flows can remain laminar, even with high Reynolds 
numbers, until several times the exit pipe diameter. Thus, additional measurements of flow 
characteristics across the impinged surface profile are needed to determine where turbulence 
may be triggered in this setup, or if the flow remains laminar in the local regime. Nevertheless, 
the measurements in Figure 4 do not reveal any observable surface boundary effects from the 
splitter plate wall, at least given the spatial resolution of measurements taken. Such a boundary 
interaction must therefore be less than 0.1 cm, demonstrating that the splitter plate design is 
adequate for experiments with similar exhaust velocities and geometries. Future studies may 
further examine the effects of splitter plate shape and placement on the resultant flow 
characteristics. 
 
Based on pitot-static measurements, small downward velocities of 100-200 cm/s were 
observed at the exit plane, at a radial distance of roughly 0.1-0.3 cm. This observed flow likely 
suggests measurement of a small, entrained flow, in the same direction as the exhaust jet. 
While this entrained flow is not likely to contribute significantly to the normal force on an 
impinged surface, future studies should consider flow entrainment when dealing with higher 
exhaust velocities. While flow entrainment will be insignificant on Mars, or non-existent on the 
Moon, large downward velocities from flow entrainment may alter the flow characteristics and 
velocity profiles when landing large rockets on planetary bodies with an atmosphere.  
The exhaust velocity measurements directly below the nozzle show a well-collimated jet 
of gas that expands radially as the plume travels farther from the exit plane. For the examined 
upstream chamber pressures and nozzle geometry, the centerline exhaust velocity slows by 
approximately 5-10% at a distance of roughly 7.5 times the nozzle diameter from the exit plane, 
namely when exposed to atmosphere and without an impinged surface. The exhaust velocity 
profile expands radially to roughly 4 times the nozzle radius at a similar distance from the exit 
plane, inducing radial velocity components as the plume expands. When exposed to an 
impinged surface, this well-focused flow exhibits a high normal stagnation pressure directly on 
the exhaust centerline that decreases radially, consistent with previous measurements by 
Fontes et al. (2022). Taken together, these observations of a focused and well-collimated jet 
will likely change when exposed to reduced ambient pressures or vacuum, such as on the Moon 
or Mars. For reduced ambient pressures, the flow is expected to expand even more in the radial 
direction, producing a different crater shape than observed in this study. While future studies 
should examine the equations for viscous erosion in vacuum or reduced ambient pressures, this 
study provides valuable insight into the initial governing equations associated with viscous 
erosion and geotechnical properties of a granular surface in terrestrial atmosphere.   
 
 
 
