ature, T, for filling factors 2.2, 2.7, and 3.2. We observe that dVxx/dI increases with T (dRxx
dT |ν > 0), but at
a finite value of IDC(≡Is), dVxx/dI decreases with increasing T (dRxx
dT |ν < 0). Thus, as we see in SI-Fig.s
9b,d,f, for IDC > Is, increase in temperature with continuous B|| sweep will lead to a ‘downwards’ BMR
and switching in the sign of the rDMR.
To visualize the crossover between dRxx
dT
> 0 to dRxx
dT
< 0 (or vice versa) driven by IDC, we have
also plotted the temperature derivative of differential resistance for few selected values of IDC. For the
ease of notational representation, dVxx/dI has been replaced with δRxx in these plots. We see a robust
superconducting dome for IDC = 0 in SI-Fig. 11a (middle panel), where δRxx(≡Rxx) increases with
increasing T in the filling range of 2 < ν < 3.2. dδRxx/dT is also positive for this region, as shown in
SI-Fig. 11a (right panel). Normal ‘upwards’ hysteresis phase centred around ν ∼2 and ∼3 reported in
earlier sections and in main text all conform to this experimental condition. For IDC = 21.6 (SI-Fig. 11b),
the situation changes slightly. We have already seen that for ν = 2.2 and ν = 3.2, the value of switching
current lies around Is ∼14 nA and ∼21−23 nA. This means for IDC ∼21 nA, we see the superconducting
dome being squeezed in the filling space as δRxx starts decreasing with increasing T around the underdoped
and overdoped region of the SC phase and we get dδRxx/dT < 0 around these filling factors (SI-Fig. 11b
(right panel)). With increasing IDC further, as we destroy the SC phase, the behavior of δRxx with T is
found to be completely reversed (SI-Fig. 11c,d) with a negative value of dδRxx/dT taking up nearly whole
of the filling phase space around ν ∼2.4 −3.2 at IDC = 45 nA (SI-Fig. 11d (right panel)) and we get a
reversal of sign in rMR (∆Rxx) as obtained from the BMR hysteresis curve for these filling factors.
SI- 7
: Relaxation time, tR
We can extract a relaxation time scale, tR, of the transient decay of the measured Rxx of near magic-angle
TBG and local temperature as sensed by the Ruthenium oxide sensor (see Figure 5a,b of the main text) at
different Bstop as shown in SI-Fig. 12. ‘tR’ is defined as the time taken by the Rxx (and TRox) to reach the
steady state value from the value of Rxx at Bstop. Interestingly, tR extracted for the TBG peaks around a
Bstop value of −17 mT, the value of B||, where RFW
xx , rises to a sharp peak (∼−Bco). The difference in the
tR values extracted for TBG and Rox sensors could be due to the different thermal masses of the two entities
and/or variations in the cooling power of the fridge in different thermal cycles required to measure TBG and
Rox temperature sensors separately. Though, the numbers are quite different for the extracted relaxation
time (tR) for the measured device and the sample stage (by virtue of the Rox sensor), the similarity in the
behavior of the tR with Bstop, to our understanding, couldn’t be a simple coincidence. Such evidences
propel us to focus us on a possible extrinsic origin of the magnetoresistance hysteresis observed for the
measured TBG device in the in-plane magnetic field (B||).
17
