Preprint. Under review.
geometries
views
selections
coordinates
variables
couplings
physics
multiphysics
materials
meshes
studies
solutions
batches
datasets
evaluations
tables
plots
exports
C.4
Valid Target
There are various ways in which computing the correct value and exporting it to a table
may fail: a) the LLM’s code forgets the export command to the API and no table is exported
b) an empty table is exported or, c) a table containing an incorrect value is exported, such
as a default value or the wrong quantity (eg: time instead of temperature). Failure modes
b) and c) are far more common than a) and occur when the code is not fully correct and
the partially constructed COMSOL Multiphysics®model exports nothing or an incorrect
value. For instance, a partially solved model that was asked to compute the temperature
at time=190s might export a table where the last value was 190 but because of errors in
model construction, no temperature was exported. In such a case if the ground truth answer
is say, 185◦C, without verifying the physical quantity, one would mistakenly evaluate the
algorithmically parsed figure 190 to be quite close to the target. In other cases, the software
might export a default such as 293.15 K if the solver did not solve correctly.
If a table containing the target quantity is exported, it is first read and parsed. The last
value in the table is algorithmically extracted. To address this problem, we ask an LLM
(Gemini-1.5-Pro), to extract the exported value and units from the table, if it is a match
for the target description, and minimize the chances of incorrectly evaluating these failure
modes as valid solutions.
Evaluate Prompt
You are provided with a table that was exported by a model built in COMSOL. The
table * should * contain the EXPECTED TARGET QUANTITY. The following failure
modes may occur when the model is not built correctly:
1. The table might be empty or might export a physical quantity that is different
from the expected target quantity.
2. The table might export the same physical quantity, but the quantity is just an initial
or boundary condition, or a default value that was exported, instead of the result of
genuinely numerically solving the problem. You can find numbers already in the
problem description in ‘PROBLEM‘. Default values include 20degreesCelsius, 293.15
K, 0 etc.
Carefully examine the ‘TABLE‘ and compare it with the units and description of the
expected target quantity and the numbers in ‘PROBLEM‘ to assess whether the table
exported a value that was the result of genuinely numerically solving the problem.
You must return TARGET VALUE and TARGET UNITS in json format if the table
21
