0
20
40
60
80
100
time [ps]
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
energy drift [eV/atom]
orb-v3-conservative-inf
orb-v3-conservative-20
orb-v3-direct-inf
orb-v3-direct-20
Figure 7: Total energy during NVE dynamic simulations as a function of time, for the various
Orb-v3 models. Only orb-v3-conservative-inf is truly energy-conserving, so this model is to
be recommended whenever calculating physical properties based on constant energy dynamics.
Appendix G:
MDR benchmark and mechanical properties
This Section gives an overview of the computational details that are involved in the evaluation of
models on the phonon MDR benchmark and on the mechanical property benchmark (Table 2).
For the phonon MDR, we use Phonopy to generate displacements and compute the (second-order)
force constants. Before applying displacements, atomic positions and unit cell components are
first optimized using a combination of the FIRE optimizer and a FrechetCellFilter from the
Atomic Simulation Environment (ASE) [6]. We use a displacement magnitude of 0.01 Å and
is_plusminus=True to generate displacements, and a default 𝑞-mesh of [20,20,20]. Free energy,
entropy, and heat capacity were evaluated at 300 K based on the obtained force constants.
For the bulk and shear moduli, we sub-sampled 1,000 materials from the full benchmark datasets
to limit the total time required for its evaluation. Before applying the strain displacements,
atomic positions and unit cell components were optimized using a combination of the FIRE
optimizer and a FrechetCellFilter from the Atomic Simulation Environment (ASE) [6]. We
use strain magnitudes of [-0.1, -0.05, 0.05, 0.1] for the normal (diagonal) components, and [-0.02,
-0.01, 0.01, 0.02] for the off-diagonal components as we found this to yield the best agreement
with the PBE reference values across all models (though it is possible that there is some level
of error cancellation involved here). After applying strain to the optimized unit cell, atomic
positions were optimized at fixed unit cell, as per the original MP protocol.
Appendix H:
Distillation for direct models
As stated in the main text, we find that distillation-based training with conservative teachers
promotes more accurate force-derivatives for our direct mpa models. Such distillation is not
required when training direct models on omat, suggesting that some unique quirk of the
mpa force distribution causes degradation (and this quirk is absent in the conservative model
predictions we distill from).
Identifying the exact nature of this "quirk", and understanding whether or not it exists in
17
