Multilevel Quantum Rabi Models
12
Figure 6.
Histogram of energy levels of the two almost-degenerate groundstate
energies of 600 random systems with the same parameters as those in Fig.
5 and
λ1/ω = 2.5.
Vertical lines showing the energies of similar systems with either no
detunings (ε = 0), or a uniform coupling matrix (Λij = 0.2λ1). Only the case with
both nonzero detuning and non-uniform coupling matrices yields a significant variation
in these energy levels (∼ε/ω).
variance. In Fig. 6, we compare the distribution of the two nearly degenerate ground
state energies at λ1 = 2.5 to cases with a constant coupling matrix Λij = λ1/√nm =
0.2λ1 (and finite detunings), or no detunings, ε = 0, and random couplings. In the
latter two situations, a tiny residual separation between the two levels (∼10−12ω) arises
because the coupling, although very large, remains finite. The distribution of energy
levels thus requires both a randomly coupled system and non-zero detunings (ε ̸= 0). It
reflects the mixing of doublets within the eigenstates (the corresponding value of ⟨D⟩
is not precisely unity) caused by finite detuning and hence they do not depend on just
the largest singular value. Thus, scaling by λ1 cannot fully remove the randomness of
the underlying coupling matrix leading to a distribution of finite width.
5. Conclusions
We have explored the properties of a generalisation of the celebrated QRM in which the
two-level atom is replaced by two manifolds of atomic levels with the separation between
levels within each manifold much smaller than the average separation between the
manifolds. We found that when the levels within each manifold are actually degenerate,
the system resolves into a direct sum of two-level QRMs. However, the couplings within
each of the QRM are in general different and depend strongly on the form of the original
coupling matrix between the individual levels in the two manifolds, together with the
total number of the states. Most significantly, the strongest coupling is enhanced in
a way that scales with n for uniform couplings.
For random couplings, we derived
an approximate expression for the behaviour of the strongest coupling [Eq. 16] which
