ˆ∆
ˆ∆1ct
×
Rkδ
Figure 1: Examples of three kinds of contributions which appear on the RHS of Eq. (3.18).
The ﬁrst is a pure two-loop breaking diagram with fully internal b∆-vertex. The middle
exempliﬁes one-loop diagrams with one-loop ∆1
ct-counterterm insertions. The third ex-
ample shows a product of pure counterterms due to the second to last term in Eq. (3.6).
to determine the symmetry-restoring counterterms both in the Abelian and the non-
Abelian case. The LHS conversely yields sums of products of ordinary Green functions.
The equality between the LHS and RHS must hold both for the divergent and the ﬁnite
parts. If the eﬀective action is fully renormalized up to two-loop order, they need to
evaluate to zero. If the action is merely subrenormalized, the products of Green functions
on the LHS need to give the same poles and ﬁnite breakings as the subrenormalized
insertion of b∆on the RHS. We perform the checks for Eq. (3.17) and Eq. (3.18) at the
level of the subrenormalized eﬀective action, as in Ref. [21].
In the Abelian two-loop calculation the LHS of Eq. (3.18) simpliﬁes dramatically and
produces the well-known QED-like Ward identity between the fermion self-energy and the
fermion-gauge boson vertex correction. Indeed in the Abelian case the ﬁrst factor ΓDReg
caρbµ
simply becomes the photon momentum, cf. Eq. (2.13), since the Green functions with
external sources receive no higher order corrections. The remaining two terms simplify in
an analogous way. The fermion source operators take on their tree-level expressions, and
the two fermion self energies hence come with similar coeﬃcients, albeit diﬀerent external
momenta,
pµΓRen
ψψG(p2, p1, p) + eQ

ΓRen
ψψ (p2, p + p1) −ΓRen
ψψ (p + p2, p1)

= 0.
(3.19)
In the non-Abelian case, both the LHS and the RHS of Eq. (3.18) lead to additional
complications.
First we discuss the kinds of contributions appearing on the RHS of
Eq. (3.18). Fig. 1 illustrates three classes of diagrams.
The ﬁrst diagram is purely two-loop and carries an internal insertion of the tree-level
b∆-vertex. As discussed this is a markedly non-Abelian example. There are of course
further pure two-loop diagrams. Some of them exist in the Abelian model and are either
structurally identical or outwardly Abelian but with internal non-Abelian corrections.
Then there are non-Abelian types of diagrams which were present at one loop (cf. Ref. [20])
but now with an additional internal correction and for which the b∆-vertex may still
be external but its ghost line is internal. The second class of diagrams comprises the
counterterm corrections through bD(S1L
ct ), which are largely similar to the previous papers
[21, 23]. Still, for the ﬁrst time we get a contribution in ∆1L
fct which contains both 4-
dimensional as well as evanescent (cf. Eq. (3.10)) terms.
Finally we see an instance
of the second to last term in Eq. (3.6).
Here the product of one-loop divergent and
ﬁnite counterterms gives rise to both divergent and ﬁnite contributions and is hence
indispensable for the correct ﬁnite counterterms.
11
