3
heavy mesons inclusive semileptonic decay rates1.
In this work we computed the differential decay rate
and the first two lepton-energy moments for the inclu-
sive process Ds 7â†’Xâ„“Â¯Î½â„“. We have carefully investigated
and quantified all sources of systematic errors, including
the ones associated with the necessary continuum and
infinite-volume extrapolations. As shown in section XI,
and discussed in more details in the companion paper [1],
our first-principles theoretical results have a total accu-
racy of O(5%) and are in very good agreement with the
corresponding experimental results of Refs. [3, 4].
The plan of the paper is as follows. In sections II and III
we set our notation and derive the formulae for the decay
rate. In section IV we present the formulae for the lepton-
energy moments. In section V we derive the asymptotic
formulae that we will use to extrapolate our results, ob-
tained with the HLT algorithm of Ref. [9] at increasingly
smaller values of a smearing parameter Ïƒ, down to the
Ïƒ 7â†’0 limit.
In section VI we define the lattice Eu-
clidean correlators from which we extract our physical
results. In section VII we discuss the details of the im-
plementation of the HLT algorithm used in this work. In
the sections VIII, IX, and X we present our results for the
different flavor contributions to the decay rate, while the
results for the lepton-energy moments are presented in
appendix A. In section XI we summarize our results and
present our conclusions. In appendix B we explain how
we obtained the experimental result for the decay rate
by starting from the currently available measurements of
the branching-ratios.
II.
THE DIFFERENTIAL DECAY RATE
We work in the rest-frame of the decaying Ds meson and
call
p = mDs(1, 0) ,
Ï‰ = mDs(Ï‰0, Ï‰) ,
pâ„“= mDs(eâ„“, kâ„“) ,
pÎ½ = mDs(eÎ½, kÎ½) ,
(1)
the four-momenta of the Ds, of the generic hadronic state
X, of the lepton and of the neutrino, so that the energy-
1 See also [27] which appeared on the arXiv when this work and
the companion paper [1] were already finalized. The authors of
Ref. [27] perform a lattice QCD analysis of the Ds 7â†’Xâ„“Â¯Î½â„“in-
clusive decays and focus on the systematic errors associated with
the chosen spectral reconstruction technique and with finite vol-
ume effects, performing simulations at fixed lattice spacing, fixed
physical volume, and unphysical pion mass (mÏ€ = 300 MeV), ne-
glecting the Â¯cd and Â¯us flavour channels as well as the so-called
weak-annihilation contribution.
Ds
p
X
â„“
Â¯Î½â„“
Ï‰
pâ„“
pÎ½

FIG. 1.
The kinematics of the inclusive Ds 7â†’Xâ„“Â¯Î½â„“semilep-
tonic decay. The incoming Ds meson carries momentum p,
and the outgoing lepton, neutrino and generic hadron state
carry momentum pâ„“, pÎ½ and Ï‰, respectively.
momentum conservation relation p = pâ„“+ pÎ½ + Ï‰ (see
Figure 1) implies
Ï‰0 = 1 âˆ’eâ„“âˆ’eÎ½ ,
Ï‰ = âˆ’kâ„“âˆ’kÎ½ .
(2)
We work in the approximation in which the charged lep-
ton is massless and therefore we have k2
â„“= e2
â„“as well as
k2
Î½ = e2
Î½.
The fully inclusive process Ds 7â†’Xâ„“Â¯Î½â„“can be separated
into three different flavor channels. These are mediated
by the flavor components JÂµ
Â¯cs, JÂµ
Â¯cd and JÂµ
Â¯us of the hadronic
weak current, given by
JÂµ
Â¯
fg(x) = Â¯Ïˆ Â¯
f(x)Î³Âµ(1 âˆ’Î³5)Ïˆg(x) .
(3)
When the flavor indexes Â¯fg are omitted, we refer to the
fully inclusive process that is mediated by the sum of
the three different flavor contributions weighted by the
corresponding CKM matrix elements,
JÂµ(x) = VcsJÂµ
Â¯cs(x) + VcdJÂµ
Â¯cd(x) + VusJÂµ
Â¯us(x) .
(4)
Taking into account that the Ds meson has Â¯sc flavor, in
the channel mediated by JÂµ
Â¯cd the final hadrons are Â¯sd-
flavored and, therefore, denoted as XÂ¯sd. Analogously, in
the channel mediated by JÂµ
Â¯us the final hadrons are Â¯uc-
flavored and denoted as XÂ¯uc. In the channel mediated
by JÂµ
Â¯cs the final hadrons are flavorless and, in this case,
we denote them as XÂ¯ss. In the following, we shall call
X Â¯
F G the hadronic states in the channel mediated by the
current JÂµ
Â¯
fg. We thus have the correspondence
Â¯fg = {Â¯cs, Â¯cd, Â¯us}
â†â†’
Â¯FG = {Â¯ss, Â¯sd, Â¯uc}
(5)
between the flavor indexes of the currents and of the
states.
