Below, an overview of the current status of fixed-order calculations within the Standard
Model is provided. The references mainly focus on the state of the art at the time of writing.
In particular, superseded computations can be found in the respective process categories of
prior wishlists. In detail, we provide a short overview of the status of theory predictions as
documented in the previous wishlist (LH21), followed by a description of the progress since
then. Before moving to the actual wishlist, several aspects and highlights of the recent years of
fixed-order calculations are discussed.
Electroweak corrections
Given the present and anticipated experimental precision from run III of the LHC and its future
HL-LHC upgrade, EW radiative corrections have become essential to be included in the analysis
of many SM processes alongside higher-order QCD corrections. The increase in experimental
precision further demands the inclusion of mixed QCD–EW corrections for some key processes
such as the Drell–Yan like production of electroweak gauge bosons.
Generally, EW corrections can receive sizeable enhancements in two scenarios: First, in the
vicinity of resonances and shoulders where photon emission (in QED) induce large corrections
that can further be enhanced in the case of non-collinear safe observable (such as bare-lepton
observables). Second, in the high-energy limit where Sudakov logarithms (in the weak theory)
can become large.
These effects have been studied for a plethora of processes and are well
understood; the interested reader can consult the comprehensive review article [312] for further
details. Nonetheless, in contrast to QCD predictions where the scale variation offers a convenient
approach to estimate the impact of missing higher orders, this is typically not the case of EW
corrections as they are renormalised at physical points. The issue of assessing the uncertainties
on EW corrections is thus more subtle with first steps in this direction taken in Ref. [313] and
continued in [314].
One-loop Matrix Elements for EW corrections are readily available from a plethora of one-
loop providers: OPENLOOPS [315, 316], GOSAM [317–319], RECOLA [320–322], MADLOOP [323,
324], and NLOX [325] are publicly available and incorporated in various public and private Monte
Carlo programs capable of performing NLO calculations. The highest multiplicity achieved at
NLOEW so far is for a 2 →8 scattering process, the associated-top production [326,327] (off-shell
t¯tW and t¯tZ).
Electroweak Sudakov logarithms have received renewed interest in the recent years with
their incorporation into different automated tools [328–331] based on the original work of
Ref. [332]. Isolating the enhanced Sudakov corrections allows to incorporate dominant effects in
certain phase-space regions while avoiding the additional complexity that a full EW calculation
entails, in particular from IR singularities induced by QED corrections. Moreover, they serve as
a convenient starting point for QCD parton shower matching [333–337] and the resummation of
Sudakov logarithms [338]. Lastly, their impact in the context of new physics has been studied
in the context of Effective Field Theories [339].
On-shell and off-shell descriptions
The resonance of intermediate unstable particles admits various approximations that allow to
reduce the complexity of the calculation. Among the most common are the Narrow-Width Ap-
proximation (NWA) and the Pole Approximation (PA). The NWA is valid for narrow resonances
in which case the intermediate particle can be approximately treated as stable, effectively replac-
ing the internal propagator by an on-shell delta distribution and thus only retaining resonant
diagrams. The PA instead performs a consistent expansion around the resonance, retaining
all leading terms in which the resonant propagators are kept intact while their residues are
12
