in our case is determined by KP framework we explained in the previous section. The
time tin here can also be seen as the time when the PBH critical energy density ΩPBH gets
saturated to a constant value (See Fig. 2).
We have chosen kpeak = 0.1kend for all our
computations. The left column in Fig. 3 shows the effect of changing Γϕ, growing from
top to bottom, whereas the right column shows the effect of a varying ΩPBH(tin), also
growing from top to bottom. We observe that the higher both of these parameters are,
the longer the PBH dominates. Since the position of the Gaussian peak is the same for all
plots, which essentially sets the mean mass of the PBH distribution, evaporation occurs
(approximately) at the same number of efolds, Neva2. Thus, setting kpeak towards higher
scales increases the evaporation time and consequently decreases the temperature of the
plasma after evaporation, which could conflict with BBN, as shown above (see eqn. (2.11)).
The vertical dashed lines in Fig. 3 mark several relevant times, translated to number
of efolds. From left to right: tin, ϕ-radiation equality (tr), radiation-PBH equality (tPBH),
and PBH evaporation (teva).
The former and the latter are defined in eqns. (3.6) and
(3.11), respectively. The ϕ-radiation equality occurs approximately at tr ∼Γ−1
ϕ
and, to
estimate the transition from radiation to PBH we do the following. Initially, the scalar
field dominates, and thus ρϕ redshifts as
ρϕ(t) ∼ρϕ(tin)
a(tin)
a(t)
3
∼ρϕ(tin)
tin
t
2
,
(3.15)
where we assume the standard matter-dominated power-law behavior of the scale factor,
a ∼t2/3. The decay into radiation occurs at a time tr ∼Γ−1
ϕ , which implies that
ρϕ(tr) ∼ρϕ(tin)
tin
tr
2
.
(3.16)
At this point, ρϕ(tr) ∼ρr(tr) and radiation becomes the dominant component. This implies
that ρr redshifts as
ρr(t) ∼ρr(tr)
a(tr)
a(t)
4
∼ρr(tr)
tr
t
2
,
(3.17)
where now we used that a ∼t1/2 during radiation-dominated. On the other side, ρPBH
redshifts as follows during this radiation-dominated era
ρPBH(t) ∼ρPBH(tin)
tin
tr
2 tr
t
3/2
,
(3.18)
where we considered the redshift during the time ρϕ dominates. Equating (3.17) and (3.18)
we obtain, approximately, the time at which PBH dominate, which is given by
tPBH ∼Γ−1
ϕ
1 −ΩPBH(tin)
ΩPBH(tin)
2
.
(3.19)
2It is worth noting here that any modification of Γϕ and/or Apeaks turns into different expansion rates of
the universe, depending on the amount of time matter (ϕ, PBH) or radiation dominates. This means even
though teva is fixed Neva could in principle differ based on the duration of PBH dominance (See (3.20)).
– 11 –
