Factorizing Defects from Generalized Pinning Fields
Fedor K. Popov1 and Yifan Wang2
1 Simons Center for Geometry and Physics, SUNY, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA and
2 Center for Cosmology and Particle Physics, New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA
(Dated: April 9, 2025)
We introduce generalized pinning fields in conformal field theory that model a large class of critical impurities
at large distance, enriching the familiar universality classes. We provide a rigorous definition of such defects as
certain unbounded operators on the Hilbert space and prove that when inserted on codimension-one surfaces they
factorize the spacetime into two halves. The factorization channels are further constrained by symmetries in the
bulk. As a corollary, we solve such critical impurities in the 2d minimal models and establish the factorization
phenomena previously observed for localized mass deformations in the 3d O(N) model.
I.
INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY
Extended operators defined on submanifolds of the space-
time constitute a fundamental component of modern quantum
field theory (QFT), shaping our understanding of symmetry
principles, phases of matter and strong coupling phenomena.
When extended in time, they are also known as defects – such
as impurities and boundaries – which exhibit rich dynamics,
particularly in gapless bulk systems described by conformal
field theories (CFTs). In cases where the CFT admits a grav-
ity dual, defects correspond to strings, branes and nontrivial
backreacted geometries, providing a valuable portal to inves-
tigate systematically such nonperturbative objects in quantum
gravity. Hence it is essential to determine what defects and
extended operators are admissible in CFT (and QFT more
broadly) and to understand their corresponding dynamics.
To this end, powerful monotonicity theorems have been es-
tablished for defect renormalization group (RG) flows [1–10],
ensuring that certain defects remain unscreened at large dis-
tances, while additional constraints from generalized symme-
tries are beginning to be explored [11–18]. Furthermore, con-
formal bootstrap techniques have been developed to directly
probe the operator algebra data at the defect fixed point [19],
while the study of defect fusion and the Casimir effect offers
new perspectives on universal defect data via the framework
of effective field theory [20–23]. Nevertheless, explicit exam-
ples of nontrivial conformal defects remain scarce, and even
with a well-defined short-distance description, their behavior
at large distances remains unclear.
Here we introduce a large family of defects with the follow-
ing simple UV definition in an arbitrary CFT in d ≥2,
Dh(O) ≡
h
eh ˆ
Oi
ren ,
ˆO ≡
Z
Σp
O(x) ,
(I.1)
where O is a scalar operator of dimension ∆O < p and Σp
is the defect worldvolume which we will often take to be
an Rp hyperplane in the Euclidean spacetime. Intuitively, a
nonzero coupling constant h in (I.1) triggers a defect RG flow
on Σp. With appropriate renormalization, this defines a p-
dimensional flat defect in the CFT (similarly for Σp = Sp
which defines the spherical defect). Such a defect is expected
to flow to a nontrivial conformal defect in the IR, which we
denote as,
D(O) ≡lim
h→∞Dh(O) .
(I.2)
This is because the monotonicity theorems requires the defect
entropy (for p odd) and conformal anomaly (for p even) to
decrease under defect RG, and they both vanish for the triv-
ial defect. These defects generalize the well-studied pinning
field defects in the Ising and general O(N) CFTs where O is
taken to be the fundamental scalar field (measuring the local
spin) and h is the so-called background pinning field [24, 25].
We will thus refer to (I.1) and (I.2) as the generalized pin-
ning field defect and its conformal fixed point. In particular,
our definition includes the defect RG flows studied by [26–
30] in the very same O(N) CFT but triggered by certain mass
deformations on a surface. There it was observed based on
large N analysis and ϵ-expansion that the generalized pin-
ning field surface defect at 3d appears to factorize into con-
formal boundary conditions for two disconnected regions of
the spacetime. Interestingly, this factorization also manifests
in different ways depending on the sign of the pinning field
h, revealing the intricate phase structure on the surface, which
includes a newly discovered extraordinary-log phase at strong
surface coupling [26, 31].
In this work, we focus on codimension-one (i.e. p = d−1)
generalized pinning field defects and establish this factoriza-
tion property in great generality. In particular, this implies that
there is no energy transmission across the interface in the IR.
Intuitively, this is because the conformal pinning defect
(I.2) will take the form of an un-normalized projector on the
CFT rigged Hilbert space H (see around (II.4)),
D(O) =
M
α
|α⟩⟨α| ,
(I.3)
by projecting to the highest or lowest eigenvalues of the op-
erator ˆO depending on the sign of h, where the eigenbasis is
denoted by |α⟩. The eigenstates |α⟩are scalars with respect to
SO(d−1) and hence do not support a non-vanishing two-point
function of the stress energy tensor Tµν across the interface.
Furthermore, by conformal symmetry, we expect these eigen-
states to describe conformal boundary conditions of the CFT.
However one should be cautious with the above heuristic
reasoning, since the conformal boundary conditions do not
define normalizable states in H and relatedly ˆO may not be
a healthy bounded operator on H. In the following we will
formalize these points using results from the spectral theory
of unbounded operators on Hilbert spaces, particularly the
Gelfand triple construction. This framework allows us to pre-
arXiv:2504.06203v1  [hep-th]  8 Apr 2025
