explicit the connection to the notion of Renormalized Area introduced by Alexakis and
Mazzeo in Ref. [28]. Renormalized Area correctly isolates the finite part of holographic
EE for minimal surfaces. However, the latter statement is no longer true for non-minimal
surfaces due to divergencies coming from the non-orthogonal intersection to the boundary.
A generalization of the Hawking mass in the presence of asymptotically hyperbolic
spaces was introduced in Ref. [29] by Fischetti and Wiseman, dubbed reduced Hawking
mass. Taking advantage of its monotonicity under an IMCF flow for AAdS manifolds the
authors showed that the finite part of the EE of an arbitrary region in (2 + 1)–dimensional
holographic CFTs admits an upper bound depending on the energy density of the state.
It should be stressed at this point that corrections to Renormalized Area are unavoid-
ably ad hoc in Einstein gravity. Indeed, a well-posed variational principle should imply
that classical configurations are stationary under arbitrary variations of the spacetime and
surface functionals. Thus, while the Einstein equations hold in the bulk, in codimension–2
the minimality condition is necessarily met.
In that respect, additional extrinsic curvature terms in the surface functional indi-
cate the departure of the classical conditions on Σ. While quadratic-curvature terms may
be considered as an alternative starting point for the bulk, the requirement of matching
codimension–2 functionals for Einstein gravity imposes several constraints in the form of
that action. This construction is the subject of the next section.
2
Quadratic Curvature Gravity and conical defects
Energy functionals can be derived using the LM method, which is a systematic prescription
to obtain codimension–2 quantities of holographic interest, from the conical contribution
of gravitational bulk actions.
2.1
Lewkowycz–Maldacena Prescription
In Quantum Field Theory (QFT), the EE of a spatial region A of a d–dimensional manifold
C is commonly calculated in the path integral formulation using the replica trick [11]. This
method involves the construction of an n–fold cover Cn by joining the boundaries of n
replicas of the region boundary, with a cut along the entangling surface. As a consequence,
the manifold Cn acquires a Zn symmetry, corresponding to the cyclic permutation of the
replicas when rotating by an angle 2π(1−1/n). This symmetry induces an orbifold C(n) =
Cn/Zn, which is characterized by a conical singularity along the entangling surface. After
analytically continuing the replica parameter n, the EE is given by
S(A) = −lim
n→1 n∂n (ln Zn −n ln Z1) ,
(2.1)
where Zn is the partition function of C(n), and Z1 = Z is the partition function of the
original manifold C.
While the replica trick has been extensively applied to study entanglement entropy
in diverse QFT cases – such as in non-interacting QFTs – it is often very difficult to
obtain exact results [13, 30]. For strongly coupled CFTs, the AdS/CFT correspondence
– 3 –
