 
1
Understanding The Effects of Geotechnical Properties on Viscous 
Erosion Rate from Plume Surface Interactions 
B. Dotson, A. St. John, R. Hall, D. Sapkota, D. Britt, and P. Metzger, University of Central Florida, Department of 
Physics, 4000 Central Florida Boulevard, Orlando, FL 32816; email: br339171@ucf.edu. 
 
With humans returning to the Moon under the Artemis program, understanding 
and mitigating effects from Plume Surface Interactions (PSI) will be essential for 
the protection of personnel and equipment on the Moon. To help characterize the 
underlying mechanics associated with viscous erosion and crater formation, 
experimental measurements using regolith simulants and subsonic, non-reacting 
flows were completed using compressed air in a splitter plate, plume cratering 
setup. More specifically, these investigations examined the underlying effects of 
bulk density, cohesion, and exhaust flow characteristics on viscous erosion rates 
and crater formation using Lunar highlands simulant (LHS-1), Lunar mare simulant 
(LMS-1), LHS-1D (Dust) simulants, and 40-80 µm glass beads in atmosphere. 
Results show that particle size distribution can ultimately influence crater shapes 
and erosion rates, likely owing to internal angle of friction. Measurements show 
that increasing bulk density, especially from an uncompacted to a slightly 
compacted state, decreases erosion rate by as much as 50%. While cohesion of 
granular material can mitigate erosion rates to some extent, higher levels of 
cohesion above 1,000 Pa may actually increase viscous erosion rates due to 
particle clumping. A modified version of Metzger's (2024a) equation for 
volumetric erosion rate is presented, with limitations discussed. These modified 
equations for viscous erosion, with limitations noted, show that geotechnical 
properties play an important role in viscous erosion and should be considered in 
PSI computer models for future mission planning.    
 
1.0 INTRODUCTION 
The term Plume Surface Interaction (PSI) is used to describe the complex, dynamic 
transport and erosion processes that happen during impingement of surface materials by 
rocket exhaust, particularly during launch and landing operations. During the Apollo 12 mission 
to the Moon, rocket exhaust from landing spacecraft ejected regolith material at high velocities, 
causing measurable damage to a nearby robotic Surveyor probe (Immer et al., 2011). Compared 
to spacecraft used during the Apollo program, the proposed size and mass of the new Human 
Landing System (HLS) vehicles under the Artemis program are substantially larger, creating the 
potential for even higher-velocity ejecta from PSI effects. Since NASA plans to develop a 
sustainable and long-term presence on the surface of the Moon during Artemis, complete with 
required lunar infrastructure, understanding and mitigating the effects of PSI events is vital for 
protecting personnel and equipment on the Moon. 
Research into PSI events have been an on-going effort since the 1960s, with Roberts 
(1963), Metzger et al. (2010), as well as Rahimi et al. (2010) identifying the processes of viscous 
erosion, bearing capacity failure, diffused gas eruption, and diffusion driven flow as 
contributing to crater formation and development. Since the 1960s, other studies have 
leveraged a wide range of models, simulations, laboratory, and field experiments, as well as 
