Citation: Mann, R.B.
One-Dimensional Relativistic
Self-Gravitating Systems. Entropy
2024, 26, 612. https://doi.org/
10.3390/e26070612
Academic Editor: Bruce N. Miller
Received: 7 June 2024
Revised: 10 July 2024
Accepted: 15 July 2024
Published: 21 July 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
entropy
Review
One-Dimensional Relativistic Self-Gravitating Systems †
Robert B. Mann 1,2
1
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada;
rbmann@uwaterloo.ca
2
Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics, 35 Caroline St., Waterloo, ON N2L 2Y5, Canada
†
Dedicated to the memory of Tadayuki Ohta, who introduced me to this fascinating subject.
Abstract: One of the oldest problems in physics is that of calculating the motion of N particles
under a speciﬁed mutual force: the N-body problem. Much is known about this problem if the
speciﬁed force is non-relativistic gravity, and considerable progress has been made by considering the
problem in one spatial dimension. Here, I review what is known about the relativistic gravitational
N-body problem. Reduction to one spatial dimension has the feature of the absence of gravitational
radiation, thereby allowing for a clear comparison between the physics of one-dimensional rela-
tivistic and non-relativistic self-gravitating systems. After describing how to obtain a relativistic
theory of gravity coupled to N point particles, I discuss in turn the two-body, three-body, four-body,
and N-body problems. Quite general exact solutions can be obtained for the two-body problem,
unlike the situation in general relativity in three spatial dimensions for which only highly speciﬁed
solutions exist. The three-body problem exhibits mild forms of chaos, and provides one of the ﬁrst
theoretical settings in which relativistic chaos can be studied. For N ≥4, other interesting features
emerge. Relativistic self-gravitating systems have a number of interesting problems awaiting further
investigation, providing us with a new frontier for exploring relativistic many-body systems.
Keywords: self-gravitating systems; lower-dimensional gravity; relativistic chaos
1. Introduction
One of the oldest problems in physics is the N-body problem: the determination
of the motion of a system of N particles mutually interacting through speciﬁed forces.
This problem appears in a broad variety of subﬁelds of physics, including cosmology,
stellar dynamics, planetary motion, atomic physics, and nuclear physics. The N-body
problem is a particular challenge if the interactions are purely gravitational. Although an
exact solution is known for the two-body problem in pure Newtonian gravity in three
spatial dimensions, there is no closed form solution for large N, even for N = 3 [1],
although particular solutions exist in restricted cases [2]. No exact solution is known in the
general-relativistic case, even for N = 2, since it experiences the dissipation of energy in
the form of gravitational radiation.
One-dimensional self-gravitating systems (OGSs) have played an important role in
advancing our understanding of the gravitational N-body problem [3]. Such systems
have been of interest for over half a century, where they have played an important role
in astrophysics and cosmology for more than 30 years [4]. Apart from being prototypes
for studying the behaviour of gravity in higher dimensions, they also approximate the
behaviour in three spatial dimensions of some physical systems. Examples include very
long-lived core-halo conﬁgurations that model a dense massive core in near-equilibrium,
surrounded by a halo of high-kinetic energy stars that feebly interact with the core [4–6].
Other examples include cosmological models [7,8], the dynamics of stars in a direction
orthogonal to the plane of a highly ﬂattened galaxy [9], shells of matter interacting with
a spherical globular cluster [10], and the collisions of ﬂat parallel domain walls moving
in directions orthogonal to their surfaces. A recent review of the OGS [11] provides a
Entropy 2024, 26, 612. https://doi.org/10.3390/e26070612
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/entropy
