8
commonly used in the field for this type of analyses, detailed in Refs. [42, 44]. We also implement
this method, adjusting the weights based on the number and fit quality of different observables.
The final weights applied in our present study are also provided in Table I.
B.
Fit parameters
Here, we introduce the fit parameters of our theoretical model, which are listed in Table II and
Table III. First, the electromagnetic and hadronic coupling constants of the K1(1270), molecules,
general N∗and ∆∗resonances, are treated as free parameters that need to be fitted. Since the
reaction amplitudes are only sensitive to the products of electromagnetic and hadronic coupling
constants, we make the products as the fit parameters instead of individual coupling constants,
which are shown in Table II. It is necessary to note that for the specific calculations of the reactions
γp →K+Σ0 and γp →K0Σ+, the products gγNRgKΣR should be multiplied by the corresponding
isospin factor τ.
Second, to reduce the number of fit parameters, we implement the following settings for the
masses MR, widths ΓR, and phases ϕR of molecules and general resonances. For molecules, the
widths and phases are treated as fit parameters, while the masses are fixed, as mentioned in Sec. II.
For four-star general resonances, only the masses of ∆(1910) and the widths of N(1720), N(1900),
∆(1910) are treated as fit parameters due to their large ranges recorded in PDG and relatively
significant effects on fitted results. The masses and widths of other four-star general resonances
are fixed according to PDG. For three-star and two-star general resonances, all masses and widths
are treated as fit parameters.
Lastly, the cutoff parameters Λ in the phenomenological form factors attached in each hadronic
vertex are also treated as fit parameters. We merge some of them to reduce the number of fit
parameters. Specifically, we use the same cutoff parameter Λt for the t-channel K and K∗(892)
exchanges, and the same cutoff parameter Λs for the s-channel ground states N and ∆exchanges.
Additionally, we merge the cutoff parameters of the molecules and general resonances located
below the KΣ threshold. For the molecules and general resonances above the threshold, the cutoff
parameters are divided into ten groups based on their category and spin-parity, which are shown
in Table III.
In summary, our theoretical model contains a total of 77 fit parameters, which is a relatively
streamlined number, that need to be adjusted to match the experimental data through the fitting
program.
