4
2.
Role of Confinement
A confining potential V (r), especially if anisotropic,
modifies this picture and can lead to new features in the
dispersion relation ϵ(k). Intuition can be gained by con-
sidering a gas confined only in one or two spatial direc-
tions, with harmonic trapping frequencies ω⊥, but un-
confined in the excitation direction k (i.e. infinite tube
or pancake).
Assuming that excitations in the unconfined direc-
tion are purely longitudinal, i.e. retain the ground-state’s
shape in the transverse confined directions, Eq. (5) re-
mains valid. Yet, n becomes the linear or areal density
and ˜Vint(k) is no longer the Fourier transform of Vint(r).
Instead, its dipolar contribution ˜Vdd(k) relates to Φdd(r)
[Eq. (4)] and contains information on n(r) spatial vari-
ations induced by the confinement [3, 25–32]. Thereby,
˜Vdd(k) acquires a dependence on k = |k|, potentially giv-
ing rise to elementary excitations of neither phononic nor
free-particle nature, see Fig. 2(c-f).
The characteristic momentum scale for ˜Vdd variations
with k, and thereby for the novel excitation features, is
set by the inverse confinement length ℓ−1
⊥
with ℓ⊥=
p
ℏ/mω⊥.
These variations are qualitatively dictated
by the relative orientation of the dipoles, confined di-
rection(s), and excitation direction k, as reviewed below.
a.
Confinement perpendicular to the dipoles —
If
the dipoles are oriented along the excitation direction,
perpendicular to the confinement direction(s), ˜Vdd in-
creases with k, from negative to positive values, see
Fig. 2(c) [25, 29]. This yields a hardening of the large-k
modes, see Fig. 2(d). The resulting high excitation ener-
gies cause a breakdown of the longitudinal approximation
of Eq. (5) once ϵ(k) ∼ℏω⊥. Going beyond this approx-
imation and accounting for the transverse reshaping of
the cloud under excitation gives rise to a novel antirotonic
feature in the dispersion relation through an avoided level
crossing, see Fig. 2(d) [25, 33].
Conversely, the DDI causes a softening of the phonon
modes, which remain stable (i.e. real-valued ϵ(k)) as
long as ϵdd ≤1 thanks to the additive contact term gs,
see Fig. 2(d).
As in the unconfined case, the phonon-
instability threshold shifts to a∗= add (i.e. ϵdd = 1).
b.
Confinement along the dipoles —
If instead the
dipoles are oriented along a confinement direction, per-
pendicular to the excitation direction, ˜Vdd decreases with
k, starting positive at k = 0 and becoming negative (at-
tractive) at large k, see Fig. 2(e) [25–27, 31, 32]. This
hardens long-wavelength, and softens short-wavelength
excitations, see Fig. 2(f).
Here, the longitudinal ap-
proximation of Eq. (5) remains reliable even for shal-
low traps and for ϵ(k) > ℏω⊥[25].
Due to phonon-
modes hardening, the DDI may exceed the contact in-
teraction in strength (i.e. add > as, ϵdd > 1) without
the spectrum becoming unstable (i.e. real-valued ϵ(k)),
see Fig. 2(f). For dominant DDI, the competition in (5)
between kinetic term ℏ2k2/2m and interactions with at-
tractive character at large k ultimately yields new exci-
tation features. Namely, the dispersion develops a local
maximum (maxon) followed by a local minimum (roton),
see Fig. 2(f) for ϵdd = 1.25 and 1.31 [25–27, 31, 32, 34].
A similar dispersion shape was first postulated by Lan-
dau (and later observed) to explain the distinctive dy-
namical properties of superfluid liquid helium [35]. The
possibility of a maxon-roton dispersion is one of the most
striking features of dipolar superfluids. It signals that
density modulations at a specific wavelength – that of the
roton λrot = 2π/krot – are energetically favored [36, 37].
The dipolar roton minimum arises at the MF level, and
λrot ∼ℓ⊥with additional dependencies on density and
interaction strengths, see Fig. 2(f).
The dipolar roton energy gap ϵrot can be finely ad-
justed by tuning as, as gs acts as an offset in ˜Vint(k),
see III B 1. ϵrot decreases with as down to as = a∗
rot, for
which the roton is the first mode of the spectrum to fully
soften, i.e. ϵrot = 0, see Fig. 2(f). The existence of a ro-
ton minimum and its controlled softening was tested in
two experiments using 166Er atoms, probing the disper-
sion via Bragg scattering, and the growth of a coherent
population in the roton mode after an interaction quench
past its full softening, respectively [31, 38]. Additional
confirmations came from density fluctuations analysis in
162Dy quantum gases [39, 40].
c.
Fully trapped case —
Going beyond the approx-
imation of (5), the dispersion relation and the underly-
ing elementary excitations can be derived within Bogoli-
ubov theory, linearizing the GPE (3) around the ground-
state wavefunction [2, 3].
This in particular holds for
a fully trapped system. We note ω∥and ω⊥the longi-
tudinal and tightest transverse trap frequencies, respec-
tively. While a 3D trap alters the excitation spectrum
properties – e.g.
making it discrete, or causing a mo-
mentum broadening in non-uniform traps – many fea-
tures derived in III B 2 a,III B 2 b (a∗shift, DDI-induced
softening and hardening) remain relevant. For large trap
aspect ratio ω⊥/ω∥, the antiroton and roton-maxon fea-
tures themselves are retained, while for smaller aspect
ratios, the interplay of trap geometry and DDI per-
sists and yields excitations of peculiar character, see
also IV D [5, 28, 31, 33, 38–45]. The formalism of (5)
thus stays insightful for experimentally relevant configu-
rations.
C.
Dipolar quantum gases beyond the mean-field
instability
The ability to fully soften the roton mode – bringing its
energy ϵrot to equate that of the superfluid ground state
– raises the question of what the ground state is at and
beyond this point. This question was first posed in the
context of superfluid and solid helium, where it sparked
vivid debates for decades [46–49]. With the advent of
ultracold gases, especially dipolar ones, this question was
revived [26, 34, 49–56].
