1
Introduction
The discovery of the Higgs boson at the LHC in 2012 marked the completion of the Standard Model
(SM) of particle physics. Since then, extensive experimental efforts have tested the properties of the
Higgs boson, and so far, all results remain consistent with SM predictions. This success is mirrored
in cosmology, where the Λ-Cold Dark Matter model, based on Einstein’s General Relativity, describes
the large-scale structure of the Universe with remarkable precision. However, while the SM provides
an accurate description of known elementary particles and their interactions, it does not account for
several key phenomena observed in nature. Several fundamental questions—such as the nature of dark
matter, the origin of neutrino masses, and the matter-antimatter asymmetry of the Universe—demand
the existence of physics beyond the Standard Model (BSM). The lack of any evidence or hints for new
physics so far suggests two possible scenarios: either new physics resides at energy scales beyond current
accelerator reach, or it is only endowed with extremely feeble interactions that have so far remained
undetectable.
The need for dedicated searches for feebly-interacting particles (FIPs) and long-lived new
physics states at accelerators was explicitly recognized by the 2020 update of the European Strategy
for Particle Physics (ESPP). It emphasized the importance of exploring the hidden sector as part of a
broad and balanced experimental programme. Following this recommendation, CERN examined mul-
tiple proposals for intensity-frontier experiments aimed at probing feebly-coupled new physics, culmin-
ating in the selection of the SHiP experiment [1–6](and references therein) and the approval of the
HI-ECN3 project in June 2024, with ratification by the CERN Council. SHiP now stands as a key
element of CERN’s strategy to expand beyond the energy frontier, complementing ongoing and future
high-intensity and precision-frontier searches.
The SHiP experiment is specifically designed to explore feebly-interacting long-lived particles,
capable of covering regions inaccessible at high-energy colliders. By targeting a broad class of FIPs —
including heavy neutral leptons (HNLs), dark photons, dark scalars, axion-like particles (ALPs), and light
dark matter (LDM) — SHiP provides a dedicated facility on the "Coupling Frontier" to systematically
probe a vast, unexplored parameter space of new long-lived particles.
The experiment will be hosted at a new SPS Beam Dump Facility (BDF) [7–9] to be constructed
in the upgraded ECN3 experimental facility, leveraging the high-intensity SPS proton beam to maximise
the physics reach. SHiP will exploit the potential for hidden-sector particle production directly through
inelastic processes, in electromagnetic processes, and decays of light and heavy mesons generated in
the beam dump. These particles, which would typically escape detection at colliders, can be studied at
SHIP in a controlled environment where their decays or interactions occur in a shielded, low-background
detector.
Beyond its role in hidden-sector physics, SHiP will provide the world’s most intense neutrino flux
in the multi-GeV range, enabling unique SM tests and BSM searches with neutrinos. The experiment
will collect an unprecedented sample of tau and anti-tau neutrino interactions, allowing for high-precision
measurements.
With the approval of the Technical Design Report (TDR) phase, SHiP is now positioned to trans-
ition towards implementation. Over the last year, the collaboration and the HI-ECN3 project have made
significant progress in key technical milestones, including detector prototyping, as well as beamline and
target-system design, ensuring timely readiness for construction and commissioning. The experimental
timeline is aligned with CERN’s accelerator schedule. The upgrade of ECN3 will start in Long Shutdown
3 with the dismantling of the existing experimental setup before the installation of BDF/SHiP with com-
missioning and first data-taking planned for 2031-2033, well before Long Shutdown 4 (LS4), currently
scheduled for 2034. The initial data-taking phase in 2032-2033 is critical to validate background
conditions and detector performance, and to provide the first physics results with significant dis-
1
