existence of the threshold in the type-II region is also related to the specific shape of C (or
a related quantity) at the scale rm. Nevertheless, the exploration of the parameterization of
the threshold for PBH formation in the type-II region and its analytical threshold estimation
is left for this work [77].
5.3
PBH mass
Finally, we present the numerical results regarding the PBH mass. First, we define tPBH
as the time when the PBH is formed. For type A PBHs, this corresponds to the moment
when a marginally trapped surface at r∗with Θ+(r∗) = 0, Θ−(r∗) < 0 is formed. In the
case of type B PBHs, this time corresponds when the first bifurcated trapping horizon with
Θ+(r∗) = Θ−(r∗) = 0 at tbif,1 appears. After the formation of the PBH, an accretion process
from the FLRW background follows, which can substantially increase the PBH mass by a
few factors (see [18] for a study of profile dependence with type-I fluctuations). Following
[17], to obtain the final mass of the PBH8, we use the Zeldovich-Novikov formula [79–81]9.
In particular, the time evolution of the PBH mass can be obtained by solving:
dM
dt = 4πFR2
PBHρb(t) ⇒MPBH(t) =
1
1
Ma + 3
2F

1
t −1
ta
 , MPBH(t →∞) =
 1
Ma
−3F
2ta
−1
,
(5.1)
where Ma is the initial mass when the asymptotic approximation is used at the time ta and
F is an effective accretion constant, which is typically found to be of order O(1). By the
condition of the trapping horizon, RPBH = 2MPBH, the previous equation can be solved
analytically to obtain MPBH(t) and we can infer the final mass of the PBH as MPBH ≡
MPBH(t →∞). Using an excision procedure [83, 84] based on the methodology outlined in
[17] (for details, we refer the reader to that reference), we can remove the computational
domain where a singularity is expected to form at late times, after the formation of the PBH,
and continue evaluating the PBH mass, observing its subsequent increase.
We will find the parameters Ma, ta, and F by fitting the numerical evolution to the
analytical Zeldovich formula for the PBH mass MPBH(t) Eq.(5.1). To find the time interval
for fitting, we consider the criteria in [17] to account for the ratio of the black hole mass
increment with respect to the Hubble scale, Ψ =
˙M/(HM). In the regime described by
Eq.(5.1), we expect Ψ < 1. The range of numerical values used for the fit corresponds to
those that satisfy Ψ ≲10−1, up until nearly the end of the numerical evolution, when the
Hamiltonian constraint becomes significantly violated. Once Ma, ta, and F are found, the
PBH mass is inferred as the asymptotic mass at t →∞.
First, we discuss the results regarding the black hole mass at the moment of formation
of PBH, which are shown in the top-left panel of Fig.7.
The results are classified using
different colours according to the following categories: type-I A (blue), type-II A (magenta),
and type-II B (green). This classification applies to the two profiles considered: β = 1 (solid
dots) and β = 3 (crosses).
8Another way to obtain the PBH mass is to use null coordinates with the Misner-Hernandez equations [78]
to avoid the formation of a singularity. In our case, however, we will use an excision technique.
9It is important to note that at early times, the PBH mass growth does not follow the Zeldovich formula,
since the cosmological expansion is neglected [82]. Nevertheless, for sufficiently late times, when accretion
becomes a stationary process, we can apply it to accurately infer the values of the PBH mass.
– 18 –
