some works have investigated PBH formation in non-spherical settings [27–30], which may
have some impact on specific scenarios where non-sphericities become important (for instance
in a matter-dominated era [31]). While this is an interesting avenue that warrants further
exploration, for the purposes of this study, which focuses on a radiation-dominated Universe,
we will assume spherically symmetric PBH formation.
As introduced in Ref. [32], curvature fluctuations ζ can be classified into two types: type-
I and type-II. Type-I fluctuations correspond to cases where the areal radius R =
p
A/4π is
a monotonically increasing function, where A is the area of the 2-sphere as a function of the
radial coordinate r at constant t. In contrast, type-II fluctuations correspond to cases with
a non-monotonic R associated with sufficiently large fluctuations, satisfying the condition
that exist a region where ∂rR < 0. This results in a characteristic throat structure, which
also appears in other scenarios like baby Universes, domain wall formation and inflating
monopoles [33–37].
Type-I fluctuations have been considered the standard in the literature. However, al-
though type-II fluctuations have commonly been neglected due to the rarity of such large
fluctuations, recent studies have highlighted their importance in specific scenarios related
to non-Gaussianities [38], vacuum bubbles [39], and very recently in non-linear statistics
[40]. Remarkably, reference [41] presented numerical simulations of type-II fluctuations in
a radiation-dominated Universe, following the formalism of [42] with the BSSN formalism
[43, 44] and the numerical code of [45, 46] (COSMOS code, which originally follows SACRA
code [47]).
From the numerical results obtained, a new classification of PBHs based on
the trapping horizon configuration was proposed, with type A PBHs corresponding to the
standard formation of a marginally trapped surface during the numerical evolution of over-
threshold fluctuations, and type B PBHs featuring bifurcated trapping horizons for suffi-
ciently large curvature fluctuations above the threshold for type A PBH formation. Recently,
references [48, 49] documented cases where specific fluctuation shapes (from large negative
non-Gaussianity models) exhibit a formation threshold in the type-II region, meaning that
some type-II fluctuations do not lead to PBH formation. This contrasts with the common
understanding that type-II fluctuations always collapse to form black holes.
These find-
ings emphasize the need for detailed numerical studies of type-II fluctuations, particularly
exploring their profile dependence.
A standard and successful numerical approach that has been employed to study PBH
formation under the assumption of spherical symmetry is the so-called Misner-Sharp formal-
ism [50] (see for some examples [13, 17, 51–54]), which essentially corresponds to Einstein’s
equations in the comoving gauge. However, in the case of simulating type-II fluctuations, the
standard formulation suffers from divergent terms of the form (0/0), which are associated
with the existence of a neck structure in the initial conditions, where the areal radius satisfies
∂rR = 0. This makes the simulation challenging and potentially causes it to crash immedi-
ately after starting or when the initial condition approaches the boundary in the parameter
space that separates the type-I and type-II regions.
In this work, we address this issue with the goal of developing a new approach for nu-
merical simulations of PBH formation using the Misner-Sharp formalism that can effectively
handle generic curvature fluctuations, type-I and type-II. Our objective is to successfully sim-
ulate type-II fluctuations and explore key features such as the dynamics of the collapse, the
trapping horizon configurations, the formation thresholds, and the PBH mass. We demon-
strate that using auxiliary equations enables us to absorb the divergent terms in the Misner-
Sharp equations in a straightforward manner. We follow the same numerical methodology
– 2 –
