Rayleigh–Sommerfeld diffraction integrals for relativistic wave equations
Mingjie Li∗and S. A. R. Horsley†
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Exeter, Stocker Road, Exeter, UK, EX4 4QL
Here we apply the commonly used Rayleigh–Sommerfeld diffraction integral to the propagation
of relativistic fields in spacetime, using the theory to find the propagators for both the Klein–
Gordon equation and the Dirac equation. Based on these results, we find an interpretation of the
Klein–Gordon equation in terms of the Feynman checkerboard model, as well as highlighting some
apparently overlooked aspects of the Feynman checkerboard model as it is usually applied to the
Dirac equation.
Keywords:
propagator, Klein–Gordon equation, Dirac
equation, Rayleigh–Sommerfeld diffraction integral
I.
INTRODUCTION
Inspired by Dirac’s discovery of a connection between
the Lagrangian in classical mechanics and Heisenberg’s
matrix mechanics [1], Feynman proposed the path in-
tegral formulation [2] to describe the behavior of mat-
ter waves in terms of probability amplitude (or phase
change), instead of wave equations, providing an intuitive
physical picture on how matter waves propagate through
various paths. It has proven to be highly useful even to
this day [3–6]. The path integral shows that the mat-
ter wave changes its phase in accordance with the path
it travels, the phase of each path proportional to the
Hamiltonian action of the particle.
There is a similar situation in optics, in diffraction the-
ory, where the optical wave also changes its phase de-
pending on the path it travels.
Although the diffrac-
tion theory is usually applied in 3D space with time ne-
glected, it can, as a consequence of the divergence theo-
rem of arbitrary dimensions, be extended to spacetime.
This is simply a mathematical result, and we can see in
e.g.
Ref. [7], that Kirchhoff diffraction theory can be
extended in this manner to treat propagation in space-
time. Diffraction theory, when extended to the time di-
mension, has found wide-ranging applications in recent
research [8–12]. Likewise, as we show here, the Rayleigh
diffraction theory can also be extended to propagation in
spacetime. Based on this connection between the path
integral and diffraction theory, we use Rayleigh diffrac-
tion theory to construct the propagators for the Klein–
Gordon [13] and Dirac equations [14].
In what follows we shall compare the results of our
approach to a different method for calculating the prop-
agator, given by Feynman [15], for the particular case of
the 1 + 1D Dirac equation. This is known as the Feyn-
man checkerboard model and differs from the sum over
paths applied to the Schr¨odinger equation [16]. Note that
∗ml813@exeter.ac.uk
† S.Horsley@exeter.ac.uk
this checkerboard approach has been extended to the full
Dirac equation in 3 + 1 dimensions, see e.g. Ref. [17].
We shall show that, using our approach, we reclaim the
checkerboard propagator but with additional terms that
are non–zero only on the light cone, which are essential
to reclaim the correct zero mass limit. Further to this
we apply our method to calculate the propagator for the
Klein–Gordon equation, finding a new checkerboard in-
terpretation for this relativistic wave equation, contain-
ing two time–reversed copies of the particle motion.
II.
THE PROPAGATORS FOR THE
KLEIN–GORDON AND DIRAC EQUATIONS
In quantum mechanics we have a wave equation that
involves only a first–order time derivative, namely,
iℏ∂tΨ = ˆHΨ.
(1)
The propagator, K, is the integral operator that performs
the time evolution according to Eq. (1), taking any state
at time t′ to its later form at time t′′. This is given by
the matrix element of the time evolution operator,
K(x′′, t′′; x′, t′) = ⟨x′′|e
t′′−t′
iℏ
ˆ
H|x′⟩.
(2)
We note that here “propagator” does not mean the Green
function of Eq. (1), but as stated, the integral kernel
K(b, a), which is applied to any initial state Ψ(a) as fol-
lows: Ψ(b) =
´
a K(b, a)Ψ(a)dx, where a and b denote two
events in spacetime. Feynman discovered [2, 15] that this
propagator can be expressed in terms of the Hamiltonian
action of the particle, S,
K(xA, xB) =
ˆ xA
xB
all paths
exp
 i
ℏS[x(t)]

Dx(t),
(3)
where throughout we use the compressed notation e.g.
xA to indicate all coordinates specifying the point A, and
Dx is understood as an infinite product of infinitesimals,
each associated with an integral over a position along the
path x(t). This sum over classical paths is known as a
path integral. Conversely, the Hamiltonian action can be
given, in terms of the propagator, as Eq. (3)
S[l] = −iℏln

lim
∆x→0
Q
x∈l
K(x + ∆x, x)

= −iℏ
´
x∈l ln K(x + dx, x),
(4)
arXiv:2504.06329v1  [physics.gen-ph]  8 Apr 2025
