F. Rigamonti et al.: The perturbed BLR of PG 1302-102
Fig. 3. Best-fit result of the spiral model on the ESPRESSO data. The top panel shows the data in gray smoothed with a Gaussian Kernel
(σ ≃0.07Å), the best-fit model in black, the spiral model in gold, and all the emission components of the background model identified by different
colors: Hγ in brown, Hβ in red, [OIII] in cyan, Fe in light-blue and the continuum in dark blue. The vertical dashed lines indicate, from left to right,
the rest-frame emission wavelength of the Hγ, [OIII]λ4363.2Å, Hβ, and [OIII]λ4958.9Å, λ5006.8Å. The bottom panel represents the residuals
defined as (data-model)/error, the horizontal dashed black line at the zero level of residuals is plotted to guide the eyes.
model being statistically preferred20 over a model with a sin-
gle Gaussian component for both the BELs (∆log Z = 13437),
a model with a single Gaussian for the Hγ and two Gaussians
for the Hβ (∆log Z = 1080) and two Gaussians for both lines
(∆log Z = 6147).
We expect multiple kinds of perturbations, not necessar-
ily spiral in nature, arising from different physical processes
in BLRs. The spiral model is just a simple way to approxi-
mate asymmetric emission due to asymmetric emissivity distri-
bution. Indeed, we are not interested in discussing the specific
parameters of the spiral model determined in the fit. Instead, we
want to stress that even a quite simple toy model is capable of
characterizing (still with statistical significance) distorted emis-
sion lines. Nevertheless, the presence of spirals in BLR disks
seems not to be very uncommon. Theoretical studies (Wang
et al. 2022) suggest that non-axisymmetric perturbations (spi-
ral structures) may inevitably grow in the self-gravitating parts
of AGN accretion disks. These regions are spatially overlapped
20 We note that we cannot directly compare the evidence presented in
Tab. 1 with the evidence estimated in Sec. 3.2 since the two models have
been optimized on different slices of the data.
with BLRs. It is therefore reasonable to believe that inhomo-
geneities in the self-gravitating parts of accreting disks might be
the origin of the spiral arms in disk-like BLRs. Such hypothe-
ses are also supported by the growing number of reverberation
mapping velocity-resolved delay analyses. In such studies there
are evidences of the common presence of disk-like BLR con-
sistent either with Keplerian motion, inflow, outflow, or with
a complex configuration (Bentz et al. 2010; Grier et al. 2012;
Du et al. 2018; Zastrocky et al. 2024). We also observe that the
expected BLR size inferred from the luminosity-radius relation
(Bentz et al. 2009; Shen et al. 2024; Wang & Woo 2024) is a
few times larger than the predicted separation of PG 1302-102
(≃0.015 pc). This implies that the individual BLRs of the two
SMBHs in PG 1302-102, if really present, should have already
settled in a single BLR. However, given the large uncertainties
on the BLR size estimates (typically on the order of 0.3 dex) it
might be possible that the two BLRs are still in the process of
merging and, therefore have been disturbed as a consequence of
the passage of two SMBHs. This scenario gives a complemen-
tary explanation to that of gravitational instabilities.
Article number, page 9 of 13
