develop certification procedures for QKD equipment that can be carried out by third parties [509], as is
done for conventional IT and security equipment.
On the other hand, the development of device independent protocols can provide a more broad
solution with it’s goal to achieve information-theoretic security with as few assumptions as possible. DI-
QKD, MDI-QKD and SDI-QKD can solve many of the most important implementation issues. While
DI techniques allow for the main concepts behind security to be rooted to fundamental laws of physics,
practical implementation will inevitably introduce new issues that may not have been considered. These
need to be identified and scrutinized in order for QKD (DI or otherwise) to have widespread use. This is
one of the objectives of the ongoing standardization process of QKD systems (see next section).
Authentication. To prevent man-in-the-middle attacks, QKD requires two-way authentication of the clas-
sical channel between users for the classical post-processing stage of the QKD protocol (basis sifting, error
correction, privacy amplification). In small networks, pre-shared keys can be used. However, this severely
limits the network, as not only do the keys need to be stored securely, but new users should be able to join
without having previously established a key. In classical communications, the public-key infrastructure
(PKI) provides methods for authentication, which will soon include post-quantum cryptography (PQC).
Though it is not information-theoretic secure, PQC and crypto-agility is the current next step to be
adopted in protecting public-key cryptosystems from quantum computing [510]. PQC has already been
used to authenticate classical communications in QKD sessions in several network topologies [511, 512].
Importantly, since PQC is used only for authentication (key exchange for data encoding is realized with
QKD), only short-term security is required. That is, if the PQC method used is broken in the future,
the encoded data is still safe. Thus, PQC+QKD can offer a more robust security paradigm.
Trusted Relays. As discussed above, currently trusted relays are required to construct QKD links over
several hundred kilometers. As the development of quantum repeaters evolves [470], these classical relays
can be exchanged for quantum relays, which will solve this issue. In a quantum network architecture,
distributing several keys over multiple paths incorporating different sets of nodes will improve security,
should one or more trusted nodes become compromised. Post-processing of the keys by the end users
can reduce any leaked information. In addition, MDI-QKD can be used to transform some of the trusted
relay stations into untrusted ones. For DI-QKD at large-scale distances, however, quantum repeaters are
indeed a requirement.
Denial of service. Since QKD involves sending a single quantum state over a channel, any interruption in
transmission, such as simply cutting the optical fiber, or introducing high amounts of noise, will prevent
key exchange.
This risk, known as denial of service, has been reduced in several proof-of-concept implementations by
using quantum link redundancy, which takes advantage of the quantum network architecture to distribute
keys over multiple paths [513]. In addition, hybrid approaches using QKD and PQC can also mitigate
denial of service [514, 515].
Cost. When evaluating the cost of cybersecurity, it should be compared to the cost of cybercrime, which
worldwide is the equivalent third largest economy in the world (∼9.5 trillion USD in 2023 and grow-
ing) [516]. In this regard, massive investment in cybersecurity is warranted, as exemplified by the US
governments migration to post-quantum encryption, which is estimated to be 7.1 billion USD over ten
years [517]. Second, the last century has shown that the evolution of technology typically leads to cheaper
and better devices, as is the case of the microchip, for example. In this regard, integrated photonics will
inevitably bring not only miniaturization and improvement but also the cost-reduction of quantum pho-
tonic devices, as it has done for classical equipment (see Ref. [518] for a recent review). It should also
be noted that research and investment in quantum technology in general will accelerate development
in quantum communications, since quantum photonic devices are widely used in most applications. In
regards to QKD, manufacture of on-chip transmitters and receivers should facilitate the standardization
and deployment of QKD systems. While chip integration of sources and optical circuits is quite ad-
vanced, the current technological roadblock is the integration of on-chip single-photon detectors, which
are currently at a proof-of-principle or development stage [518].
Much progress has been made in integrating QKD into existing telecommunications infrastructure
(see below), which will help decrease costs and requirement of special purpose equipment. In addition,
QKD network architecture can be designed for cost reduction. For example, Hub and spoke [519] or
multi-user [520] architectures with MDI-QKD or standard QKD [521], incorporating a central detection
station, reduce the need for multiple detectors, which should minimize infrastructure costs.
Finally,
77
