124
The Path to aN3LO Parton Distributions
Total cross-section data are obtained by extrapolating measurements performed in a fiducial
region. Whereas for NC DY production in the central rapidity region and for dilepton invariant
masses around the Z-peak, the N3LO/NNLO cross-section ratio depends only mildly on the
dilepton rapidity yℓℓ[288, 289], it is unclear whether this is the case also off-peak or at very
large and very small rapidities. Hence, the inclusion of N3LO corrections for hadronic processes
is, at present, not fully reliable. We have consequently not included them in our default
determination, but only in a dedicated variant, with the goal of assessing their impact. For
conciseness, we refer to Ref. [3] for its discussion.
Despite the fact that we are not yet able to determine reliably N3LO corrections for currently
available LHC measurements, we wish to include the full NNPDF4.0 dataset in our aN3LO
PDF determination. To this purpose, we endow all data for which N3LO are not included with
an extra uncertainty that accounts for the missing N3LO terms. This is estimated using the
methodology of Refs. [152, 151], recently used in Ref. [6] to produce a variant of the NNPDF4.0
PDF sets that includes MHOUs, summarized in Section 2.2.
Thus, when not including N3LO corrections to the hard cross-section, the theory prediction is
evaluated by combining aN3LO evolution with the NNLO cross-sections. The prediction is then
supplemented with a theory covariance matrix, computed varying the renormalization scale µR
using a three-point prescription [152, 151]:
covNNLO
mn
= 1
2 (∆m(+)∆n(+) + ∆m(−)∆n(−)) ,
(4.28)
analogous to Eq. (4.27), but now with ∆m(±) the shift in the prediction for the m-th data point
obtained by replacing the coefficient functions with those obtained by performing upper or
lower renormalization scale variation using the methodology of Ref. [151] (as implemented and
discussed in [6, Eq. 2.9]). This MHOU covariance matrix is then added to the IHOU covariance
matrix as a further term on the right-hand side of Eq. (4.8).
The impact of this uncertainty is shown in Fig. 4.15, where we show for all hadronic datasets
the square root of the diagonal entries of the MHOU covariance matrix Eq. (4.28), compared
to those of the IHOU covariance matrix Eq. (4.8), and to the experimental uncertainties, all
normalized to the central theory prediction. The MHOU is generally larger than the IHOU,
indicating that the missing N3LO terms in the hard cross-sections are larger than the IHOU
uncertainty in N3LO perturbative evolution. The experimental uncertainties are generally larger
still.
In addition to the NNPDF4.0 aN3LO baseline PDF set obtained in this manner, we will also
produce a NNPDF4.0 MHOU aN3LO set, in analogy to the NLO and NNLO MHOU. For this set,
MHOUs on both perturbative evolution and on the hard matrix elements are included using
the methodology of Refs. [152, 151] with a theory covariance matrix determined performing
combined correlated renormalization and factorization scale variations with a 7-point prescrip-
tion, as discussed in Section 2.2 and with more details in Ref. [6]. In this case, we simply
perform scale variation on the expressions at the order at which they are being computed,
