S4
FIG. S1. Illustration of alternate truncation schemes for NH-NRG on the non-interacting (Ud = 0) NH AIM (also known as the
non-Hermitian RLM). The plots are analogous to those in Fig. E1 of the main text, and the same parameters are used. Top
row panels (a) show truncation to the lowest Nk states ordered by Im(EN); bottom row panels (b) show a hybrid scheme in
which the ‘ground state’ with lowest Re(EN) is first subtracted, and then states are sorted by magnitude, |EN −Egs
N |. NH-NRG
results as red-diamonds, exact diagonalization results as black circle points.
and similarly
⟨N + 1; r|L
d fN+1σ |N + 1; r′⟩R
d
=
X
m,m′,s
M σ
mm′ U L
N+1(r; m, s)†U R
N+1(r′; m′, s)
(S.27)
Thus, we have all of the ingredients to proceed to the next step. In this way, the entire chain can be built up orbital
by orbital, starting from ˆH0, which one explicitly constructs ‘by hand’ in the initialization step.
Without truncation, the Fock space would of course grow by a factor of four at each iteration. However, due to the
exponentially-decaying Wilson chain parameters, we have a scale separation from iteration to iteration that motivates
a truncation to just the Nk lowest-lying states at each iteration, meaning that the computational complexity of the
NH-NRG calculation scales linearly with N rather than exponentially. Of course, with complex eigenvalues EN at
each step, there is a subtlety about what is meant by ‘lowest lying’, and there are several truncation schemes that one
could envision. The simplest, and the one that is closest to that employed in regular Hermitian NRG, is to truncate to
the lowest Nk eigenstates ordered by Re(EN). This turns out to be the most numerically stable and accurate scheme,
which we have confirmed reproduces correctly the exact results of exact diagonalization in the non-interacting limit.
These issues are explored in more detail in the following sections.
S.III.
ALTERNATIVE TRUNCATION SCHEMES
S.III.A.
Non-Hermitian resonant level model
In the main text, we presented results for strongly-correlated quantum impurity problems obtained by NH-NRG
using a truncation scheme (‘LowRe’) in which the lowest Nk states were kept at each step, sorted by Re(EN). In the
End Matter we presented some justification for that, by consideration of the non-interacting limit of the AIM (Ud = 0),
also known as the ‘resonant level model’ (RLM). Being quadratic, the RLM can be solved exactly by diagonalizing
