curve) steadily decreasing throughout the training process. The blue dash-
dotted and red dotted curves represent the minimal and the maximal loss
function values, respectively, while the gray dashed curves are the plots of the
25th and 75th percentiles of the loss distribution. The loss function values
presented in Fig. 2 were taken only at the end of each training cycle. These
observations suggest that an early stopping may not be an optimal strategy
in this problem.
This behavior may be attributed to the cyclical learning rate schedule.
This behavior may be related also to the phenomenon of grokking [28], where
an ensemble with the increasing number of neural networks undergoes a phase
transition, shifting to signiﬁcantly lower loss values. As a result, while in-
dividual networks may experience abrupt improvements, the ensemble as a
whole exhibits a relatively smooth and continuous learning trajectory. How-
ever, an additional research is required to explicitly demonstrate the eﬀect
of grokking.
The set of hyperparameters outlined in this section (but not limited to)
controlling the machine learning process has been designed and carefully
tested in the described above benchmark problem of extrapolating the ground
state energy of the 2H nucleus supported by the Nijmegen II NN potential.
2.2. Prediction processing
Not all trained neural networks produce reasonable predictions, thus it
is needed to establish selection criteria for networks in the ensemble. The
selection process consists of three main stages [17, 18]: constructing a pre-
diction array including results from diﬀerent model spaces, applying ﬁltering
criteria to retain only reliable networks, and ﬁltering the outliers.
Prediction array construction. The prediction array is obtained by generat-
ing the results for model spaces Nu
max + 2, Nu
max + 4, ... , Nf
max and the range
of ℏΩvalues matching that of the training dataset. We use Nf
max = 300 as
the upper limit for the model space predictions.
Selection criteria. To ensure the reliability and stability of the ensemble, we
apply the following selection criteria:
• “Soft” Variational Principle (for energies only): The predictions ob-
tained with increasing Nmax at the same ℏΩvalues may exhibit minor
violations of the variational principle due to numerical errors which are
not exceeding 0.1 keV.
7
