Swinging small quantum systems out of available values of control parameters
9
−0.5
−0.25
 0
 0.25
 0.5
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
Interaction strength g(t)
Time t / T
Optimized
Perturbed
 0.96
 0.97
 0.98
 0.99
 1
 0
 0.02
 0.04
 0.06
 0.08
 0.1
Averaged final fidelity Fav
Noise deviation σ
Figure 5. (left) Exemplary realization of the noisy control field (red) obtained from the ideally
optimized field (blue) by application of random shifts of optimized values of interaction g(t) at
optimization instants (blue and red dots) with noise deviation σ = 0.06. (right) The averaged
final fidelity as a function of noise deviation σ obtained in the ensemble of 100 randomly
generated noisy control fields. Error bars correspond to the standard deviation of the average.
In both plots, the system parameters are fixed as T = 3.5ω−1, g2 = 2, and −gA = gB = 0.5.
Finally, we also checked the resistance of the protocol to experimental imperfections
in controlling the field. For this purpose, we modeled such imperfections in the simplest
possible way, by introducing random perturbations to the values of the already optimized
control field g(t) at optimization instants defined by M. These perturbations are drawn
from a normal distribution centered at zero and some standard deviation σ. In this way,
we consider a randomly perturbed control field and we check its consequences on the final
fidelity. An illustration of the noisy control field (with noise deviation fixed σ = 0.06) is
provided in the left panel of Fig. 5. A single realization of the noisy control field (red line)
is established from the optimized control field (blue line) obtained for the case studied
previously, i.e., T = 3.5ω−1, g2 = 2, and −gA = gB = 0.5. Note that perturbation of the
optimized control field g(t) may significantly change a resulting field in a whole considered
domain. For such a noisy control field we calculate the final fidelity F and, to make the
analysis more meaningful, we repeat this construction 100 times and average. The averaged
final fidelity Fav obtained in this way for different noise deviations σ is presented in the
right panel of Fig. 5b. As suspected, an introduction noise introduced to the control field
diminishes the quality of the performance of the protocol. However, even for evidently
strong randomness in the system, the protocol is quite robust and obtained final fidelity may
be considered as satisfied.
5. Interactions with third system
Finally, we analyze the minimal extension of the problem to a situation in which the system
of interest is affected by the external surroundings due to uncontrolled interactions. For
this purpose, we consider the previous system of three fermions interacting additionally
(via zero-range forces) with a third-component particle of mass mB confined in the same
