7
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS SECTION A: EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
Electric field calibration
We calibrated the electric field using Rydberg spectroscopy. The electrode setup consists of six concentric plate
electrodes spaced along the time-of-flight axis. During Rydberg excitation, we applied an external electric field by
setting a controllable voltage Vrep on the first plate electrode (the repeller). The electrodes were connected through a
voltage divider network, such that the voltages on the six electrodes follow a ratio of 1 : 0.82 : 0.585 : 0.35 : 0.175 : 0.
In addition, a residual electric field Eresidual existed in the system even when all electrodes were grounded. Therefore,
it is essential to calibrate the total electric field as a function of the applied repeller voltage to ensure accurate field
control.
The electric field geometry is shown in Fig. 5(a/b). Our goal is to measure all 3 projections of the residual electric
field Eresidual.
Here, the x-axis is the magnetic field direction, and the z-axis is the symmetry axis of the plate
electrodes. Due to the concentric geometry of the electrodes, the applied electric field only has a z-component. The
total electric field magnitude with an applied voltage Vrep is:
Etot =
q
E2
minimal + (Eres,z + αVrep)2.
(1)
Eminimal and Eres,z are the perpendicular and parallel components of the residual electric field relative to the z-axis.
α is a conversion factor between the applied voltage and the electric field Eapplied. To measure these quantities,
we adjusted the repeller voltage Vrep in the absence of a magnetic field. At each voltage, we performed Rydberg
spectroscopy scans for the 98D states, which were compared with theoretical calculations to extract the electric fields
as shown in Fig. 5.
(c)
(a)
z
x
y
Eresidual
Eapplied
Etot
Eminimal
KRb + Rb
(b)
-800
-600
-400
-200
0
Repeller plate voltage (mV)
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Electric field (mV/cm)
x,
y
z,Eapplied
B
Repeller
Extractors
FIG. 5. Geometry and calibration of the electric field. (a) Field plates used to apply the appropriate E-field. The leftmost plate
is the repeller, and the other plates on the right are extractors. The Rb-KRb ensemble is placed at the center of the repeller
and the first extractor plate. (b) Geometry of the electric field in the system. Eresidual is the residual electric field when all
plate electrodes are grounded, which corresponds to a Eapplied of zero. We can completely cancel the residual electric field in
the z-direction, after which the total electric field would be minimized to Eminimal. (c) Calibration of the residual electric field
by varying the repeller plate voltage. The electric field is extracted from comparing 98D Rydberg states excitation spectrum
at zero magnetic field to theoretical calculations. The blue curve is fitted based on Eq. 1.
After fitting total electric fields at different applied voltages to Eq. 1, we determined Eminimal = 38.6 mV/cm, Eres,z
= 88.5 mV/cm, and α = 0.1953 (mV/cm)/mV. In addition to this, we also wish to know the angle ϕ between the
x-axis and Eminimal, as they also affect the compositions and energies of the eigenstates under a finite magnetic field.
This was achieved by measuring the Rydberg excitation spectrum at a magnetic field of B = 10 G and comparing
it with theoretical predictions, where we determined ϕ = 55◦. Using our simulation, we also found that ϕ had little
impact on the Rydberg excitation broadening.
