Stern-Gerlach experiment example in the introduction. It seems fair to conclude that, in
our formulation, the remaining selection problem is of philosophical interest but no longer
requires further physical explanation.
Our approach to the Born rule is guided by three principles which are worth emphasizing
here:
1. Uniﬁed dynamics: In an objective framework, all physical theories rest on two core
elements: an initial state and a governing law of motion that dictates its evolution.
Fundamental physics should, therefore, be expressible in terms of a single rule governing
time evolution. This principle of parsimony has driven many major advances in physics,
and our approach reinstates it within quantum mechanics.
2. Discrete foundations: If fundamental physics operates on discrete rather than con-
tinuous mathematics, the Schr¨odinger equation must be an approximation, because it
fundamentally relies on complex numbers. It is then plausible to expect some form of
small-signal truncation of wavefunction amplitudes at the threshold where this approx-
imation ceases to be accurate, analogous to digital computers having ﬁnite precision
limits. This perspective aligns with various other theoretical approaches suggesting
that continuous mathematical structures — including complex and real numbers —
may not be fundamental to physics.
3. Probability does not exist fundamentally: Equally, probability is a powerful tool,
but one that exists in our models rather than in physical reality itself. As argued by
many practitioners of probability theory and statistics, it is implausible that probability
represents an intrinsic feature of the world independent of human conception — it is
instead a mathematical construct we impose to describe and manage uncertainty, see
e.g. Spiegelhalter (2024).
These three conceptual foundations crucially shape our treatment of the Born rule in this
paper, but we recognize that reasonable minds may diﬀer on these principles. Addition-
ally, alternative derivations of the Born rule might be consistent with these principles while
diﬀering signiﬁcantly in their technical mechanisms.
44
