Identifying Universal Spin Excitations in Spin-1/2 Kagome Quantum Spin Liquid
Materials
Aaron T. Breidenbach,1, 2, ∗Arthur C. Campello,1, 3, ∗Jiajia Wen,1 Hong-Chen
Jiang,1 Daniel M. Pajerowski,4 Rebecca W. Smaha,1, 5 and Young S. Lee1, 3, †
1Stanford Institute for Materials and Energy Sciences,
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA
2Department of Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
3Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
4Neutron Scattering Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge TN 37830, USA
5Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA‡
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
A quantum spin liquid (QSL) is an exotic quantum state of matter characterized by fluctuating
spins which may exhibit long-range entanglement. Among the possible host candidates for a QSL
ground state, the S=1/2 kagome lattice antiferromagnet is particularly promising.
Using high
resolution inelastic neutron scattering measurements on Zn-barlowite (ZnxCu4−x(OD)6FBr, x ≃
0.80), we measure a spin excitation spectrum consistent with a QSL ground state.
Continuum
scattering above ∼1 meV matches that of herbertsmithite (ZnxCu4−x(OD)6Cl2, x ≃0.85), another
prominent kagome QSL material, indicating universal spinon excitations. A detailed analysis of the
spin-spin correlations, compared with density matrix renormalization group calculations, further
indicate a QSL ground state for the physically relevant Hamiltonian parameters. The measured
spectra in Zn-barlowite are consistent with gapped behavior with a gap size ∆= 1.1(2) meV.
Comparison with a simple pair correlation model allows us to clearly distinguish intrinsic kagome
correlations from impurity-induced correlations. Our results clarify the behavior that is universal
within this important family of QSL candidate materials.
A quantum spin liquid (QSL) is a fascinating ground
state that may emerge when a collection of quantum
magnetic moments are prevented from ordering due to
frustration[1–3]. In such a state, the quantum spins can
be correlated without breaking conventional symmetries
and may possess long-range quantum entanglement [1, 2].
The resulting properties could have far-reaching implica-
tions, such as in applications for topological quantum
computing [1, 4]. Improved understanding may also elu-
cidate the fundamental physics in unconventional super-
conductors [5, 6] as carrier doped QSL’s are hypothesized
to themselves exhibit high-temperature superconductiv-
ity [5, 7, 8]. Continued progress requires expanding the
family of materials with clear signatures of QSL behavior.
A promising class of quantum spin liquid candidates
exists on two-dimensional frustrated lattices, such as tri-
angular and kagome lattices. The S=1/2 kagome min-
eral herbertsmithite (ZnCu3(OH)6Cl2) is found to avoid
magnetic ordering even at temperatures down to 50 mK
[9, 10], and inelastic neutron scattering has uncovered
fractionalized spinon excitations in the material consis-
tent with QSL behavior [11].
Nuclear magnetic reso-
nance (NMR) and neutron scattering measurements fur-
ther indicate an ∼1 meV energy gap in the QSL state
[12–14], though some NMR results indicate the absence
of a gap [15].
Despite controversy surrounding a gap,
∗These authors contributed equally to this work
† youngsl@stanford.edu
‡ Present
address:
National
Renewable
Energy
Laboratory,
Golden, CO 80401, USA
which include theoretical calculations of possible gapped
and gapless QSL ground states in spin-1/2 kagome sys-
tems [16–22], the experimental results have established
herbertsmithite as a leading candidate for a QSL mate-
rial [1, 23].
The discoveries in herbertsmithite have motivated in-
tense investigation into similar kagome lattice materi-
als. Zn-substituted barlowite (ZnCu3(OH)6FBr) [24–30],
like herbertsmithite, is comprised of magnetically iso-
lated kagome layers of antiferromagnetic spin-1/2 Cu2+
ions. Zn-barlowite differs from herbertsmithite in having
a simpler A-A stacking of kagome layers – compared to
herbertsmithite’s A-B-C stacking. Both materials have a
residual fraction of Cu2+ impurities on the interlayer sites
due to incomplete Zn2+ substitution, however there is no
evidence of impurities within the kagome layers.[31, 32]
Moreover, the Cu2+ impurities are shifted to lower sym-
metry positions in Zn-barlowite relative to the impurity
positions in herbertsmithite. Susceptibility and NMR ex-
periments on Zn-barlowite show similar properties as her-
bertsmithite and are suggestive of QSL physics, such as
a lack of magnetic ordering down to T=100 mK [26] and
the presence of gapped singlets [14, 28, 33]. Resonant
inelastic x-ray scattering on small Zn-barlowite crystals
indicated a broad continuum of spin excitations up to
∼200 meV[29].
In this article, we present high-resolution inelastic neu-
tron scattering measurements on large Zn-barlowite crys-
tals.
We discover a continuum of excitations for the
kagome magnetic moments, indicative of fractionalized
spinon excitations.
This matches the same signature
found in herbertsmithite, and therefore points to uni-
arXiv:2504.06491v1  [cond-mat.str-el]  8 Apr 2025
