12
the general mixed-state compression of [5, 7] and the visible compression of mixed-state ensembles considered in [9]
by constraining N to be an identity channel and the input ρAR to be fully classical, respectively
We deﬁne two functionals in Deﬁnition 3 and show that they characterize the simulation rates for all models,
irrespective of constraints. We prove that the optimal entanglement-assisted rate for the simulation of the channel
N : A →BK is equal to a(ρAR, 0). This is a quantity depends only on a single copy of the input state ρAR and
channel N. For the unassisted simulation, we prove a rate limm→∞1
mu(ρ⊗m,
1
m9 ) is achievable, and the lower bound
limγ→0 limm→∞1
mu(ρ⊗m, γ) holds. Even though we could not prove these two rates are equal in general, we provide
multiple examples that these two bound match and can be simpliﬁed to single-letter quantities.
Several directions remain open for further exploration. One immediate avenue is to investigate whether the unas-
sisted rate functional u(ρ, γ) admits a tighter or more computable characterization, potentially leading to a deeper
understanding of the regularization behavior. Another promising direction is to consider local error instead of global
error criterion or more generally a rate-distortion model. Finally, an open question left by our work is determining
the resource trade-oﬀbetween shared randomness, shared entanglement, and quantum communication. In our model,
we only consider shared entanglement and quantum communication; including shared randomness as an additional
resource completes the picture from a resource-theoretic perspective.
Acknowledgments. ZBK was supported by the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions (MSCA) European Postdoctoral
Fellowships (Project 101068785-QUARC) and the Ada Lovelace Postdoctoral Fellowship at Perimeter Institute for
Theoretical Physics. DL received support from NSERC discovery grant and NSERC Alliance grant under the project
QUORUM. ZBK and DL, ia the Perimeter Institute, are supported in part by the Government of Canada through the
Department of Innovation, Science and Economic Development and by the Province of Ontario through the Ministry
of Colleges and Universities.
Appendix A: Proof of Lemma 2
Proof. From the ﬁdelity criterion we obtain
1 −ǫ ≤F

σBnKnRn ⊗|Φ⟩⟨Φ|A1B1, ξBnKnRnA1B1
n

≤F

|Φ⟩⟨Φ|A1B1, ξn
A1B1
=
q
⟨Φ| ξA1B1
n
|Φ⟩
≤
rξA1B1
n

∞,
(A1)
where the second line is due to monotonicity of the ﬁdelity under partial trace. The last line follows from the deﬁnition
of the operator norm. Now, consider the Schmidt decomposition of the state |ξn⟩BnKnWAWBRnR′nA1B1 with respect
to the partition BnKnWAWBRnR′n : A1B1, i.e.
|ξn⟩BnKnWAWBRnR′nA1B1 =
X
i
p
λi |vi⟩BnKnWAWBRnR′n
|wi⟩A1B1 .
