B.6
Smooth Calabi-Yau threefold Y3 dual to (X3, [±1]3)
52
B.7
Almost generic octic X4 with 100 nodes and torsion B(X4) = Z3
53
B.8
Almost generic octic Y4 with 100 nodes and torsion B(Y4) = Z2
56
C Gopakumar-Vafa invariants
58
References
59
1
Introduction
The calculation of genus zero Gromov-Witten invariants of the quintic Calabi-Yau threefold
using mirror symmetry in [1] gave rise to a rich and beautiful interplay between string theory
and mathematics, the consequences of which still appear far from exhausted. The genus zero
calculation has been quickly generalized to other Calabi-Yau threefolds [2–5]. Subsequently,
using the holomorphic anomaly equations derived in [6, 7] has in many cases allowed to obtain
results to relatively high genus [8–11].
Certain singular Calabi-Yau varieties can support a ﬂat but topologically non-trivial B-
ﬁeld that regularizes the string worldsheet theory and obstructs deformations that remove
the singularities [12, 13]. The A-model topological string partition function depends on the
topology of the B-ﬁeld and it has more recently been observed [14–16] that the partition
functions for diﬀerent choices of the topology encode a torsion reﬁnement of the Gopakumar-
Vafa invariants [17, 18] of the smooth deformation of the underlying geometry.
For the examples considered in [13–16], the phenomenon arises when a projective Calabi-
Yau threefold X has isolated nodal singularities and, given any complex analytic small reso-
lution b
X of X, every exceptional curve represents a non-trivial torsion class in H2( b
X, Z). We
will refer to such geometries as almost generic Calabi-Yau threefolds (AGCY–3). We refer to
B(X) = Tors H3( b
X, Z) ≃Tors H2( b
X, Z) ,
(1.1)
as the torsion of the geometry, where the second isomorphism in (1.1) follows from the uni-
versal coeﬃcient theorem. The torsion is independent of the choice of small resolution b
X up
to isomorphism. The precise deﬁnition will be formulated in Section 2 where we also review
some of the relevant geometric background.
The name “almost generic” is motivated by the fact that an AGCY–3 X always has
a smooth deformation e
X and never admits a small resolution that is projective or K¨ahler.
This will also be elaborated on in Section 2. Almost generic Calabi-Yau threefolds therefore
correspond to a special sublocus in the moduli space of complex structures on the Calabi-Yau
– 1 –
