46
Tools and methodology
theoretical predictions, to the independent degrees of freedom the PDFs and overcome all the
complications arising due to the flavor mixing and Q2 dependency. However, to solve the PDF
regression problem we are left with at least 3 major obstacles that have to be taken into account.
First, the problem might seem mathematically ill-defined, as the number of datapoints is finite,
while PDFs have a continuous domain. This is practically solved by restricting the region of
validity of the fitted PDFs to a specific x range (approximately [10−4, 0.7]), called data region,
where the behavior of PDFs can be really determined by the data, and adopting a discrete grid
parametrization. In the very small-x and large-x regions our analysis can only be interpreted as
an extrapolation, which might be possible to validate with future measurements or so-called
future tests [147]. Second, both the experimental data and the theory predictions used during
the fit, have a finite accuracy. Thus, their uncertainties, need to be taken into account. In this
work we adopt a Monte Carlo method to sample the experimental distributions (described in
Section 2.2.1) and a covariance matrix formalism to propagate different theoretical errors such
as nuclear uncertainties or missing higher order corrections (cf. Section 2.2.2) to the PDF fit.
Finally, there is an arbitrariness in the choice of the parametrization to adopt for the initial scale
PDFs. Various approaches have been proposed in literature, in the thesis we mainly present
results based on the NNPDF methodology where the PDFs are given as an output of feed forward
neural network. The solutions adopted to overcome these issues together with the setting used
to define a cost function and its minimization, define the so-called fitting methodology, which is
described in Section 2.2.3.
2.2.1. Treatment of experimental uncertainties
In particle physics, measurements are typically presented as binned and fiducial cross-sections.
In a simplistic way, given a scattering process, defined by the kinematics of its final state and,
the possible background processes, we can define a fiducial cross-section σ as
σ = Nc −Nb
ϵL
(2.10)
where Nc and Nb are respectively the total number of observed events satisfying the selection
criteria and the estimate of background events. L corresponds to the integrated luminosity
which acts as a normalization by total number of collision happening in a certain time and
detected by the experimental apparatus. ϵ instead, called acceptance, is used to model possible
systematic effects such as, detector acceptance, trigger efficiency, reconstruction efficiency,
which are typical of the experimental setup. Subsequently, one can divide the phase space
regions into different bins and obtain differential cross-sections. Often, in order to reduce
uncertainties, measurements are presented as ratios of cross-sections: for instance, polarized
asymmetries are computed from the ratio of the polarized to unpolarized cross-sections.
The experimental uncertainties can thus be classified into:
