12
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIG. 2: Zero modes on the interval −∞< x < ∞with a smooth domain wall given by S-shaped, symmetric or asymmetric Pöschl–Teller, or
constant fields m(x) and v(x), and with its width smaller than or comparable with the characteristic decay lengths w ≲ξ. Panels on different
rows from top to bottom show the spatial dependence of i) the real and imaginary parts of the wavefunctions, ii) the natural logarithm of the
norm of the wavefunctions, iii) the real and imaginary parts of the fields m(x) and v(x), iv) the quantities M(x) and K(x). Panels on different
columns from left to right correspond to different choices of the parameters m0,1,2 and v1,2, giving (a) single mode with exponentially damped
oscillations on the right side and exponential decay on the left side of a smooth domain wall with an S-shaped field m(x) and a complex
S-shaped field v(x) with Im(vL) ̸= 0 (nonhermitian), (b) single mode with exponentially damped oscillations and nonuniform complex phase
on the right side and exponential decay on the left side of a smooth domain wall with complex S-shaped field m(x) with a nonzero imaginary
component (nonhermitian). (c) single mode with exponentially damped oscillations and nonuniform complex phase on the right side and
exponential decay on the left side of a smooth domain wall with asymmetric Pöschl–Teller field m(x) and a complex S-shaped field v(x) with
Im(vL) ̸= 0 (nonhermitian), (d) single mode with exponentially damped oscillations and nonuniform complex phase on the right side and
exponential decay on the left side of a smooth domain wall with complex asymmetric Pöschl–Teller field m(x) with a nonzero imaginary
component (nonhermitian).
equation determined by the Hamiltonian coincides with the maximum number of possible topologically protected modes and
with twice the maximum possible value of the topological invariant as a consequence of the bulk-boundary correspondence.
A second-order differential equation can support at most 2 linearly independent solutions satisfying the boundary conditions.
Therefore, any Hamiltonian that can be reduced to a scalar second-order differential equation as in the modified Jackiw-Rebbi
equation in Eq. (3) may exhibit at most 2 topologically protected edge modes. In this case, the critical lines between topologically
distinct phases, where the edge modes localize, can only separate phases with topological invariants W, W ′ with |W −W ′| ≤2,
due to the bulk-boundary correspondence. Hence, the topological invariant must be |W| ≤1, with a maximum number of
2 nontrivial phases, regardless of the presence of antiunitary and unitary symmetries. More generally, given that an n-order
differential equation can support at most n linearly independent solutions satisfying the boundary conditions, any Hamiltonian
that can be reduced to a scalar n-order differential equation may exhibit at most n topologically-protected edge modes, and the
critical lines can only separate distinct phases with topological invariants W, W ′ with |W −W ′| ≤n, which allows the presence
of at most ⌊n/2⌋topologically nontrivial phases with 2|W| ≤n, regardless of the presence of antiunitary and unitary symmetries.
