MDI-
QKD
Encoding
Variants
Phase-
Encoding
Time-Bin
Encoding
Protocol
Exten-
sions
Decoy-
State
MDI-
QKD
Coherent-
State
MDI-
QKD
Higher-
Dimensional
variants
Practical
Imple-
menta-
tions
Fiber-
Based
MDI-
QKD
Free-
Space
MDI-
QKD
Advanced
Variants
Twin-
Field
QKD
Asymmetric
MDI-
QKD
Network
MDI-
QKD
Figure 15:
Hierarchical overview of MDI-QKD advancements.
5.3. Measurement-device-independent QKD
The purpose of SDI-QKD is to eliminate the most serious possible hardware vulnerabilities at the
expense of a minimum of security assumptions. The measurement devices and detectors used in QKD
present considerable opportunities for side-channel attacks by Eve, in particular, due to the fact that
Eve can both probe and/or manipulate the measurement system using external light, allowing her to
determine measurement settings, blind a detector, or force a detector to “click”. To combat this type of
attack, Lo et al. proposed the idea of measurement-device-independent QKD (MDI-QKD) in 2012 [96].
Since it’s introduction, many variants and improvements of MDI-QKD have been proposed, a summary
of which is shown in Fig. 15. In the following sections, we present an brief overview of MDI-QKD.
5.3.1. Original MDI-QKD Protocol
The main idea of the original MDI-QKD scenario [96] is sketched in Fig. 16. For simplicity, consider
first that Alice and Bob each send a single photon to Charlie, who implements a linear-optical Bell-state
measurement (BSM), which can be described by measurement operators Π+, Π−, Π0 (see also Fig. 18).
Here Π± is a rank-one projector onto one of the Bell states |ψ±⟩= (|H⟩A |V ⟩B ± |V ⟩A |H⟩B)/
√
2, where
H and V are the rectilinear polarization states. Π0, on the other hand, is a rank-two projector onto the
remaining two Bell states. When Alice and Bob prepare their pulses in either the H or V polarization
state, a successful BSM (“Π±” results) indicates that their pulses were prepared in orthogonal states.
In the ideal scenario, they have an error rate of zero. These events can be used to generate a shared
key–say–by defining HA ≡“0” and VA ≡“1”, where Bob will flip all of his bits so that their bit strings
are correlated. When the photons are prepared with diagonal polarization (states A, D in Fig. 16), a
detection of the state ψ−(ψ+) occurs only when orthogonally (parallel) polarized pulses were prepared.
An error in this case corresponds to detection events Π+ (Π+) when orthogonal (the same) diagonal
polarization states are sent. With the error rates for both bases, post-processing steps similar to BB84
can be realized.
Remarkably, the same logic can be applied to the case when Alice and Bob use weak coherent pulses
(WCP) [96]. To fully realize MDI-QKD, the pulses are prepared in one of the four polarization states,
determined by random bit strings held by Alice and Bob, and then sent to Charlie, who publicly announces
the results when the BSM is successful. Alice and Bob subsequently post-select their data, retaining only
the outcomes with a successful BSM, and the same preparation bases were used. The data corresponding
to the diagonal basis is used for assessing bit and phase error rates.
If the error rates fall below a
predetermined threshold, Alice and Bob proceed with classical error correction and privacy amplification
processes to obtain a secure key; otherwise, they terminate the protocol. Most notably, MDI-QKD does
not require a trusted measurement apparatus. To see this, notice that a successful BSM event ψ± does
not provide any information about whether Alice and Bob prepared HA, VB (= secret bit value 0) or
VA, HB (= secret bit value 1), and moreover there is no basis selection at the measurement device, so no
information can be acquired if Eve somehow probes the BSM station. In addition, forcing BSM detectors
to click, or announcing false results will inevitably lead to errors when diagonal states are sent.
Thus, MDI-QKD effectively mitigates all potential detector side channels, and in fact, the BSM station
can be implemented by an untrusted third party and completely under Eve’s control. However, one still
59
