3
as a Type IL GRB. We identified 5 GRBs whose light
curve patterns align with the characteristics of Type IL
GRBs. Upon examining their observational properties,
we found that these 5 GRBs indeed fall within Type I
GRB category, thereby further validating the classifica-
tion of Type IL GRB as a subclass of Type I GRB. We
also obtain a comprehensive sample of Type IL GRBs
collected over the past decade.
Furthermore, we also
search for thermal components in the precursors of Type
IL GRBs and briefly discuss theoretical models related
to the progenitors, central engines, and extended radia-
tion that could produce Type IL GRBs.
This paper is organized as follows. Data selection re-
quired for establishing the criterion is described in sec-
tion 2.
The process of criterion establishment is pre-
sented in section 3. The results of searching based on
the criterion and the verification of Type IL GRBs are
given in section 4, discussions are given in section 5.
Summary is given in section 6.
All parameter errors in this work are for the 68% con-
fidence level if not otherwise stated.
2. INSTRUMENT AND DATA SELECTION
The Gamma-ray Burst Monitor (GBM) is one of the
two instruments onboard the Fermi Gamma-ray Space
Telescope (Meegan et al. 2009; Bissaldi et al. 2009),
which consists of 14 detectors with different orientations:
12 Sodium Iodide (NaI) scintillation detectors (labeled
from n0 to nb) covering the energy range of about 8-1000
keV, and 2 Bismuth Germanate (BGO) scintillation de-
tectors (b0 and b1) covering the energy range of about
0.2-40 MeV.
From the Fermi GBM Burst Catalog 1, we selected all
long GRBs with T90 greater than 4 s from January 1,
2014 to January 1, 2024. The reason why those bursts
with duration exceeding 4 seconds were chosen is be-
cause the GRBs we want to investigate generally have a
long duration, for example, the main emission of GRB
211211A lasts about 10 s. With this filter, we obtain a
total dataset of about 1800 GRBs. We note that there
were about 400 short GRBs in the past decade in this
catalog. We use the trigger time and T90 provided in
the catalog for the subsequent criterion establishment
process.
3. SEARCH CRITERION FOR TYPE IL GRB
As mentioned in Wang et al. (2024), Type IL GRBs
feature a unified burst pattern:
(1) there must be an evident precursor;
1 https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/W3Browse/fermi/fermigbrst.html
(2) the duration of quiescent period is defined as the
waiting time, and the waiting time Twt should be
relatively short;
(3) a relatively long T90 of the prompt emission, includ-
ing precursor, main emission and extended emission;
(4) there must be an extended emission, which is sepa-
rated from the main emission by a dip-like structure.
Therefore, two aspects are considered in the process of
criterion establishment: one is the precursor and qui-
escent period, and the other is the extended emission
and the dip. The standard for the long main emission
is guaranteed by the filter of T90 greater than 4 s in the
dataset.
The flowchart of the criterion is shown in Fig.1. We
start by extracting the total light curve of the three
NaI detectors with the strongest signal from the time
range T0-5 s to T0+2*T90, with a time resolution of 0.2 s.
Choosing 5 s before T0 is based on the consideration that
the background should not have too much influence on
the burst. If a GRB’s precursor appears more than 5 s
before T0, then its waiting time is too long, and this
GRB should not be considered. The choice of resolu-
tion of 0.2 s is considered from two aspects: On one
hand, if the time resolution is too high, it would bring
large statistical fluctuations, affecting the recognition of
the precursor and quiescent period. On the other hand,
if the resolution is too low, the structure of the quies-
cent period may be covered by the precursor and main
emission. After all, the durations of the precursor and
quiescent period are relatively short.
Next, we segment the light curve using the Bayesian
Block algorithm and calculate the significance of each
block using the Li-Ma formula (Li & Ma 1983)
SNRLi−Ma =
√
2

n log

α
α + 1
n
n + b

+ b log

(α + 1)
b
n + b
1/2
(1)
where n is the counts of the on-source time interval ton to
testify the existence of a burst, b is the measured back-
ground counts in the off-source time interval toff, and α
is the ratio of the on-source time to the off-source time
ton/toff. The first block is taken as the off-region. This
is based on the assumption that the first block, which
occurs before the source signal rises, represents the back-
ground region. Subsequently, we use the SNRLi−Ma of
each block to characterize the strength of the GRB sig-
nal. If none of the blocks has SNRLi−Ma greater than 3,
this GRB is considered to be too weak, and no further
analysis is conducted. Conversely, for those light curves
with blocks that have SNRLi−Ma exceeding 3, all blocks
are classified into low-significance blocks (LSBs) with
