Machine Learning-Assisted Unfolding for Neutrino Cross-section Measurements
R. G. Huang,1 A. Cudd,2 M. Kawaue,3 T. Kikawa,3 B. Nachman,1 V. Mikuni,1 and C. Wilkinson1
1Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
2University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309, USA
3Kyoto University, Department of Physics, Kyoto, Japan
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
The choice of unfolding method for a cross-section measurement is tightly coupled to the model
dependence of the efficiency correction and the overall impact of cross-section modeling uncertain-
ties in the analysis. A key issue is the dimensionality used in unfolding, as the kinematics of all
outgoing particles in an event typically affect the reconstruction performance in a neutrino detector.
OmniFold is an unfolding method that iteratively reweights a simulated dataset, using machine
learning to utilize arbitrarily high-dimensional information, that has previously been applied to
proton-proton and proton-electron datasets. This paper demonstrates OmniFold’s application to a
neutrino cross-section measurement for the first time using a public T2K near detector simulated
dataset, comparing its performance with traditional approaches using a mock data study.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Unfolding is a general term for removing the im-
pact of a measuring device from a measurement [1, 2].
In the context of cross-section measurements in high-
energy physics, this can be thought of as the deconvo-
lution of detector smearing and efficiency effects, neces-
sary to present data in a way which does not require
detailed information about the particle detector to inter-
pret. Neutrino cross-section measurements typically use
binned unfolding methods and a small number of dimen-
sions to present results. Most current results are single-
dimensional, but multi-dimensional results of up to three
dimensions have been extracted [3]. A simple, but repre-
sentative formula used to extract a binned cross section
dσ/dxi as a function of the true kinematic variable x
is [4]:
dσ
dxi
=
P
j eU −1
ij (Nj −Bj)
ΦνT∆xiϵi
(1)
where Nj (Bj) is the number of selected (predicted back-
ground) events in reconstructed bin j, Φν is the total
integrated flux, T is the number of target nuclei, ∆xi is
the width of the true bin i (or area/volume for multi-
dimensional extractions), ϵi is the selection efficiency,
and eU −1
ij
is the unfolding matrix. The unfolding matrix
is a regularized inverse of the matrix Uij that encapsu-
lates the effects of detector smearing. The efficiency and
the detector smearing are closely related, and in some
formulations the efficiency correction is absorbed into
the smearing matrix. A number of unfolding methods
have been explored in neutrino physics [5–7], between
which the most important differences are how the result
is regularized and how the potential for bias that regu-
larization introduces is handled [4, 8]. One of the most
commonly used unfolding methods in neutrino physics,
as in high-energy physics more generally, is D’Agostini
unfolding [9, 10], also known as Iterative Bayesian Un-
folding (IBU)1. This method has been independently de-
scribed multiple times [11–13] and is known in other
fields by other names, such as Lucy-Richardson decon-
volution [14, 15].
Experimental data from neutrino experiments have
a number of unique challenges:
they typically suffer
from low statistics; detector volumes are large with non-
uniform detector efficiency and smearing; they use rela-
tively low-fidelity, high-threshold detectors; and, system-
atic uncertainties are generally large. These issues couple
to the unfolding problem in complex ways, which risks de-
grading the quality of extracted results. Because the de-
tector smearing and efficiency depend on a large number
of variables, expressing a smearing matrix with a small
number of dimensions implicitly integrates over all of the
other relevant variables. This integration relies not only
on the detector model in the simulation, but is convolved
with a prediction for how signal events will be distributed
in those variables, leading to model-dependence and the
potential for bias [4, 8]. Additionally, by expressing the
result in a small number of dimensions, the result loses
much of the richness of the original data, particularly as
the binning must be determined in advance using sim-
ulation studies. Experiments often extract results in a
number of variables, but generally without correlations
between the different variables. This has presented diffi-
culties in the use of these measurements, although meth-
ods have been proposed to overcome this problem [7].
Additionally, the challenges of unfolding have led to dis-
cussions of whether to unfold data at all, both in neutrino
physics [16] and more generally [17].
New unfolding methodologies are possible using ma-
chine learning, many of which naturally generalize to
high-dimensional spaces, and a number of approaches
have been explored [18–20]. In this work, we apply the
OmniFold unfolding method [21, 22] to a publicly avail-
able simulated dataset from the T2K experiment and
1 Although this is somewhat of a misnomer, as it is a fully frequen-
tist method [11].
arXiv:2504.06857v1  [hep-ex]  9 Apr 2025
