towards the equator (Hartmann 2016). The weakening of this overturning circulation, shown in
Figure 1, provides a possible explanation for the changes in tropical precipitation. The processes
related to changes in the precipitation distribution are discussed in more detail in Section 6
4. From circulation changes to energy budget changes
In order to link the climate changes described in the previous section to the imposed circulation
change, we will investigate how these circulation changes influence the distribution of energy in
the climate system. In particular, we discuss the roles of the mean meridional circulation and of
the eddies in Section 4.a, and then use the methods introduced in Section 2 to discuss the radiative
balance changes in Section 4.b and Section 4.c.
a. Meridional energy transport
We first compute the changes in vertically-integrated meridional energy transport related to
the transition to superrotation, and connect these changes to the atmospheric circulation changes
described in Section 3.a. We denote these changes as ğ›¿

âˆ‡Â· [vMSE]

, where v is the horizontal
velocity vector and MSE is the moist static energy, i.e. MSE = ğ‘ğ‘ğ‘‡+ ğ‘”ğ‘§+ ğ¿ğ‘, where ğ‘ğ‘is the
specific heat capacity of air at constant pressure and ğ¿is the specific latent heat of vaporization
(the other symbols have their usual meanings). The overline represents the time- and zonal-average
and the brackets represent the vertical mass-weighted integral.
After applying a correction to the meridional wind in order to compensate the numerical er-
rors in the closure of the energy balance (Bangalath and Pauluis 2020), we compute explicitly
the meridional MSE flux and decompose it into mean meridional circulation (MMC) and eddy
components (Fig. 5). Here, the eddies include both transient and standing eddies, but since the
boundary conditions are axisymmetric in our problem, standing eddies are not expected to play a
very important part.
We first note that the energy transport in the control run (Fig. 5, panel a) exhibits the standard
characteristic features: both the MMC and transient eddies transport energy poleward, the latter
dominating everywhere except at low latitudes. The meridional energy flux divergence for the
MMC is positive below 25â—¦in the ascending branch of the Hadley cell, and negative between 25â—¦
13
