Müller-Bravo et al.: SNe Ia NIR Analysis with PCA
from Fe II and Co II to the Y and H bands could possibly ex-
plain the relation between the C0 and C1 components seen for
these bands (see Fig. 3). However, a caveat with these simula-
tions is that they are not fully non-LTE (Collins et al. 2022),
which would produce more realistic results.
In the next section, we will explore correlations between
light-curve parameters and PCA components to help disentan-
gle the effects of different physical properties.
6.3. Comparison to light-curve parameters
To have a better understanding about the physics behind each
of the PCA components, we proceed to compare them against
different light-curve parameters. We calculate the linear relation
for each pair of parameters, by using the Pearson correlation co-
efficient (ρ) and p-value. The values of ρ range from −1, com-
pletely anti-correlated, to 1, completely correlated, where 0 is
no correlation. The p-value tells the probability of the null hy-
pothesis (slope of the linear relation being equal to zero) being
true. Commonly, if the p-value is below 0.05, the null hypothesis
is discarded. We use Monte-Carlo sampling (1000 realizations)
from the light-curve parameters and their respective uncertain-
ties to propagate the errors into ρ and the p-value. We assume
no uncertainty for the PCA coefficients (p0 and p1) as PCA does
not propagate uncertainty.
6.3.1. NIR peak absolute magnitude
In the top and bottom panels of Fig. 4, relations between the
NIR peak absolute magnitudes5, and the first two PCA compo-
nents (p0 and p1) are presented. No correlations are found for
the J6 and H bands, although the Y band shows a significant but
relatively weak correlation. If SNe Ia were to be true standard
candles in the NIR, no correlations would be expected between
their peak brightness and other light-curve parameters, which is
what the J and H band show. However, the Y band, being closer
to the optical wavelengths than the other two bands, is likely not
as homogeneous around first NIR peak. The standardization of
the Y band is studied in Sect. 6.6.
6.3.2. Color-stretch, sBV
In the top panels of Fig. 5, we show the relation between p0 and
sBV for each of the NIR bands. sBV works as a tracer of the time
when the iron-group elements recombine (Fe iii→Fe ii; appendix
of Galbany et al. 2023). If this were to be true, we would ex-
pect very strong correlations between these parameters. Indeed,
it can be seen that both J and H bands show strong correlations
between sBV and p0, but the Y band does not. However, the latter
shows a strong correlation between sBV and p1, while the other
two bands do not (see bottom panels of Fig. 5). As sBV corre-
lates with MNi, this is evidence in favour of our interpretation in
Sect. 6.2. Additionally, Lu et al. (2023) already showed that sBV
can successfully capture the NIR light-curve shape of SNe Ia.
However, it is worth noting that this parameter does not corre-
late with all PCA components, so the NIR variability may be
more complex than one could expect. A caveat in this compar-
ison is that the the SNooPy NIR templates, used for correcting
the light curves (Sect. 4), are based on the sBV parameter, so a
5 Assuming a cosmology with Ωm = 0.3, Ωλ = 0.7 and H0 =
70 km s−1 Mpc−1.
6 The correlation for p1 in the J band is driven by a single data point,
at the bottom left.
completely independent comparison is not possible as the PCA
and sBV were linked from the start.
6.3.3. Optical peak absolute magnitude
It is known that the light curves of SNe Ia are primarily powered
by the decay of 56Ni (Colgate & McKee 1969). Hence, their peak
bolometric brightness is proportional to the MNi produced in the
explosion (known as Arnett’s rule; Arnett 1982). As most of the
luminosity (∼85%) of SNe Ia is emitted at optical wavelengths
(Maguire 2017), the optical luminosity at peak can be used as a
proxy for MNi (e.g. Stritzinger et al. 2006). We found a correla-
tion between the optical peak absolute magnitudes (BV bands)
and p1 for the Y band and p0 for the J band. This is shown in
Fig. 6. These correlation aligns with our analysis from Sect. 6.2,
where C1 describes the contribution of MNi for the Y band and C0
for the J band, although no correlation was found for the H band.
It is possible that MNi could have less influence towards redder
wavelengths given the diminishing strength and significance of
the correlation from Y to H.
6.4. Comparison to host-galaxy properties
It has been known for over a decade that the environment in
which SNe Ia reside affects their peak optical brightness, where
SNe in more massive environments are brighter, on average,
compared to those in less massive hosts, after standardization
(e.g. Kelly et al. 2010; Lampeitl et al. 2010; Sullivan et al. 2010).
However, whether this dependence is mainly due to external fac-
tors, such as dust (Brout & Scolnic 2021), or other intrinsic ef-
fects (e.g. Ginolin et al. 2024), is still under debate.
NIR observations of SNe Ia can provide clues on this mat-
ter as these wavelengths are less affected by dust extinction. In
fact, it has already been shown in recent years that the NIR peak
brightness of SNe Ia does depend on the environment in which
they reside (e.g. Uddin et al. 2020; Ponder et al. 2021; Uddin
et al. 2024), most likely implying that dust is not the dominat
mechanism behind this relation. However, to our knowledge, the
effect of the environment on the NIR light curves beyond first
peak has not been explored yet, which can give us new insight
on the physics of these transients.
In this work, we use previous estimates of the host-galaxy
masses from the literature. Uddin et al. (2024) provides host-
galaxy masses for the entire CSP sample (CSP-I and CSP-
II), which represents a large fraction of the samples used (see
Sect. 5.1). In addition, Ponder et al. (2021) estimated host-galaxy
masses for several SNe from different surveys and others from
the literature. Although they also include CSP-I, we prioritize
the values from Uddin et al. (2024) for consistency. Finally, Pe-
terson et al. (2024) provide values for the DEHVILS sample.7
Although different studies estimate host masses with different
methods, they usually agree relatively well.
In Fig. 7, the relation between host-galaxy stellar mass,
log10(M/M⊙), and p0 is shown. Although no correlation is found,
a possible lack of SNe with faint J-band secondary peak in low-
mass hosts is apparent. However, this could be due to a bias
given the relatively small number of SNe in the sample. Addi-
tionally, no clear trend is found with p1, implying that the en-
vironment has no visible effect on the secondary NIR peak of
7 Erik Peterson was kind enough to share with us the host-galaxy
masses, including uncertainties, estimated with Prospector (Leja et al.
2017; Johnson et al. 2021), as those in Peterson et al. (2024) do not
include these uncertainties.
Article number, page 7 of 16
