 
16
Moon or Mars are expected to be significantly higher than those observed in this study, future 
investigations should also consider experiments with commensurate exhaust velocities, 
temperatures, and surface properties.  
 
4.6 Shear Strength 
While this study did not make any attempt to directly measure the relationship between 
viscous erosion rate and shear strength, previous studies have shown the important 
relationships between shear strength, cohesion, and bulk density more directly (Dotson et al., 
2023, 2024). These previous studies represented shear strength as a 3-dimensional surface that 
increases with an increase in density and normal load, where cohesion represents one of the 
edges of this 3-dimensional surface. Since viscous erosion rate generally decreases with an 
increase in cohesion and bulk density as described above, viscous erosion rates will likely be 
reduced where granular shear strength is high; generally consistent with both Roberts (1963) 
and Metzger (2024a). However, additional research is needed to understand the influence of 
these geotechnical properties, shear strength, and erosion rate, particularly for granular 
materials with cohesion greater than 1,000 Pa. Additionally, since Dotson et al. (2024) 
demonstrated that shear strength can change with absorbed atmospheric water increasing 
interparticle cohesion, additional plume tests should be conducted in vacuum or under dry 
conditions for comparison. 
However, measurement of normal and shear velocities along the crater wall are 
required to fully understand and predict the relationship between shear strength and viscous 
erosion rates. This can be challenging as the crater geometry is ever-changing with time and 
sample density changes as a function of depth. Studies are already underway to directly 
measure the shear and normal force from impinging flow within the crater, leveraging 3-D 
prints of LiDAR scans from this study. Such investigations are expected to reveal areas of 
maximum erosion rate within a steady-state crater, ultimately providing insight into the flow 
behavior and fundamental characteristics associated with crater formation and development. 
 
5.0 CONCLUSION 
Geotechnical properties play an important role in PSI events and determining erosion 
rates from plumes impinged on granular material. The results of this study show that more 
complex particle size distributions, likely owing to higher internal angles of friction, can change 
the overall crater shape and may influence erosion rates. Measurements in this study also show 
that viscous erosion rate decreases with an increase in bulk density, particularly when 
transitioning from an uncompacted to a slightly compacted state. Higher levels of cohesion may 
help to reduce erosion rates form PSI events to an extent but can also increase erosion rates for 
values greater than roughly 1,000 Pa, potentially due to particle clumping. The potential energy 
of lifting a particle over a neighboring particle tends to dominate erosion rate over cohesion 
contributions, particularly for lower mass flow rates near 125 slpm. The equations for viscous 
erosion rate presented by Metzger (2024a) generally match experimental data from this study 
with a few adjustments, including using sample cohesion as an input instead of cohesive energy 
density. A modified version of such equations, determined from experimental data, is 
presented but should be limited to models where cohesion is less than 1,000 Pa. The viscous 
erosion rate likely decreases with shear strength, but additional tests are needed to measure 
