13 
 
by differences in equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS). For example, CanESM5, with the largest 
ECS (5.6˚C from Meehl et al., 2020), provides the highest values in warming rate and GMST 
anomaly by the end of the analysis year, and MIRCO6, with the smallest ECS (2.6˚C), shows the 
lowest values (Figure 1e,f). However, the effect of ECS on OHUE is not as evident (Figure 1a). 
Although ECS is an important factor in determining the ocean warming rate and GMST anomaly, 
its influence on OHUE appears to be less pronounced, potentially due to other oceanic processes 
such as circulation or heat distribution that vary across models. Further analysis is needed to 
understand the underlying mechanisms. 
The vertical profile of ocean temperature responses (Figure S2) also shows some inter-model 
differences. For instance, the penetration of the volcano-eruption-related cooling signal is 
shallower in CanESM5 compared to the other models (Figure S2 in Supporting Information). This 
leads to a smaller magnitude of OHUE variation in CanESM5 (Figure 1), which may be related to 
differences in vertical diffusivity. Further investigation is needed to better understand the role of 
mixing processes in shaping OHUE responses, and in general more theory is needed to understand 
the timescale of response of OHUE to forcing (akin., Marshall and Zanna, 2014).  
Regarding the spatial pattern of OHUE evolution, the IAP and Ishii show notable differences 
before the 1990’s (Figure 3), which are linked with the sparseness of earlier records (Swart et al., 
2018). The models show a response more similar to IAP, but this does not necessarily imply that 
it is accurate. We would need more accurate and long-term observational data, particularly in under 
sampled regions like the Southern Ocean, to provide more robust validation and improve model 
projections. In addition, given the large internal variability and the relatively small signal-to-noise 
ratio during the historical period, it would be beneficial to investigate model differences using 
strong forcing scenarios and a much larger ensemble of models in future studies. 
As shown in both the data and models, OHUE has already exhibited a noticeable decrease in 
the early 21st century (Figure 1a). It is mainly due to reduced efficiency in the Southern Ocean 
(Figure 3). When considering the moderate emissions scenario (Shared Socioeconomic Pathways 
2-4.5), almost all models (except CESM2LE) show a linear decrease in OHUE through to the end 
of the 21st century (Figure S7 in Supporting Information). This decline is potentially influenced 
by the deep ocean warming up and increased stratification, which hinders the penetration of excess 
heat (Gregory et al., 2015; Li et al., 2020; Bourgeois et al., 2022). To further understand the impact 
of future volcanic eruptions on OHUE and the climate system, idealized experiments simulating 
large volcanic events combined with future emission scenarios should be conducted. These 
experiments could help quantify the potential long-lasting effects on ocean heat uptake and provide 
insights into the interplay between different forcing mechanisms.  
 
 
