CHI ’25, April 26-May 1, 2025, Yokohama, Japan
Jian Zhang, Wafa Johal, and Jarrod Knibbe
Virtual sizes [cm]
Virtual sizes [cm]
Virtual sizes [cm]
Virtual sizes [cm]
Virtual sizes [cm]
Virtual angles [°]
Virtual angles [°]
Virtual angles [°]
Virtual angles [°]
Virtual angles [°]
Physical Object 1
Size: 3cm Angle: 8°
Physical Object 2
Size: 6cm Angle: 8°
Physical Object 3
Size: 9cm Angle: 8°
Physical Object 4
Size: 6cm Angle: 16°
Physical Object 5
Size: 6cm Angle: 0°
Figure 3: Proportion of choosing ”virtual smaller”. Blue areas show instances configurations in which the illusion holds, where
grey areas indicate cube pairings where the illusions break.
permitted to move their fingers along the surfaces of the object as
this could have served to reveal more geometric information about
the object in question.
Prior to beginning, we asked each participant to perform three
example object grasps (with physical and virtual properties: 6cm-16°
and 6cm-0°, 9cm-8° and 3cm-0°, 9cm-8° and 9cm-16°, showcasing
both size and angle incongruences) for training. The experiment
commenced right after. The participants had two breaks during the
experiments. The procedure took 50 min on average. During the
study, the experimenter monitored the participants, to ensure the
tasks were completed correctly (i.e., the participants lifted the ob-
jects from the centre line). In case of failure, the experimenter would
repeat failed trials later during the study. However, no noticeable er-
rors were made by participants. A video figure of the experimental
setup and procedure can be found in the supplementary materials.
3.5
Participants
We recruited 40 right-handed participants contributing to 20 data
points for each grasping combination. The recruitment information
was posted on a public university website. Among the participants,
21 of them identified themselves as females and 19 as males. Their
ages ranged from 18 to 38 and the average age was 24.6 (SD=4.1).
Their average thumb-index finger span was 16.6cm (SD=2.0). There
were 14 participants who claimed they had no prior experience
in VR, while 25 claimed some experience and 1 claimed extensive
experience. The study was approved by the Ethics Board of the
university. Each participant received a gift card with the value of
20 USD as compensation for participating in the experiment.
4
Results
To begin, we calculated the proportions of responses to the 2AFC
questions. If less then 25% or more than 75% of participants select
”virtual smaller” or ”virtual less tilted”, then there is a 75% proba-
bility for them to notice differences between physical (haptic) and
virtual (visual) stimulus. Following this, illusions are considered
effective when the proportions of responses are between 25% and
75%. This forms the illusion space. The proportions of participants
selecting ”virtual smaller” are shown in Fig.3. In this heatmap, the
coloured cells show the illusion space where participants tend to
believe they are grasping objects with the same properties in virtual
and physical scenes, while the grey cells show when the illusion
breaks. As the virtual sizes increase, the proportion of selecting
”virtual smaller” drops. The proportions of answering ”virtual less
tilted” is shown in Fig. 4. When the values of the virtual angles are
smaller, the proportion of selecting ”virtual less tilted” increases.
According to the results, given the object step sizes we chose (1
