2.1. DHR bimodules. If A is a C∗-algebra, recall that a correspondence over A is a right
Hilbert A module X together with a (non-degenerate) homomorphism from A to the adjointable
operators on X (see [CHPJP22] for a detailed exposition). We usually think of a correspondence
as an (algebraic) A-A bimodule X equipped with a right A-valued inner product ⟨ξ|η⟩for
ξ, η ∈X, which is conjugate linear in ﬁrst variable and right A-linear in the second.
The collection of all correspondences over A forms a C∗-tensor category we call Corr(A),
whose objects are correspondences over A and morphisms are adjointable bimodule intertwiners.
The monoidal product is the relative tensor product, denoted
X ⊠A Y.
A projective basis of a correspondence is a ﬁnite sequence (ξi)n
i=1 ⊆X such that
(2.1)
x =
X
i
ξi ⟨ξi|x⟩
holds for all x ∈X. Note that the existence of a projective basis only depends on X as a
right Hilbert A module, and not on the structure of the left action. It is not hard to show that
the existence of a projective basis is equivalent to X being ﬁnitely generated projective as an
(algebraic) right A-module.
We can use projective bases to make the connection with algebraic quantum ﬁeld theory
(AQFT), generalizing the Doplicher-Haag-Roberts (DHR) theory approach to superselection
sectors. In AQFT, the DHR C∗-tensor category can be deﬁned in terms of localized, trans-
portable endomorphisms of the quasi-local algebra. An endomorphism ρ is localized in a small
region F if ρ(a) = a for all a localized in the complement of F. Transportability is deﬁned by
the property that for any small region F, ρ is unitarily conjugate to an endomorphism localized
there.
To translate this into correspondences, we note that an endomorphism ρ: A →A yields a
correspondence ρA, which is A as a right Hilbert A module, with left action given by ρ. However,
this abstract bimodule does not recover the endomorphism itself, and thus we cannot a-priori
make sense of localized, transportable bimodules. However, if we choose the 1-element projective
basis 1 ∈ρA, then we recover ρ as the matrix coeﬃcient of the Hilbert module ρ(a) = ⟨1|a · 1⟩.
Furthermore, if we pick any unitary u ∈ρA, we see that that Ad(u) ◦ρ = ⟨u|a · u⟩. Thus the
correspondence picture allows us to collect all unitary conjugacy classes of an endomorphism
into one object, and recover them by picking (unitary) projective bases.
The idea behind DHR-bimodules is to focus on this later point, but keep it a bit more general
by not requiring endomorphisms (encoded by the special type of projective basis), but more
generally amplimorphisms encoded by arbitrary projective bases. An amplimorphism is a (not
necessarily unital) homomorphism π: A →Mn(A). This is required to capture the full level
of generality of super-selection theory, since in the setting of abstract spin chains, the local
algebras are ﬁnite dimensional, and in particular are not purely inﬁnite. The idea to apply this
to abstract spin chains has its origins in the earlier work of [NS97], but was more developed
recently in [Jon24].
We now give a formal deﬁnition of DHR-bimodules, following [Jon24]. We denote the category
of dualizable C∗-correspondences over A by Corrd(A).
Deﬁnition 2.6. Let A• be an abstract spin chain and X a dualizable correspondence over the
quasi-local algebra A. Given a subset F ⊆Z, we say a vector ξ ∈X is localized in F if we have
aξi = ξia
for all a ∈AF c.
The bimodule X is a called a DHR-bimodule if there exists an r ≥0 such that for any interval
I of length at least r, there is a projective basis (ξi)i for X localized in I. The full C∗-tensor
subcategory of Corrd(A) consisting of DHR bimodules is denoted DHR(A•).
Under Condition 2.2, the tensor category DHR(A•) is braided [Jon24, Theorem 3.13]. The
braiding can be explicitly described as follows. For two DHR-bimodules X and Y , pick pro-
jective bases {ξi} ⊆X and {ηj} ⊆Y localized in I and J respectively, where I and J are
5
