Kerr enhanced optomechanical entanglement via reservoir design
Yan Li,1, ∗Cheng Liu,1, ∗Yu-Hong Liu,1, ∗Yue-Hui Zhou,2 and Jie-Qiao Liao1, 3, †
1Key Laboratory of Low-Dimensional Quantum Structures and Quantum Control of Ministry of Education,
Key Laboratory for Matter Microstructure and Function of Hunan Province,
Department of Physics and Synergetic Innovation Center for Quantum Effects and Applications,
Hunan Normal University, Changsha 410081, China
2School of Information, Hunan University of Humanities, Science and Technology, Loudi 417000, China
3Institute of Interdisciplinary Studies, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, 410081, China
Quantum entanglement is a crucial resource in quantum technologies, enabling advancements
in quantum computing, quantum communication, and quantum precision measurement. Here, we
propose a method to enhance optomechanical entanglement by introducing an optical Kerr non-
linear medium and a squeezed vacuum reservoir of the optomechanical cavity. By performing the
displacement and squeezing transformations, the system can be reduced to a standard linearized op-
tomechanical system with normalized driving detuning and linearized-coupling strength, in which the
optical and mechanical modes are, respectively, coupled to an optical vacuum bath and a mechanical
heat bath. We focus on the entanglement generation in the single stable regime of the system. By
evaluating the steady-state logarithm negativity, we find that the optomechanical entanglement can
be enhanced within a wide range of the Kerr constant. In addition, the Kerr nonlinearity can extend
the stable region, enabling considerable entanglement generation in the blue sideband-parameter re-
gion. We also investigate the dependence of the entanglement generation on the average thermal
phonon occupation of the mechanical bath and the optical driving amplitude. It is found that the
presence of the Kerr nonlinearity allows the generation of optomechanical entanglement even when
the thermal phonon occupation of the mechanical bath is as high as 3000. Our findings will provide
valuable insights into enhancing fragile quantum resources in quantum systems.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Cavity
optomechanics
primarily
investigates
the
radiation-pressure interaction between optical modes and
mechanical modes, along with the novel quantum effects
and applications arising from this interaction [1–3]. The
study of cavity optomechanics holds dual significance in
both fundamental theoretical research [4, 5] and cutting-
edge applied research [6].
Not only does it advance
the fundamental theoretical exploration of quantum the-
ory, including macroscopic quantum behaviors [7, 8] and
quantum-classical boundary [4, 9], but it also advances
the applied research value in frontier quantum technolo-
gies, especially concerning quantum precision measure-
ment [10–12] and quantum sensing [13–15].
In cavity
optomechanics, the optomechanical entanglement holds
significant research meaning for both aspects [16–27], be-
cause quantum entanglement is located at the kernel po-
sition of quantum theory [28, 29], and it is an important
resource in quantum information science [30].
In general, it is expected to generate strong entangle-
ment for implementing various quantum information pro-
cessing tasks. In cavity optomechanics, various strate-
gies have been proposed, such as reservoir engineering
techniques [31–33], multimode coupling and collective ef-
fects [34–36], the injection of squeezed light [37], and the
quantum interference effect [38, 39]. Usually, quantum
entanglement induced by interaction can be enhanced
∗These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Contact author: jqliao@hunnu.edu.cn
via increasing the coupling strength. For linearized op-
tomechanical interaction, the coupling strength can be
enhanced by increasing the driving strength. However,
the large driving amplitude is subject to the unstability
issue [40]. This motivates us to explore other methods to
enhancing the optomechanical interaction.
In this work, we propose to enhance the linearized op-
tomechanical coupling by introducing a Kerr nonlinearity
into the optical cavity. Under the linearization, the Kerr
nonlinearity will lead to the two-photon terms ˆa†2 and
ˆa2, which could amplify the optomechanical coupling. To
suppress the noise amplified by these terms, we design in
advance a squeezed vacuum reservoir to the cavity field.
By carefully choosing the squeezing parameters, the ad-
ditional noise can be completely canceled, reducing the
cavity-field environment to a vacuum bath [41–44]. Con-
cretely, we apply the displacement and squeezing trans-
formations to realize the linearization and amplification
effects [45]. We also analyze the changes in the scaled
detuning and effective coupling strength due to the Kerr
nonlinearity. The single- and multi-valued solutions of
the cavity-field displacement amplitude are determined
to identify the operational regime. The stability is ana-
lyzed with the Routh-Hurwitz criterion [46] and we focus
on the single-valued parameter range in this work. Note
that the Kerr nonlinearity has recently been suggested
to enhance the optomechanical effects, such as optical
spring [47], optomechanical cooling [48, 49] and entan-
glement [50, 51]. However, the amplified noise has not
been canceled in these studies. In addition, the realiza-
tion of the Kerr nonlinearity in optomechanical system
has been proposed [52].
arXiv:2504.06696v1  [quant-ph]  9 Apr 2025
