F. Rigamonti et al.: The perturbed BLR of PG 1302-102
flux9. The amplitude ratio between the [OIII]λ4959Å and the
[OIII]λ5007Å is assumed to be 1:3 (Osterbrock & Ferland
2006), while the ratio of the individual Fe lines is taken from
Véron-Cetty et al. (2004). We note that our approach is one of
the most general in treating the Fe contribution in type I AGNs;
we allow for independent broad and narrow emissions across all
expected wavelengths without constraining the fit to any specific
template. To check if our results depend on the specific method
adopted to model the Fe contribution, we compared it against
other approaches (e.g., Boroson & Green 1992; Tsuzuki et al.
2006; Marziani et al. 2009) where the Fe contribution is mod-
eled by applying a Gaussian kernel on a reference template. We
find that the considered templates were statistically unfavored
and that the estimates on the other parameters were not signifi-
cantly affected by the specific method adopted.
Finally, Model 1 includes an additional “very” broad com-
ponent that is also significantly redshifted if it is associated with
the Hβ emission line (see the discussion below). Such compo-
nent is described through a Gaussian profile with its own ampli-
tude (AVB), wavelength shift with respect to the Hβ narrow line
(∆µVB), and FWHM (FWHMVB) parameters. As we discuss be-
low, the same component is not statistically required, and there-
fore not included in Model 1 for the Hγ. Model 2 is a replica of
Model 1, but for the fact that it does not include the additional
very broad component.
We report in Tab. 1 a summary of the model parameters, their
prior10 and the best-fit estimates from Model 1 and Model 2. The
last row of Tab. 1 reports the evidence of the two models that
points toward a decisive preference (according to Jeffreys 1939)
for Model 1 against Model 2 (∆log Z = 1209). The most sig-
nificant differences among the estimated parameters of the two
models regard the continuum and the broad component of the
Balmer line. The differences in the continuum parameters might
be explained as a consequence of the relatively small wavelength
range considered. Although the parameters defining the contin-
uum of Model 1 and Model 2 are quite different, still, the pre-
dicted continuum flux is almost indistinguishable between the
two cases in the considered wavelength range. On the other hand,
the difference in the broad Balmer lines is mainly due to the in-
clusion of the very broad Gaussian component in Model 1, which
reduces ∆µB (from ≃12Å to ≃7Å in the case of the Hβ) com-
pared to Model 2. Still, in both cases, the presence of asymmetry
towards red wavelengths remains evident for the Balmer lines.
Fig. 2 shows the result of the fit of Model 1 against the
ESPRESSO data (the results obtained from Model 2 are reported
in appendix A). The top panel shows the data in gray with a
Gaussian smoothing (σ ≃0.07Å) and the best-fit model with
a black line. The contributions of the continuum and each indi-
vidual emission line to the overall spectrum are highlighted in
different colors. The bottom panel shows the residuals defined
as the difference between the model and the data divided by the
error where the typical error on the data is ≃0.045 in units of F0.
Overall, Model 1 reproduces the data well, as can be deduced by
the lack of strong systematics in the residuals and the agreement
observed between the smoothed spectra.
The superposition of the different Gaussian contributions re-
sults in emission profiles that deviate from a symmetric shape.
More specifically, the BELs of the Hγ, Hβ are clearly redshifted
9 The spectrum considered in the analysis is normalized to a reference
flux F0 = 2.96 × 10−15erg/s/cm2/Å chosen to have a flux close to 1 at
λ ≃5100Å.
10 We assumed either uniform or log-uniform priors for all the parame-
ters.
(see ∆µB ≃440 km/s in Tab. 1). Such an asymmetric shape of
the emission profile was already observed in Graham et al. 2015b
although only for the Hβ and the Hα11 and not for the Hγ. In this
work, given the high resolution of the ESPRESSO data, we con-
firm the presence of such a redshifted component and character-
ize its features with higher precision. Moreover, we also detect,
for the first time, the presence of such redshifted asymmetry in
the Hγ emission line. Given our results and the considerations
made in Graham et al. 2015b about the presence of a similar red-
shifted component in the Hα, we argue that such behavior could
be common among all the Balmer lines.
Our fiducial model indicates the presence of an additional
broad (FWHMVB ≃12600km/s) Gaussian component that ap-
pears to be very redshifted (∆µVB ≃4000km/s) if associated to
the Hβ emission. The improvements in the modeling when in-
cluding such component are quite significant as can be deduced
by comparing the residual between Fig. 2 and Fig. A.1 in the re-
gion comprising the Hβ and [OIII] doublet and by the increase
in the Bayesian evidence. This is the first time such a broad and
extremely redshifted component has been detected in PG 1302-
102. However, it seems that a non-negligible fraction of quasars,
with a spectrum similar to that of PG 1302-102 (i.e., asymmetric
and redshifted Hβ emission line), shows the presence of such
feature (e.g., Sulentic et al. 2002; Marziani et al. 2009). The
physical origins of this peculiar component are still debated (see
Sec. 4 for a more detailed discussion), and its inclusion is usu-
ally justified on empirical grounds, as it significantly improves
the fit residuals. If such a component is connected to a process
in the BLR, it might be reasonable to expect its presence to be
ubiquitous in all the Balmer lines. We attempted fitting for an ad-
ditional very broad and very redshifted component also for the
Hγ emission line without finding any increase in the Bayesian
evidence and, therefore rejecting the detection of such a compo-
nent in the Hγ12.
The additional Gaussian component included in the model-
ing of [OIII], Hγ, and Hβ NELs is shifted toward bluer wave-
lengths, (∆µO ≃−340km/s) and is relatively broad (FWHMO ≃
1260 km/s). Given the observed properties, we interpret it as
the presence of an ionized gas outflow affecting the NLR of
PG 1302-102. We stress that, this is the first detection of a pos-
sible outflow component in PG 1302-102, which has only been
made possible thanks to the high resolution of ESPRESSO.
From the BELs parameter (i.e., FWHMB), assuming the
BLR being virialized and the broad component of the Balmer
lines tracing the gravitational potential dominated by a SMBH,
we can estimate its mass (MBH) through single epoch method
(see Tab. 4 of Shen et al. 2024):
log10
 MBH
M⊙
!
= 0.85+0.5 log10
 
L5100
1044erg/s
!
+
2.0 log10
 FWHM
km/s
!
,
(2)
where L5100 is the luminosity at λ = 5100Å and the FWHM is
the full width at half maximum of the broad Hβ emission line.
If relying on the estimates from Model 1, using L5100 = (3.66 ±
0.03) × 1045erg/s and FWHM = FWHMB = 3972 ± 18km/s, we
11 The authors report the presence of a redshifted tail also in the Hα.
Since that line does not fall in the observed wavelength range we cannot
confirm its presence.
12 Even fixing the amplitude ratio AHβB/AHβVB to be the same of
AHγ/AHγVB we did not observe any increase in the model evidence.
Article number, page 5 of 13
