13
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIG. 3: Zero modes on the interval −∞< x < ∞with S-shaped, symmetric, or asymmetric Pöschl–Teller, or constant fields m(x) and v(x)
as in Fig. 2, but where the width of the smooth domain wall is larger than the characteristic decay lengths w > ξ.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
Concluding, we derived the analytical form of the wavefunctions of nonhermitian topological zero modes localized at smooth
domain walls, by extending the modified Jackiw-Rebbi equation to nonhermitian systems with line gaps. Using these analytical
results, we showed that the nonhermitian bulk-boundary correspondence for these systems can be directly derived by analyzing
the asymptotic and localization properties of the zero modes. We thus identified a universal relation between the decay rates and
oscillation wavelengths of the nonhermitian topological zero modes and the underlying scalar fields. This relation provides a
direct link between the bulk properties and experimentally measurable physical quantities, which are, in principle, accessible via
spatially resolved spectroscopies, suggesting an experimental way to probe nonhermitian topological zero modes. Analogously to
their hermitian counterpart, the nonhermitian topological zero modes exhibit different localization behaviors, from featureless zero
modes in the sharp domain wall limit to modes with "short" or "long hair" in the presence of smooth domain walls. Additionally,
we showed that these modes can exhibit either pure exponential decay or exponentially damped oscillations in different regimes.
These findings allow us to understand the physical properties of the zero modes, such as localization and oscillating behavior, that
cannot be understood by topological considerations alone.
Acknowledgments
P. M. is partially supported by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) Grant-in-Aid for Early-Career Scien-
tists KAKENHI Grant No. 23K13028 and No. 20K14375, Grant-in-Aid for Transformative Research Areas (A) KAKENHI
Grant No. 22H05111, and Grant-in-Aid for Transformative Research Areas (B) KAKENHI Grant No. 24H00826.
