Figure 8.
An example of normalised eigenvectors at criticality, Ra = Rac & k = kc, associated with the
fastest growing mode. Note that the solid and dotted lines represent the real and imaginary parts of the
eigenvectors, respectively. The left panel shows the imaginary part of u, and the real part of w. The right panel
shows the (real) b, γq and m eigenvectors. The dashed lines mark the basic state LCL (zs, red) and the LFC
(blue). Note that the normalisation is such that wi = bi = qi = ur = 0, so u is π/(2kc) out of phase with
w, b, q & m, where kc is the critical wavenumber. The results are shown for the parameter values: RHsurf = 0.6,
bsurf = 0.05 and r = 1 × 10−5 and Ra = Rac = 7.80 × 105.
Below zs, b′ < 0 and q′ > 0 ⇒RH′ > 0, so the linear perturbation moistens the up-
drafts lower (unsaturated) region. Computation of the perturbation relative humidity
reveals that RH′ ≥0 for z ≥zs too, i.e. q′ ≥α¯qb′ despite increase in qs due to warm-
ing. However the increase in RH is much larger in the lower unsaturated region than
it is in the upper saturated region. The moistening effect of the linear perturbation
in updraft regions results in increased levels of condensation, and a decrease in zs
in updraft regions. The linear perturbation has the opposite effect in subsiding re-
gions, causing a drying effect which reduces the levels of condensation and increases zs.
To assess the effect of the linear perturbation on the conditional stability, we
examine the structure of the perturbation b′. The parcel buoyancy profile remains
the same, however the buoyancy profile of the environment changes with the linear
perturbation. The ˆb eigenvector in Figure 8 shows the effect of the linear perturbation
in an updraft region. For z < zs, b′ = ˆb < 0, so that the linear perturbation is making
the environment less buoyant. Recalling Figure 1, this reduces the CIN in the lower
region, and causes the LFC (where bp = bE) to decrease. There is a small vertical
region above the LFC for which b′ < 0, and so the pCAPE in the region is increasing.
However, above zs, the linear perturbation makes the environment more buoyant since
b′ > 0 here, which reduces the pCAPE. Therefore, the linear perturbation acts in
updraft regions by making the lower levels more unstable by reducing the CIN, LFC
and increasing the pCAPE in a small vertical region just above the LFC, however,
it has a stabilising influence on the upper levels, causing a reduction in the overall
pCAPE. The effect of the linear perturbation on the subsiding regions is opposite to
that in the updraft regions: the linear perturbation acts by stabilising the lower levels
up to just above the LFC, and destabilises the upper levels.
The modal structure of the perturbation quantities over one wavelength is exhibited
in Figure 9. Note that the eigenvectors are normalised with max(wr) = 2 × 10−3 to
keep the perturbations small, relative to the basic state solution (to be consistent
with Figure 10). The arrows show the circulation from the moister updraft regions
20
