Bibliography
199
Acknowledgements
Paris, February 2025.
Now that two months have passed since I left Nikhef and Amsterdam, I am starting to better
realize how lucky I was to carry out my PhD there. For sure the place matters, and indeed
living in Amsterdam is great, but most important are the people you meet. Hoping not to forget
anyone ...
First, I would like to thank Juan, my supervisor, for having accompanied me during the
PhD. From the very beginning, you have always been positive and encouraging, keeping our
motivation high for the work. Thanks to your help and connections, I was able to meet
and collaborate with many physicists from all over the world. Thank you for your trust and
sponsorship. I am grateful to Mara and Wouter for having supported and monitored my
trajectory at Nikhef. I always appreciate your enthusiasm and passion in keeping track of
my progress. My gratitude also goes to the reading committee—Kjeld, Melissa, Daniel, and
Tristan—for providing me feedback on this thesis.
Most of the projects I worked on during the PhD were carried out in collaboration, which made
the work much easier and more enjoyable. In particular, I want to thank all the members of
the NNPDF collaboration: Richard, Alessandro, Stefano, Amedeo, Mark, Juan, Luigi, Stefano,
Tommaso, Felix, Peter, Emanuele, Tanjona, Juan, Tanishq, Roy, Maria, Christopher, Niccolò,
Andrea, Rabah and Zahari. Being part of your team has been a pleasure and an honor. Stefano,
Richard, and Maria, you also have been my mentors. I am grateful for your patience in correcting
my mistakes and reviewing all the details of our work. Thank you also for your guidance and
lessons in the PDF world. As special thanks go to Emanuele (the first person I met at Nikhef) for
your kindness and precision in guiding me through all the steps and moments where something
was not clear. Chatting with you is always a pleasure. I am immensely grateful to Felix, Tanjona
and Tommaso for assisting me in my day-to-day work and being good friends. Without your
knowledge and help all the work would have been impossible. In this respect, I would like
to thank also Alessandro, Roy and Juan for your help and teaching me all the insights of best
coding and working practices. Andrea and Niccolò, you have been my "PhD mates" and I will
always cherish our time spent together struggling to understand what we were doing debugging
code and sharing countless laughs. Thanks to all NNPDF, juniors and seniors, for the nice time
we spent during many conferences and workshops.
I am happy to thank also the SMEFiT collaboration: Eleni, Fabio, Juan, Alejo, Eugenia, Jaco,
Marion and Tommaso. Working with you during the early years of my PhD provided me with a
broader perspective on the HEP field, which was truly valuable.
