Rhombohedral graphite junctions as a platform for continuous tuning between
topologically trivial and non-trivial electronic phases
L. Soneji,1 S. Crampin,1, 2 and M. Mucha-Kruczy´nski1, 2, ∗
1Department of Physics, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath, BA2 7AY, United Kingdom
2Centre for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, University of Bath,
Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, United Kingdom
(Dated: 9th April 2025)
Manipulating the topological properties of quantum states can provide a way to protect them
against disorder.
However, typically, changing the topology of electronic states in a crystalline
material is challenging because their nature is underpinned by chemical composition and lattice
symmetry that are difficult to modify. We propose junctions between rhombohedral graphite crystals
as a platform that enables smooth transition between topologically trivial and non-trivial regimes
distinguished by the absence or presence of topological junction states. By invoking an analogy with
the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger model, the appearance of topological states is related to the symmetry of
the atomic stacking at the interface between the crystals.
The possibility to explore both the
topological and non-topological phases is provided by sliding the crystals with respect to each other.
Topology, the study of properties invariant under con-
tinuous deformations, plays an important role in physics
ranging from Gauss’s and Ampere’s laws of electromag-
netism, to the quantum Hall effect [1], optical vortices
[2] and the properties of space-time [3]. The topological
properties of quasiparticle dispersions provide a distinct
way of categorizing phases of matter [4], and underpin
the notion of the topological insulator:
an important
design principle in solid state physics [5], soft matter
physics [6], and photonics [7]. In a topological insula-
tor, an insulating bulk is accompanied by edge states
robust to perturbations that do not close the bulk band
gap.
Arguably the simplest description of edge states
is provided by the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) model: a
one-dimensional chain with alternating strong and weak
couplings between nearest neighbour sites which has been
extensively used as a framework to describe phenomena
in fields as varied as photonics [8, 9], excitonics [10, 11],
plasmonics [12, 13], magnonics [14, 15], acoustics [16, 17],
and circuit electronics [18, 19]. Originally conceived to
study defects/domain walls in polyacetylene [20], the rel-
ative simplicity of the SSH model allows to capture a
range of physical effects such as defect dynamics [20],
non-Hermiticity [8] and complex interchain geometries
[21].
Here, we show that rhombohedral graphite junctions
provide a realisation of a distinct set of defects in an
SSH chain. Atomic stacking and local symmetry at com-
mensurate interfaces between two rhombohedral graphite
crystals determine the presence or absence of topological
junction states localised at the interface. Furthermore,
translating one crystal with respect to the other allows
tracking of the evolution of topological junction states as
the system transitions between the topologically trivial
and non-trivial phases.
∗M.Mucha-Kruczynski@bath.ac.uk
A.
Topological junction states at interfaces of
rhombohedral crystals
Rhombohedral graphite consists of layers of graphene:
carbon atoms in a honeycomb arrangement. The layers
are stacked atop one other such that every atom has a
neighbour in the layer directly above or below, so called
ABC stacking equivalent to shifting each layer in succes-
sion by one carbon-carbon distance along the bond direc-
tion. The real and reciprocal space structures are shown
in Supplementary Note 1. Bringing together two differ-
ent rhombohedral graphite crystals into commensurate
alignment and restricting the layer stacking directly at
the junction to either rhombohedral (ABC-type), Bernal
(ABA-type) or simple-hexagonal (AA-type) alignment
results in five distinct infinite compound crystals. These
are fully specified by the four-layer stacking sequence
across the interface (|), with representative structures
AB|CA (ideal rhombohedral graphite), AB|BC, AB|AB,
AB|AC, and AB|BA. We show these junctions schemat-
ically in Fig. 1a; within each layer atoms occupy one of
two distinct sublattices (red and blue).
The alternating nature of the intra- and inter-layer
electronic hopping allows mapping of the low-energy elec-
tronic structure of rhombohedral graphite onto the SSH
model in the limit where only these two couplings are
considered [22–24] (we discuss corrections due to higher
order couplings below). Out-of-plane periodicity is pre-
served in bulk rhombohedral graphite, meaning elec-
tronic states possess an out-of-plane wave vector k, equiv-
alent to the one-dimensional wave vector in the SSH
model. While all junctions but AB|CA break this out-
of-plane translational symmetry, in-plane periodicity re-
mains and the electronic states possess in-plane wave vec-
tor q = (qx, qy) as a good quantum number. This allows
a connection between the SSH model and rhombohedral
graphite to be made at any fixed q. Consequently, re-
gardless of the junction geometry, one expects edge states
on the outer left and right surfaces of combined crystals.
arXiv:2504.06759v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  9 Apr 2025
