intervals: 8−30 s) and then disappears. In contrast, the narrow emsission feature in GRB 221009A
appears during the falling phase of the brightest pulse, with a duration of 100 s (time intervals:
246 −256 s and 270 −360 s) 22,23. Interestingly, the Fe absorption feature previously identified
during the prompt emission of GRB 990705 and GRB 011211 appears during the rising phase of
the main pulse 12,13. This implies a higher likelihood of detecting emission or absorption features
during time intervals near the peak of the main pulse in the prompt emission phase of GRBs. It is
worth noting that due to the very high photon flux of GRB 221009A, the Fermi-GBM experienced
Bad Time Interval (time interval affected by saturation) between 219 and 277 seconds 32. It is
possible that narrow emission features also exist during the rising phase of the main emission in
GRB 221009A.
Discussion
In general, standard models of prompt emission in GRBs do not predict the appearance of a tran-
sient MeV narrow emission component2,33,34. To explain our potential finding, we have explored
several possible scenarios. One possible explanation for the narrow emission feature is the blue-
shifted annihilation line of relatively cold (kBT ≪mec2, where kB is Boltzmann constant, T
is the temperature of the medium, me is the mass of the electron, and c is the speed of light)
electron-positron pairs. Within the emission region (resulting from internal shocks and/or mag-
netic reconnection) of GRB, electron-positron pairs are readily formed within the GRB jet (such
as two-photon pair production γγ −→e+e−2,33). Numerical simulations of GRB spectra indi-
cate that the generated spectra depend on the compactness of the fireball. In scenarios with high
compactness, electron-positron pairs play an essential role in shaping the GRB prompt emission
spectrum. In a pair-dominated fireball, a pair annihilation line is predicted35,36. In the observer
frame, a line is expected to appear at an energy of E±,line = Γmec2/(1 + z), where Γ is the bulk
Lorentz factor of the emitting region and z represents the redshift. For the typical energy Eline
is about 2.1 MeV of the observed lines in GRB 221023A, the bulk Lorentz factor of the emitting
region is required to be Γ is about 4(1+z). Considering a redshift of z = 2, the bulk Lorentz factor
Γ is about 12. In this scenario, how such a low bulk Lorentz factor is generated and maintained for
an extended period in the prompt emission of the GRB is an issue.
The second scenario involves the possibility that the narrow emission feature is an intrinsic
low-energy spectral line (such as the 6.4 keV fluorescent K-α iron line). This spectral line may
be emitted within the region associated with the supernova ejecta. Subsequently, the energy of the
spectral line could be boosted through up-scattering by the relativistic jet. The spectral line feature
identified in GRB 221023A is narrow, which implies that electrons scattering photons are cold.
This form of bulk Comptonization has already been proposed to occur within blazar jets37. The
5
