2
Rydberg states often occur in the microwave (MW)
frequency range [29].
In consequence, MW radiation
was extensively used for probing and interacting with
Rydberg atoms [17].
In this article we explore the interaction of MW
radiation with Rydberg atoms excited and detected
via EIT. The configuration corresponds to a three
photon (two optical and one MW) excitation scheme.
Alternatively, our experiment can be described as the
EIT spectroscopy of Rydberg atoms dressed by the MW
radiation.
We have recorded the Rydberg excitation
spectra as a function of MW frequency and observed a
variety of features some occurring at transition frequen-
cies between adjacent Rydberg states and others for
MW frequencies detuned from atomic transitions. The
latter are assigned to Rydberg atom pairs whose energy
levels are modified by DDI. Interestingly, some of the
features observed as a function of the MW frequency
correspond to an increased transparency of the sample
for the IR probing beam. We argue that such increased
EIT cannot be just the consequence of variations of the
Rydberg excitation probability of atom pairs but can be
understood as resulting from the strong mechanical effect
arising from the DDI within the pair. Our argument is
supported by experimental evidence and consistent with
a dressed Rydberg atom-pair modeling.
II.
EXPERIMENTS
A.
Experimental setup
The atomic sample consists of 87Rb atoms cooled and
trapped in a MOT. The temperature of the cloud is ∼100
µK and its density ρ = 108 atoms/mm−3, corresponding
to an average inter-atomic distance ρ−1/3
∼2 µm.
The atomic cloud has a typical diameter of ∼300 µm.
We use a standard MOT with cooling beams tuned
near the 5S1/2 (F=2) →5P3/2 (F=3) transition and
a repumping beam tuned to the 5S1/2 (F=1) →5P1/2
(F=1) transition.
Some cold atoms are excited to the Rydberg 55D3/2
states using the two-photon ladder excitation process
illustrated in Fig.
1.a.
An infrared (IR) probe laser
(λ ≃795 nm) resonantly excites ground-state atoms to
the 5P1/2 (F=2) state. A blue coupling laser (λ ≃474
nm) promotes the atoms to the 55D3/2 Rydberg state.
Both radiations originate from extended cavity diode
lasers.
The IR laser was stabilized to the transition
[5S1/2(F = 2) →5P1/2(F = 2)] by saturated absorption
spectroscopy.
The blue laser is stabilized to the two-
photon transition from the ground state to the Rydberg
state 55D3/2 in a hot Rb reference vapor cell, using the
IR laser as a first excitation step. The EIT of the IR
light provides the error signal for stabilization. At the
cold cloud position both beams have the same vertical
linear polarizations. The two beams counter-propagate
through the cold atomic cloud with a diameter of
approximately 50 µm.
The power of the IR and blue
beams were 50 nW and 5 mW respectively.
FIG. 1. a) Relevant energy level scheme. b) Spectroscopic
setup [MOT: cold atom cloud, DM: dichroic mirror, PD: pho-
todetector, MW: microwave radiation, CB: coupling beam
(blue), PB: probe beam (IR)].
A double-ridged horn antenna, located outside the
stainless steel vacuum chamber, generates vertically
polarized MW radiation. The typical MW electric field
amplitude at the position of the MOT was estimated
to be 0.4 V/m. The MW frequency was tuned over a
∼2 GHz interval including the transition frequencies
between the state 55D3/2 and the nearby 54F5/2, 56P3/2
and 56P1/2 states (see Fig.1.a).
B.
Results
Before investigating the effect of the MW field, we
verify the excitation of Rydberg atoms by scanning the
IR probe laser and monitoring its transmission through
the atomic cloud for a fixed frequency of the blue laser.
A visible increase in IR transmission was observed when
the two-photon resonance condition was met between
the ground and the 55D3/2 Rydberg state (∼40 %
transmission increase with FWHM ≈20 MHz ) .
We
loosely designate this transparency increase as EIT. As
a coherent phenomenon, EIT requires a high degree of
mutual coherence between the involved lasers which is
not be met in our setup. Nevertheless, the promotion of
atoms to the Rydberg state implies, in the steady state,
a reduction of the ground-state population which is the
main parameter controlling the IR beam absorption.
To investigate the effect of the MW field, we have
measured the change in probe beam absorption as a
function of the MW frequency while keeping the probe
and coupling optical field frequencies locked to the
