2
global depolarizing noise on the Bell pairs we also report
experimental results that we fit numerically. In further
experimental exploration we report the performance of
three different distillation protocols as a function of the
input Bell fidelity which we degrade by idling the Bell
states before distillation. We model the waiting time er-
ror using a non-Pauli noise model (using the damping-
dephasing channel [44, 45]) and include ZZ crosstalk
to obtain reasonable agreement with experimental data
both when distillation provides an improvement in Bell
fidelity and when it does not.
Our results show that (1) simple noise parameters of
a device can be turned into a non-Pauli noise model to
capture essential features of our entanglement distillation
protocols; (2) using the noise model it is possible to pick
one distillation protocol in favor of another; and (3) de-
pending on the metric of success for distillation, one may
or may not find broad improvement from the simplest
distillation protocols.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows.
Us-
ing standard notation (see App. A), we first summarize
well-known ideas of entanglement distillation in Sec. II.
These ideas include the recurrence protocol, what we call
the {ZX3B} distillation protocol (also called double se-
lection in [17]), impact of distillation on Bell pairs of
unequal Bell fidelity, and distillation under global depo-
larizing noise. The next section, Sec. III A, is devoted
to studying the effects of gate noise, measurement noise,
and local depolarizing noise on Bell state preparation and
entanglement distillation. In Sec. III B we augment the
noise model of the previous section by adding global de-
polarizing noise to qubits as they wait prior to being
distilled. We generate experimental data on supercon-
ducting qubits to mimic depolarizing noise using twirling.
Finally, in Sec. IV we report results on the experimental
study of three distillation protocols, two recurrence-type
protocols and the ZX3B protocol, as a function of idling
noise on superconducting qubits; we match this data nu-
merically using a damping-dephasing (non-Pauli) noise
model also described in that section.
II.
ENTANGLEMENT DISTILLATION
In this section we summarize the concept of distillation
based on and extending the recurrence protocol [1, 2]
and show some simple calculations based on depolarizing
models focusing on how the protocols suffer if there is an
imbalance in the fidelities of the input states.
A.
Recurrence (Z2B, X2B)
The minimal recurrence protocols, using two Bell
states (four qubits, 0, 1, 2, and 3), are shown in Fig. 1a
and Fig. 1b. In Fig. 1a we show Z2B recurrence where
the circuit measures Z0Z1 and Z2Z3, and post-selects for
the case where these two measurements, i and j, respec-
tively, equal each other. Replacing these ZZ measure-
ments with XX measurements results in what we call
X2B recurrence, shown in Fig. 1b.
Due to the nature of the measurement, Z2B can detect
single X or Y errors and X2B can detect single Z or Y
errors. In essence, these protocols measure a stabilizer
of the Bell state (either ZZ or XX) and discard upon
encountering an error. The only difference between Bell
state distillation compared to other forms of error detec-
tion in Clifford circuits is that the stabilizer measurement
happens in a distributed fashion, i.e. instead of comput-
ing the parity of the Bell state into one qubit, we com-
pute it into an entangled resource. This allows the par-
ity checks to happen locally on each half of the Bell pair
without further (quantum) communication across differ-
ent halves of a Bell pair.
We can gain some intuition for the performance of the
protocol by applying Z2B to Bell states with a stochastic
bit flip,
ρ02 = I ⊗Dp(ϕ02)
and
ρ13 = I ⊗Dq(ϕ13),
(1)
where ϕ is the maximally entangled state, the identity
channel I acts on qubits 0 and 1 and the bit flip channels
Dp and Dq (see App. A) act on qubits 2 and 3 respec-
tively with bit flip probabilities p and q. The measure-
ments i and j in Fig. 1b equal each other with probability
ps = (1−p)(1−q)+pq (sometimes called the acceptance
probability) and result in a distilled state ρ′
02 = I⊗Dr(ϕ)
where r = pq/ps. The maximum Bell fidelity before dis-
tillation, and Bell fidelity after distillation take values,
Fb = max(1−p, 1−q),
and
Fa = (1 −p)(1 −q)
ps
, (2)
respectively.
Interchanging p and q does not change
Fa, Fb, and ps, thus we let p ≤q, and write
Fa −Fb = 1
ps
p(1 −p)(1 −2q) ≥0,
(3)
where the inequality is strict whenever 0 < p ≤q < 1/2.
The strict inequality implies distillation improves Bell fi-
delity for all non-trivial p and q (under the assumption
of a perfect implementation of the distillation protocol).
This example demonstrates (1) recurrence in Fig. 1a re-
duces the X error rate from linear (O(p) or O(q)) to
quadratic, O(pq), with probability ps; (2) the reduction
occurs by post-selecting away those errors on qubits 2
and 3 which anti-commute with the Z2Z3 measurement.
Similar conclusions hold for the X2B recurrence protocol
when analyzed for phase-flip noise, i.e., Z errors.
B.
ZX3B Distillation
The limitation in the previous recurrence protocols was
that they are not simultaneously sensitive to phase flip
and bit flip error.
If we increase the number of input
Bell states to three (six qubits), then we can perform
