A&A proofs: manuscript no. main
Table 1. Metallicity dependence of the stellar winds of hot stars.
m
Method
Reference
OB
0.94
modified CAK
Abbott (1982)
0.5
modified CAK
Kudritzki et al. (1987)
0.8
modified CAK
Puls et al. (2000)
0.85
Monte Carlo calc.
Vink et al. (2001)
0.83
empiric ˙M (Hα only)
Mokiem et al. (2007)
0.5 – 0.8†
empiric ˙M (UV+opt.)
Marcolino et al. (2022)
0.66 – 1.64††
hydrodynamic stellar
Björklund et al. (2023)
atmosphere models
WN
0.86
Monte Carlo calc.
Vink & de Koter (2005)
1.2 ± 0.1
empiric ˙M
Hainich et al. (2017)
0.83 ± 0.09
empiric ˙M
Shenar et al. (2019, 2020)
1.3 ± 0.2
empiric ˙M
Tramper et al. (2016)
WC/WO
0.66
Monte Carlo calc.
Vink & de Koter (2005)
0.25 ± 0.08
empiric ˙M
Tramper et al. (2016)
OB+WR
0.86
empiric ˙M
this work
† The authors report that the metallicity dependence is a function
of luminosity. The quoted exponents refer to stars with luminosities
above log(L/L⊙) ≳5.4 (i.e. valid for most of our stars).
††The authors predict that the metallicity dependence is a function
of temperature. We calculated the metallicity exponents for the pro-
vided validity regime of their relation.
for very low Z. Given that our sample is to the nearby galaxies
and the SMC provides the lowest metallicity anchor, we advise
caution when extrapolating mass-loss relations to extremely low
metallicities.
4.2. The sharp increase in the mass-loss rate for stars near
the Eddington limit
The classical CAK theory predicts that stars approaching the
Eddington limit experience a significant increase in their mass-
loss rates, resulting in a dramatic boost in
˙M (see Eq. (1)).
This effect is also predicted in the semi-analytic prescription
of Bestenlehner (2020), who suggest a transition occurring at
log(Γe) ≳−0.3 for stars in the LMC.
From Monte Carlo simulations of stellar winds, Vink et al.
(2011) predict that the transition from optically thin to optically
thick winds introduces a shift in the driving mechanism of the
wind, resulting in a different ˙M-Γe relation. Specifically, their
models suggest a “kink” in the ˙M-Γe relation. Supporting this
theory, the empiric study by Bestenlehner et al. (2014) reported
evidence for such a kink beginning at log(Γe) ≳−0.6 at LMC
metallicity. However, their mass estimates for WR stars are de-
rived using mass-luminosity relations based on chemically ho-
mogeneous stellar models, which may deviate from the orbital
masses.
Additionally, Vink & Gräfener (2012) derived a model-
independent transitional mass-loss rate at which stellar winds
are expected to shift from being optically thin to optically thick,
and, hence, a kink should occur. For a Galactic O4-6If+ star
with log(L/L⊙) = 6.05 and M = 60, M⊙(corresponding to
log(Γe) ≈−0.3), they proposed a transitional mass-loss rate of
log( ˙Mtrans/( M⊙yr−1)) = −4.95. When comparing this prediction
to our Galactic mass-loss relation (shown in the left panel of
Fig. 3), one can see that stars with log(Γe) ≈−0.3 are indeed pri-
marily evolved objects such as supergiants and WR stars, which
have optically thick winds, thereby supporting their theoretical
framework. However, our derived mass-loss rate at this Edding-
ton parameter is approximately a factor of two lower than the
transitional mass-loss rate proposed by Vink & Gräfener (2012)
but still lies within the scatter of our sample.
When inspecting Fig. 3, one cannot see any of the predicted
sharp increases in mass-loss rates for stars close to the Edding-
ton limit in any of the galaxies studied in this work. However,
given the small number of stars with such high Eddington pa-
rameters in our literature sample, such a kink or upturn might
be hidden in the large uncertainties of the Eddington parame-
ters of the WR stars originating from the uncertainties of the or-
bital masses when the inclination is not well known. Only larger
samples of stars near the Eddington limit with securely known
Γe could firmly confirm or rule out the presence of the theo-
retically predicted non-monotonic increase in mass-loss rates in
stars close to the Eddington limit. Following this discussion, we
advise caution when using our mass-loss relation for stars near
the Eddington limit, as the behavior of winds in this regime re-
mains uncertain and might deviate from the general trends ob-
served in our dataset.
4.3. Comparison to other commonly used mass-loss recipes
Several studies have demonstrated that the choice of mass-loss
prescriptions has profound implications for the evolution of mas-
sive stars (e.g., Renzo et al. 2017; Gilkis et al. 2019; Sabhahit
et al. 2022; Josiek et al. 2024). Many widely used mass-loss
recipes depend on various stellar parameters rather than explic-
itly on the Eddington parameter, as in our newly derived pre-
scription.
To assess the differences and implications of our ˙M −Γe re-
lation compared to other mass-loss recipes, we computed stel-
lar evolution models. These models cover the evolution of stars
from the main sequence to the supergiant phase, as well as for
pure helium (He) stars, spanning the full Γe range of our sample.
The models were generated using the MESA code, and details
regarding the input physics and parameters are provided in Ap-
pendix B.
4.3.1. Mass-loss rates of OB-type stars
The most commonly used mass-loss recipe employed in stellar
evolution calculations during the OB star phase is the one by
Vink et al. (2001). According to this recipe, mass-loss rates do
not only depend on mass and luminosity but also temperature,
as the latter determines the dominant ion responsible for driv-
ing the wind. In specific situations, such an ionization change
is predicted to considerably boost the mass-loss rate (see Vink
et al. 1999), yielding a “jump” in the resulting curve when reach-
ing specific temperature regimes. In the upper panels of Fig. 4,
we depict the change of ˙M as a function of Γe for stellar evolu-
tion models of main-sequence stars to the supergiant stage calcu-
lated with the Vink et al. (2001) mass-loss recipe to the empiric
˙M −Γe plane. For massive Galactic stars, the predicted mass-loss
rates show some overlap with the observations but still seem to
be systematically higher. This discrepancy is even more evident
at lower stellar masses and for stars in low-metallicity environ-
ments. Here, the Vink et al. (2001) mass-loss rates are consis-
Article number, page 6 of 18
