3
FIG. 2. NMR transitions measured by monitoring the SSE
signal intensity of V −
B defect at the resonance magnetic fields
B = 3.2214 T (corresponding to the |0⟩↔| + 1⟩ESR tran-
sition) and B = 3.4765 T (|0⟩↔| −1⟩ESR transition).
Experimental data are shown in green, and calculated data
using Equation (1) and EasySpin software [29] are shown in
grey. The 14N Nuclear Larmor frequency (νL) is indicated by
a dashed vertical bar. Splitting of each pair of lines is induced
by the NQ interaction as indicated by vertical bars. The HF
interaction with 14N nuclei shifts each pair of quadrupole-split
lines from νL by a constant value, as indicated by dashed ar-
rows at νL±HF.
pure quadrupole-induced transitions in the mS = 0 state.
These quadrupole-induced transitions are symmetrically
positioned around the 14N Larmor frequency, which is
about νL ≈10 MHz in the magnetic field of 3T. This ex-
act pattern is observed in the ENDOR spectra measured
for both ESR transitions (|0⟩↔| + 1⟩and |0⟩↔| −1⟩)
at the B ∥c orientation, as shown in Fig. 2, unam-
biguously indicating the interactions of the V −
B electron
spin with the 14N nuclear spins. The extracted HF and
NQ splittings from the spectrum fitting using Eq. (1)
are approximately 4.41 MHz and 0.37 MHz, respectively.
These values are notably smaller than those previously
reported for V −
B interactions with the first nearest N(1)
neighbors nitrogen spins, where the HF and NQ have
been determined to be about 45 MHz and 1.5 MHz, re-
spectively [1, 24]. To determine the values of the cor-
responding HF and NQ tensors as well as to assign the
nitrogen atoms to specific shells relative to V −
B , we mea-
sure the NMR transition frequencies between the nuclear
spin states in the mS = +1 and mS = −1 sublevels,
in an external magnetic field oriented perpendicular to
the hexagonal c-axis (B ⊥c, θ = 90◦).
The in-plane
orientation of the magnetic field is experimentally deter-
mined to be φ = 12◦relative to the direction of one of
the N(1) group nitrogen dangling bonds, which are inter-
connected by the C3 rotational symmetry, as indicated by
the dashed line in Fig. 1(a). Namely, the angle φ is calcu-
lated using previously established tensors for the HF and
NQ interactions of the V −
B spin with the atoms N(1) [24],
as shown in Fig. S1 of the supplementary material [30].
Additionally, we present the calculated evolution of the
FIG. 3. (a) NMR transitions from Fig. 2 within the mS = +1
and mS = −1 spin states, measured at B ∥c orientation.
Solid black lines show the calculated angular dependence of
the NMR transitions as a function of the angle θ between
the c-axis and the static magnetic field, as the field rotates
away from B ∥c toward the (0001) plane, based on Eq. (1).
(b) Twelve NMR transitions labeled 1-12 within the mS =
+1 and mS = −1 states, measured in B ⊥c orientation.
Calculated spectra using Eq. (1) are overlaid in grey and are
made under the assumption that the magnetic field vector is
12◦away from the nitrogen dangling bond. Spin-Hamiltonian
parameters used in the calculations are summarized in Table I.
NMR frequencies as the magnetic field is rotated, vary-
ing the angle θ between the field B and the c-axis from
B ∥c (θ = 0◦) to B ⊥c, as described by Eq. (1). These
results are summarized in Fig. 3(a). The key observation
from Fig. 3(b) is that each spectrum consists of six pairs
of lines. Given that, in this magnetic field orientation
(B ⊥c, φ = 12◦), all in-plane nitrogen atoms are non-
equivalent, we conclude that the spectra result from HF
and NQ interactions with six distinct, non-equivalent ni-
trogen atoms. Indeed, each 14N nucleus contributes two
NMR frequencies in the mS = +1 or mS = −1 states,
as schematically shown in Fig. 1(d). This rules out the
three nitrogen atoms in the N(2) shell, leading to the
conclusion that the probed nuclear spins are located in
the N(3) shell. Fitting the spectra using Eq. (1) with
the provided angle evolution of the spectra from B ∥c
toward the B ⊥c orientation allows us to establish all
components of the interactions as well as directions of
the principal axis of the corresponding tensors, as indi-
cated in Table I. The direction of the principal z-axis of
the HF and NQ tensor was chosen in the (0001) plane of
the crystal, such that for each N(3) nucleus, the axis was
tilted by 14◦from the direction of the N(1) center’s z-axis
in the perpendicular orientation, with an accuracy of up
