6
including a phase diagram, and snapshots of the system’s
final configuration at the selected state points. Note that
if a species dies out (no remaining individuals) then no
new particles of that species can be born, so the number
of species in the system can never increase.
The resulting phase diagram features three distinct
phases which are called fixation (only one species is
present at the final time), coexistence (three species are
present) and extinction (all sites are empty). As in [7], it
is not possible that two species survive at long times since
one of them will always dominate the other, which leads
to either fixation or extinction. The total density ρtotal
is also indicated: this is zero in the extinction phase.
The fixation phase occurs for large movement rate
λ and small death probability pω.
Since the system
is symmetric, the species that survives in this phase
is completely random. Reducing the movement rate λ
favours the coexistence phase, in which spiral patterns
appear, characterised by a length scale that grows with
λ. This is the same behaviour observed in the RPS model
of [7, 34, 39], consistent with the fact that our model re-
duces to theirs on setting pω = 0.
(In that case, the
fixation phase also has ρX = 1 for the surviving species.)
On increasing pω, the behaviour changes qualitatively
because the death process favours the extinct state. In-
deed for pω ≳10−3, one still has the coexistence phase
for small λ, but increasing λ leads to extinction instead of
fixation. As noted above, the reason is that if only a sin-
gle species survives (fixation phase) then all particles will
end up hungry, reducing their reproduction rate. Then
the whole population tends to collapse into the extinct
state. This illustrates how the combination of the death
process and the hunger levels leads to a more complex
ecosystem, where different species rely on each other for
survival. Increasing the death rate also tends to disrupt
the spiral patterns, compare snapshots IV, V, and VI in
Fig. 3. Eventually, the system fragments into irregular
clusters of each species [67–69].
B.
Transitions between coexistence and
fixation/extinction phases
The transition between coexistence and fixation phases
has been the focus of many previous studies [7, 33, 34, 39,
70]. The length scale of the spiral patterns grows with λ
until it becomes system-spanning (see snapshots IV, III,
II, and I in Fig. 3). Moreover, these spirals are associated
with oscillations in species’ populations, and for system-
spanning spirals, these oscillations are large enough that
one species may die out. This leads to an explosion in
the population of its prey species, which then wipes out
the remaining species (its prey). This leads to fixation.
Note however that since the number of species can
never increase,
the coexistence phase is necessarily
“metastable”: for fixed system size and with sufficiently
long simulation, the system will eventually end up in the
fixation phase [7, 33, 34, 39]. Nevertheless, the transition
between coexistence and fixation is well-defined in the
limit of large system size, where it can be characterised
via the scaling with L of the time to reach fixation [33].
However, the inherent metastability of the coexistence
phase must be borne in mind when analysing simulation
behaviour, this will become clear in later Sections.
In contrast to the coexistence-fixation transition, the
transition to an extinct state is not present in the RPS
model of [7, 33, 34, 36, 39]. (This transition relies on the
death process and the hunger levels.)
Unsurprisingly,
increasing the death probability pω tends to reduce the
total population: this eventually collapses because dilute
systems make it increasingly hard for particles to find
prey, leading to hunger, reduced reproduction and hence
extinction. Another interesting effect of increased pω is
the loss of coherence in the spiral pattern (panels V and
VI in Fig. 3).
The same transition (from coexistence to extinction)
also appears on increasing mobility λ at fixed pω. As in
for the coexistence-fixation transition, it is also impor-
tant that increased mobility leads to longer-ranged spa-
tial correlations and large fluctuations, so that species
are more likely to die out via random fluctuations. To
understand the shape of the phase boundary, we recall
that the time step τ depends on λ in the results of Fig. 3,
so fixing pω does not correspond to a fixed rate ω, due
to (6). Lines of fixed ω are shown in blue in Fig. 3, these
indicate that transition from coexistence to extinction
takes place at a death rate ω = ωx that is between 0.01
and 0.1, depending weakly on λ. This indicates that the
most important control parameters of the model are ra-
tios of rates, for example ω/µ sets the balance between
reproduction and spontaneous death (note that µ = 1 is
constant in Fig. 3). In later Sections we keep a fixed time
step τ so it is equivalent to fix either ω or pω.
IV.
LEARNING BY A “SMART” SPECIES
A.
Motivation
The central question of this work is how a privileged
(smart) species can adjust its behaviour, in order to max-
imise its population. (Specifically, we adjust the param-
eters λA, σA, ϕ as well as adopting different strategies
when choosing the preferred direction D∗.)
In princi-
ple, this question could be addressed in simulation by
scanning the various parameters.
Instead, we adopt a
different approach based on reinforcement learning (RL).
The method is detailed below: as usual in RL, the main
idea is that we mostly run simulations at parameters that
have previously been found to be good, but this is sup-
plemented by exploratory searching, to find other regions
of parameter space that might be even better.
A priori, this method seems promising for two reasons:
Firstly, we expect it to be more efficient than parameter
scanning, in the context of our simulation study. Sec-
ondly, it may mimic the mechanisms by which organisms
