GRAPHICAL FUNCTIONS WITH SPIN
OLIVER SCHNETZ
Abstract. The theory of graphical functions is generalized from scalar theories to theories with spin,
leading to a numerator structure in Feynman integrals. The main part of this article treats the case of
positive integer spin, which is obtained from spin 1/2 theories after the evaluation of γ traces.
As an application (in this article used mainly to prove consistency and efficiency of the method), we
calculate Feynman periods in Yukawa-ϕ4 (Gross-Neveu-Yukawa) theory up to loop order eight.
1. Introduction
Originally, the theory of graphical functions was developed to analyze the number theory of Feyn-
man periods in four-dimensional ϕ4 theory [4, 15, 17]. The results, using the Maple implementation
HyperlogProcedures [23], led to the discovery of a connection between quantum field theory (QFT) and
motivic Galois theory, the coaction conjectures [11, 8, 9].
Later, in order to handle full QFTs, the theory of graphical functions was extended to non-integer
dimensions [18]. The result of this extension was the calculation of the ϕ4 beta function up to loop order
seven in the minimal subtraction scheme [21]. The field anomalous dimension was calculated up to eight
loops.
In 2021, a collaboration with Michael Borinsky led to the extension of graphical functions to even
dimensions ≥4 [2]. Application to six-dimensional ϕ3 theory showed that the number content of ϕ3
theory is similar (or equal) to the number content of ϕ4 theory.
This supports the optimistic hope
that the geometry behind the number content of ϕ4 theory is universal for all renormalizable QFTs. In
Section 11 of this article we will see that an extension of ϕ4 theory to fermions via a three-point Yukawa
interaction does not seem to enlarge the number content. It is important to note that there exist strong
indications from a tool called the c2-invariant that the number content of Feynman integrals from non-
renormalizable theories with vertex degrees ≥5 is vastly more generic than that of ϕ4 theory [16, 6, 19].
So, from a mathematical point of view, the conjectured sparsity of QFT numbers is quite mysterious.
In addition, complete calculations in six-dimensional ϕ3 theory became possible and led to record-
breaking six-loop results for the beta and gamma functions [1, 22, 25].
After these breakthroughs, it seemed desirable to generalize the theory of graphical functions to the-
ories with positive spin. Such theories have a numerator structure in the Feynman integrands, which
significantly increases the complexity. The main tool in this context is integration by parts (IBP) with
the Laporta algorithm (see, e.g., [27] and the references therein). The IBP method is very powerful, but
scales very badly with the loop order. In fact, in ϕ4 theory, IBP is not helpful, but in ϕ3 theory, IBP can
be used effectively. In a suitable setup, at high loop orders, the theory of graphical function (which is
inherently IBP-free) is a valuable addition to the pool of QFT calculation methods.
In this article, we present the fundamental theory of graphical functions with positive spin. An early
version of this article is [24].
This article contains corrections, proofs, more results and many more
examples. In particular, the new Section 11 on Yukawa-ϕ4 theory is the first application of graphical
functions outside spin zero.
Algorithms and results will be included in upcoming versions of HyperlogProcedures [23].
Acknowlegements
The author is supported by the DFG-grant SCHN 1240/3-1. He thanks Sven-Olaf Moch for discussions
and encouragement. The author also thanks Simon Theil who contributed to an early version of this
work.
2. Propagators
In dimension
(1)
D = 2λ + 2 > 2
1
arXiv:2504.05850v1  [hep-th]  8 Apr 2025
