The Path to aN3LO Parton Distributions
119
For massive quarks the threshold limit is x →xmax with xmax =
Q2
4m2
h+Q2 or β →0, with
β ≡
q
1 −4m2
h
s
and s = Q2 1−x
x
the center-of-mass energy of the partonic cross-section. In this
limit, the coefficient function contains logarithmically enhanced terms of the form αn
s lnm β
with m ≤2n due to soft gluon emission, which are predicted by threshold resummation [315].
Further contributions of the form αn
s β−m lnl β, with m ≤n, arise from Coulomb exchange
between the heavy quark and antiquark, and can also be resummed using non-relativistic QCD
methods [316]. At N3LO all these contributions are known and can be extracted from available
resummed results [78]; they are included in C(3),thr
i,k
.
In the high-energy limit, the coefficient function contains logarithmically enhanced terms of the
form αn
s lnm x with m ≤n−2, which are determined at all orders through small-x resummation
at the LL level [77], from which the N3LO expansion can be extracted [78]. This result can
be further improved [88, 79] by including a particular class of NLL terms related to NLL
perturbative evolution and the running of the coupling. In the approach of Refs. [88, 79] the
high-energy contributions are combined into C(3),asy
i,k
with the asymptotic Q2 ≫m2
h limit of the
coefficient function in the decoupling scheme [80, 81, 82, 83, 84], while subtracting overlap
terms. This ensures that in the Q2 ≫m2
h limit, the structure function, computed from C(3),asy
i,k
combined with decoupling-scheme PDFs, coincides with the structure function computed in
the limit in which the heavy quark mass is neglected and the heavy quark is treated as a
massless parton. However, by the time of writing, the asymptotic limit could only be determined
approximately since in particular some of the matching conditions were not fully known.
The interpolating functions, used to combine the two contributions in Eq. (4.24), are chosen to
satisfy the requirements
f1(x) −−−→
x→0 0,
f1(x) −−−−−→
x→xmax 1 ,
f2(x) −−−→
x→0 1,
f1(x) −−−−−→
x→xmax 0 ,
(4.25)
which ensure that the threshold contribution vanishes in the small-x limit and conversely. This
guarantees that the approximation Eq. (4.24) is reliable in a broad kinematic range in the
(x, Q2) plane: C(3),asy
i,k
reproduces the massless limit for large Q2 values and for all values of x,
including the small-x limit, while C(3),thr
i,k
describes the threshold limit, with x close to xmax. An
uncertainty on the approximate coefficient function can be constructed varying the functional
form of the interpolating functions, as well as that of terms which are not fully known. This
includes the NLL small-x resummation and the matching functions that enter the asymptotic
high Q2 limit. This uncertainty vanishes in the x →xmax limit, for which the exact known
limit is reproduced (with a fixed choice for the unknown constant β-independent terms), and
becomes larger in the intermediate η region. The interpolating functions and their uncertainties
are optimized by using the same methodology at NNLO, where the full result is known. We
refer to Ref. [88, 79] for a detailed discussion of this construction.
