2
time measured by clocks, as predicted by both the DP
and the CSL models. Our analysis shows that this con-
tribution is negligible for any currently available clock.
Therefore, SCMs do not place practical limitations on
the present precision of time measurements.
Spontaneous collapse models−Standard quantum me-
chanics incorporates two incompatible dynamical princi-
ples: a linear, deterministic evolution that enables su-
perposition of states and a non-unitary, measurement-
induced process responsible for wavefunction reduction.
SCMs provide a uniﬁed evolution by modifying the
standard dynamical equations with an additional non-
unitary term, which becomes signiﬁcant only for suﬃ-
ciently macroscopic systems, leading to the quantum–to-
classical transition.
A particularly compelling class of
collapse models employs the mass density operator ˆµ(x)
as the collapse operator, ensuring that large (macro-
scopic) quantum ﬂuctuations of the mass density are
spontaneously suppressed.
In terms of the density operator ˆρ(t), the dynamics of a
system under spontaneous collapse follows the Lindblad
master equation
dˆρ
dt = −i
ℏ[ ˆH, ˆρ]
−
1
2ℏ2
Z
d3xd3yD(x −y)[ˆµ(x), [ˆµ(y), ˆρ]],
(1)
where ˆH is the standard quantum Hamiltonian of the
system and D is the spatial correlation function of spon-
taneous ˆµ-measurements at diﬀerent locations.
This
correlation function necessarily includes a characteristic
smearing (or cut-oﬀ) length σ, which deﬁnes the ﬁnite
spatial resolution of the ˆµ-measurements.
It is sometimes convenient to express Eq. (1) in an
equivalent form using the smeared mass density opera-
tor ˆµσ(x) =
R
d3ygσ(x −y)ˆµ(y) := (gσ ∗ˆµ)(x) and a
new correlation function D which does not include the
smearing, related to D through D(x) = (gσ ∗D ∗gσ)(x).
Here, ∗is the convolution operator and gσ is a Gaussian
function centered at zero with width σ.
Remarkably, the master equation (1) admits an inter-
esting interpretation in terms of spacetime ﬂuctuations.
Using Itˆo calculus, it can be derived from the following
stochastic Schr¨odinger equation
d
dt |ψt⟩= −i
ℏ

ˆH +
Z
d3xˆµ(x)φ(x, t)

|ψt⟩,
(2)
where φ is a classical Gaussian white noise ﬁeld with zero
average and correlation
E[φ(x, t), φ(y, t′)] = D(x −y)δ(t −t′).
(3)
Eq. (2) corresponds to the ordinary Schr¨odinger equation
in the presence of a classical stochastic gravitational ﬁeld,
where φ plays the role of the Newtonian potential and D
in Eq. (1) is its spatial correlation function.
Among all the possible SCMs, CSL and DP are by far
the most extensively studied. In CSL, the noise is deﬁned
by the following unsmeared correlation function
DCSL(x −y) = ℏ2γ
m2
0
δ(x −y),
(4)
where m0 is a reference mass, typically chosen to be the
nucleon mass. Thus, CSL is characterized by two param-
eters: γ, which sets the strength of the collapse process,
and the smearing length, usually denoted by rC. It is also
customary to use the parameter α = r−2
C as an alternative
to the smearing length. Together, these parameters de-
termine the collapse rate for a microscopic system, given
by λ = γ/(4πσ2)3/2. The commonly adopted values for
the collapse rate and spatial resolution are λ = 10−16 s−1
and σ = 10−7 m, as proposed by Ghirardi, Rimini and
Weber [5]. These values are consistent with most phe-
nomenological analyses of the mass-proportional formu-
lation of the CSL [25, 26], with the exception of [27] which
excludes σ values smaller than 2 × 10−7 m.
Unlike the CSL, the DP noise strength is set by the
Newton gravitational constant G and involves no new
parameter. In fact, it is characterized by the following
unsmeared correlation function
DDP(x −y) =
ℏG
|x −y|.
(5)
A commonly used reference value for the smearing
length, sometimes denoted by R0, is σ = 10−9 m. This is
approximately ﬁve times larger than the strongest lower
bound available to date [26, 28–30].
Time uncertainty−Building on the previous discus-
sion, we assume a gravitational origin for SCMs at-
tributed to a ﬂuctuating component of the Newtonian
potential and explore a relativistic eﬀect associated with
such models. We emphasize that the following analysis
holds even if we are dealing with non-relativistic SCMs.
In the presence of a classical ﬂuctuating Newtonian
ﬁeld, general relativity requires that time, as well, must
exhibit a certain degree of uncertainty. For simplicity, let
us assume a ﬂat background spacetime. The ﬂuctuation
δt measured by a clock at location x is given by the
relation [31]
δt(x, t) = 1
c2
Z t
0
φ(x, τ)dτ,
(6)
which is valid in the perturbative regime, where the
00-metric component is expressed as g00(x, t) = 1 +
2φ(x, t)/c2.
Again, φ is characterized by zero average
and a correlation function as given in Eq. (3). It follows
that
E[δt] = 0,
E[δt(x, t)δt(y, t)] = 1
c4 D(x −y) t.
(7)
In the following, we characterize the resulting uncertainty
associated with any measurement of time. What is the
