both the full partition function and also the small deformation approximation (19). The results
agree over this range. The probability distribution is obtained in both cases by adding up the
probabilities ZR/Z for all representations with a given value of
1
N Tr C2. It is important to note
that the plot shows the probabilities of each Casimir, not the probability density. That is, the
points should sum up to one but the area under the curve will not integrate to one.
Fig. 4 shows that even while the one-dimensional irreducible representation is the most com-
mon building block in (27), the distribution of the Casimir is peaked away from zero. This implies
that a small but nontrivial representation dominates the partition function for Ω2N ≳1/N. Con-
versely, as Ω2N is decreased to very small values, the distribution eventually becomes peaked at
the origin. We have illustrated this phenomenon in Fig. 5. We used the approximate partition
function (19) to make this plot, as it allowed us to work at larger N. We have verified that the
grand canonical average (29) correctly predicts the location of the peaks in these plots.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Figure 5: Probability distribution of the Casimir for several very small values of Ω2N,
calculated at N = 50 using the small deformation approximation (19).
The ratio of the variance to the average given in (30) also implies that the Casimir distribution
becomes strongly peaked as N →∞at fixed Ω2N. Indeed, each of the nM is strongly peaked
on its average (22) in this limit. This means that there is a single dominant representation in
the partition function at large N. While we often refer to this dominant representation in the
low Ωphase as the maximally reducible or trivial representation, we have just seen that in fact
it is more accurately described as almost-trivial or low-lying.
4
The Casimir distribution at intermediate deformation
As Ω2N is increased beyond the small values considered in the previous section, the approxi-
mation (19) breaks down. In Fig. 6 we see, however, that the distribution among low Casimir
representations retains a qualitatively similar form to the small Ω2N distribution in the previous
Figs. 4 and 5, now peaked at 1
N Tr C2 = O(1). The dominant representation can be identified by
considering the occupation numbers ⟨nM⟩. At ( 3
28 Ω2N)2 = 0.45 and N = 40, as in Fig. 6, we
find ⟨n1⟩= 17.3, ⟨n2⟩= 5.1, ⟨n3⟩= 2.0, and so on. As in §3, the one-dimensional representation
is the dominant building block, with a small number of low-lying irreducible representations
10
