7
FIG. 4.
Mean final training accuracy of the logically-encoded VQC under different levels of gate (left) and environmental
(right) noise ranging from p = 0.001 −0.01, and with different degrees of error detection implemented from 0 to 5 rounds
of syndrome extractions. The mean final training accuracy is calculated from the training accuracies attained by the VQC
over the final 40 iterations of training, after convergence. The standard deviation of the mean final training accuracy from 10
training runs is represented by the shaded regions.
training accuracy.
Notably, when there is no noise on
the ancilla qubits, the error detection works as expected
and even at the highest noise levels, we see the training
accuracy reach 1.0 within five rounds of syndrome ex-
tractions. As long as there is any noise on the ancilla
qubits, the error detection loses effectiveness, such that
at higher ancilla noise levels (i.e., panc ≥0.005), the error
detection becomes unreliable.
Thus, a likely explanation for the high variability in
final training accuracy at high ancilla qubit error rates
is that the ancilla errors are not well-detected in this
set-up, so they cannot be reliably eliminated from the
training.
We do not add syndrome extractions to the
ancilla qubits, since it would require an additional en-
coding of the ancilla qubits, leading to more ancillary
qubits that we cannot perform syndrome extractions on.
Since the ancilla qubits are entangled with the physical
qubits, their errors spread easily into the physical qubits
through the CNOT gates (see Figure 2).
While some
of these errors will be detectable by syndrome measure-
ments on the physical qubits, most of these errors will
be non-Pauli. Hence, as the noise level increases, it be-
comes more difficult to protect the training through syn-
drome extractions, leading to the lower final accuracies
and greater variance in its value. As we will demonstrate
in Section IV C 1, high noise levels result in high spread in
physical qubit state fidelities, which produces the higher
variance and non-monotonicity in the final training ac-
curacies.
We again observe the tendency for the mean final train-
ing accuracies to plateau for panc > 0 instead of increase
with more rounds of syndrome extraction. The plateau-
ing effect is particularly apparent in the subplots of Fig-
ure 6 where ancilla qubits are subject to noise (fanc ̸= 0),
but is most apparent where the ancilla Pauli Error Rate
is less than approximately 0.003. We also find that the
higher the noise level, the lower the accuracy at which
the plateau occurs. At higher levels of ancilla noise, the
plateauing is hidden by the greater variance and non-
monotonicity in the evolution of the final training accu-
racy. The plateau indicates that there is a limit for how
many ancilla-caused errors can be detected and removed
from the physical qubits by the stabiliser code for a given
Pauli Error Rate, leaving only errors that syndrome mea-
surements cannot detect.
When that limit is reached,
adding more syndrome extractions will not result in the
detection of more errors, leading to the plateau.
The plateauing is also present in the simulation re-
sults under gate noise (see Figure 5), though not as
clearly visible because the threshold noise level before
high variability takes over is lower than for the environ-
mental noise simulations. The plateauing is most visible
for panc ≈0.002 −0.004, where the ancilla noise is high
enough to produce plateauing but low enough to not be
masked by the high variability in final training accuracy.
Interestingly, the plateauing starts at a higher number
of syndrome extraction rounds in the simulations under
the gate noise model than under the environmental noise
model, suggesting that there are fewer detectable errors
spreading to the physical qubits under the environmen-
tal noise model. Additionally, with the same ancilla and
physical Pauli Error Rates, the gate noise model finishes
