11 
 
in close proximity to the sample surface. The back-scattered light stemming from the tip-sample 
interaction is combined at the beamsplitter with the IR reference beam and detected with a high-
speed IR detector. A lock-in amplifier using Ω as a reference frequency demodulates the signal 
and removes the far-field contributions. The resulting interference signal is Fourier-transformed 
to give the amplitude signal =+() and phase >+() spectra of the complex optical signal 
]+() = =+()B^_()  . All SINS spectra were measured with a liquid helium cooled HgCdTe 
(MCT) detector, equipped with a CsI window, which provides near-field signal down to < 200 cm-
1. The spectral resolution was set to 4 cm−1 for a Fourier processing with a zero-filling factor of 4. 
All spectra in this work were normalized by a reference spectrum taken from a clean, gold surface. 
 
Electromagnetic Simulations. Electromagnetic simulations were performed using a commercial 
finite-difference and time-domain (FDTD) simulator (Ansys Lumerical). Periodic boundary 
conditions were used in the y direction (see Fig.1e), while PML boundaries were set in the x and z 
directions. The source in the simulation was a waveguide port placed on the SrTiO3 membrane. 
The dielectric function of SrTiO3 used was extracted from our reflectivity measurements. 
 
 
Contributions 
Y.L. and R.X. conceived and supervised the study. K.K., R.G. and Y.W. synthesized and 
characterized the membranes. H.A.B., K.K. and S. G. C. performed the SINS measurements. J.T.-
G. and A.B.K. performed the far-field reflectivity measurements to extract the dielectric function 
of materials. K.K., A.B.K. and Y.L. performed the simulation and data analysis. Y.L., R.X., K.K., 
A.B.K. and J.T.-G. wrote the manuscript with input from all the authors. All authors contributed 
to the scientific discussion. 
 
Data availability 
All data that support the findings of this study are present in the paper and the Supplementary 
Information. Further information can be obtained from the corresponding author upon request. 
 
Acknowledgements 
The authors thank Xiaobin Xu for valuable discussions. Y.L. and Y.W. acknowledge the support 
by the National Science Foundation under Award No. DMR-2340751. R.G. and R.X. acknowledge 
the support by the National Science Foundation under Award No. DMR-2442399 and the 
American Chemical Society Petroleum Research Fund under Award No. 68244-DNI10. This 
research used resources of the Advanced Light Source, a U.S. DOE Office of Science User Facility 
under contract no. DE-AC02-05CH11231. The research of J.T.-G. and A.B.K. is supported by the 
Swiss National Science Foundation (grants TMPFP2_224378 and #200020_201096). 
 
