8
A. K. Maity et al.
larization observations will be helpful in examining the
magnetic field morphology for the filament hosting N59-
North. Interestingly, the formation and distribution of
the massive dense cores suitable for MSF depend upon
the inhomogeneous density structures of the colliding
molecular clouds before the collision. Thus, the massive
star-forming activity is not strictly restricted to the ver-
tex part of the cone/central part of the filament only.
The possibility of MSF, apart from the central part of
the filament, accounts for the formation of stars which
are responsible for the bubble N59-North.
5. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
To understand the physical processes related to MSF,
we conducted a multi-wavelength observational investi-
gation for an extended area hosting N59-North.
The
major outcomes of this study are summarized below.
1. An elongated IRDC (length ∼28 pc) is investi-
gated in the Spitzer 8 µm image, which is not
reported in the literature. This IRDC hosts bub-
ble N59-North, multiple protostars, and seven AT-
LASGAL dust clumps at the same distance.
2. The GRS 13CO(J = 1–0), CHIMPS 13CO(J = 3–
2) and RAMPS NH3(1–1) line data confirm the
existence of this elongated filamentary structure,
which is traced in a velocity range of about [95,
106] km s−1.
3. All ATLASGAL clumps meet the emperical mKP-
10 criteria (i.e., M(R) > 580 M⊙(R/pc)1.33;
Urquhart et al. 2018) for MSF.
4. Using the Spitzer 8 µm image, a new C-HFS is in-
vestigated toward the ATLASGAL clump located
at the central part of the filament. In the direc-
tion of C-HFS, we have detected an UC H ii region
driven by a B2-type star based on MeerKAT 1.3
GHz continuum emission. The lack of extended
ionized emission toward C-HFS suggests that it is
in the early evolutionary stage with no significant
feedback from the young massive star.
5. The study of the observed velocity features in
the CHIMPS 13CO(J = 3–2) PV/PPV diagrams
toward the filament and the existing theoretical
models shows that physical processes such as rota-
tion, central collapse, or EDC are not responsible
for the observed gas motion in the filament. Ad-
ditionally, the comparison of PV/PPV diagrams
with the results of MHD simulations (Inoue et al.
2018; Maity et al. 2024) suggests that the filament
is possibly conical in shape and exhibits converg-
ing gas motion toward its center.
6. The blue- and red-shifted gas velocities observed
at the edges of the bubble N59-North in the PPV
diagram show an expanding gas motion.
7. The outcomes of this study favor CCC activity in
the filament at [95, 106] km s−1, but they contra-
dict previous claims of a collision between the [65,
79] and [95, 108] km s−1 components, as they are
at different distances. Although the exact collid-
ing components remain unidentified, comparisons
of the outcomes of this study with MHD simu-
lations suggest that CCC contributed to the fila-
ment’s formation and gas motion.
Taken together all the results, the filament hosting N59-
North displays a converging gas motion toward its cen-
ter, where a pc-scale C-HFS is detected at an early evo-
lutionary stage of HFSs. The converging flow toward C-
HFS supports the idea of multi-scale filamentary mass
accretion for MSF, likely triggered by CCC. Notably,
the astrometric distance estimation using Gaia parallax
measurements and the measured distance of the AT-
LASGAL dust clumps suggest that our target filamen-
tary cloud could be located at either 4.66 kpc or 6.5
kpc. Therefore, further investigation is necessary to de-
termine the precise distance of this filamentary cloud.
6. DATA AVAILABILITY
The Herschel and Spitzer data are available in
the publicly accessible NASA/IPAC Infrared Science
Archive. The SPICY catalogue can be downloaded from
the Spitzer Catalogue.
The MeerKAT 1.3 GHz radio
continuum data is available in SMGPS Data Archive,
while the 20 cm radio continuum data can be accessed
via the MAGPIS Data Archive. The Herschel column
density and dust temperature maps are available in the
ViaLactea Data Server. The GRS 13CO(J = 1–0) dat-
acubes are available in Boston University Data Archive,
and the CHIMPS 13CO(J = 3–2) data can be found
in the CANFAR Archive. The RAMPS NH3(1–1) data
are available in the GBT Legacy Archive. ATLASGAL
data is accessible via the ATLASGAL Database, and
the physical parameters of the ATLASGAL clumps are
catalogued in the VizieR Data Archive.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the anonymous referee for insightful com-
ments and suggestions, which have enhanced the sci-
entific quality of this paper.
The research work at
Physical Research Laboratory is funded by the Depart-
ment of Space, Government of India.
This work is
based [in part] on observations made with the Spitzer
