2 
 
first optical imaging of intrinsic out-of-plane electric polarizations and domain wall 
(DW) sliding dynamics in tetralayer graphene, a 2D conductive layer composed entirely 
of carbon. Using scanning near-field optical microscopy (SNOM), we directly visualize 
adjacent ABAC and ABCB stacking orders with intrinsic and opposite electric 
polarizations. Our gate-dependent SNOM measurements reveal distinct optical 
response that systematically changes upon carrier doping and unconventional interplay 
between DW sliding and electric polarizations, which are supported by density 
functional theory (DFT) calculations. Independent corroboration through Kelvin probe 
force microscopy (KPFM) and Raman spectroscopy confirms the polar nature and their 
polarization directions. Furthermore, reversible mechanical switching of polar states 
via atomic force microscopy (AFM) tip manipulation is also demonstrated. Our work 
establishes SNOM as a critical tool for probing sliding ferroelectricity in conductive 
2D layers, opening avenues for exploring multiferroic behaviors and nonvolatile 
memory applications in atomically thin metals at room temperature. 
 
Introduction 
Ferroelectric materials carry spontaneous electric polarizations that can be switched by 
an external electric field. The ever-increasing requirement for nonvolatile device 
miniaturization continues to drive the development of ferroelectric materials at the 
nanoscale. Recent advancements in two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) 
materials have unlocked tremendously new opportunities to explore and engineer the 
ferroelectricity at the nanoscale through a new type of ferroelectricity, referred to as 2D 
sliding ferroelectricity [1]: the interfacial incommensurate domain wall (DW) sliding 
couples, in an unconventional manner, with (out-of-plane) electric polarizations in 
commensurate stacking orders, which can lead to efficient, robust and ultrafast 
polarization switching, on par with some of the best conventional ferroelectric materials 
[2-7].  
2D sliding ferroelectricity has been extensively studied, both in theory and 
experiment, in a variety of insulating and/or semiconducting 2D vdW materials and 
their marginally-twisted 2D moiré superlattices, such as hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) 
[2, 8-14], MoS2 [15-21], WSe2 [3, 15, 17, 22, 23], InSe [4, 24, 25]. In contrast, 
spontaneous electric polarizations and ferroelectricity were seldom seen in metallic 
phases, which conforms with the conventional wisdom that free carriers can screen 
