5
same time. Each injection has a Pauli Error Rate defined
in the same way as for the gate noise model. Applying
noise at regular intervals mimics the cumulative build-
up of errors in quantum circuits that occur as a result of
environmental noise, where the specific regularity of the
noise injections reflects the typical relaxation time and
dephasing time of the system. Although this model does
not include amplitude damping noise, dephasing noise, or
the entire span of complex errors that could arise from
realistic noise models, it is able to capture a range of
alterations that may occur to the qubits as a result of
energy loss to the system and decoherence. The model is
also compatible with our choice of QEC code.
III.
SIMULATIONS
We ran simulations of the logically-encoded circuit un-
der the gate noise and environmental noise models in a
classical high-performance computing environment, us-
ing Xanadu’s Pennylane library [58] in Python 3.12.3.
The application of each stabiliser and syndrome extrac-
tion adds one extra qubit to the system, hence the re-
source overhead for the simulations ranged from 12 qubits
to 20 qubits depending on the number of syndrome ex-
traction rounds performed.
Since there are only four unique data points that can
be used to train the VQC (namely, [0,0,0], [0,1,1], [1,0,1]
and [1,1,0]), we duplicated the set to produce 40 train-
ing samples, and split it into 24 samples for training and
16 samples for testing. We used a batch size of 8 and
ran the training for 100 iterations each, which was more
than sufficient for convergence in a zero noise environ-
ment. Since the [[4,2,2]] stabiliser code is not capable of
correcting errors, we discarded shots where at least one
X or Z error was detected. Shots were rerun until no
errors are detected.
We apply the noise models to both ancilla and physical
qubits in the system, but keep the syndrome extraction
qubits noise-free. We chose a Pauli Error Rate ranging
from 0.001 to 0.01 for both models, which is consistent
with current NISQ device capabilities [59]. For the envi-
ronmental noise model, we chose a Pauli error injection
regularity of once every 4 gates, with the same Pauli Er-
ror Rates as used for the gate noise model. Since most
of our gates are 2-qubit gates, with an estimated comple-
tion time of ≈10 −200 ns [60–62], and since our Pauli
Error Rates produce one error every 100 to 1000 injec-
tions, equivalent to one error every 400 to 4000 gates, we
estimate the time interval between errors to be ≈4−800
µs. This is consistent with realistic relaxation and co-
herence times, which are roughly of order 10 −1000 µs
in superconducting qubits [63, 64].
Incoherent noise is normally modelled by mixed states
and density matrices, as this formulation captures the
true nature of how the quantum state evolves over time
as a result of random noise. However, due to the large
computational overhead of simulating the QML model
training with density matrices (where size scales poorly
with number of qubits), we modelled the system using
statevectors instead. Although this model does not cap-
ture the decoherence of the original pure state, for our
purposes it was able to correctly predict the probability
vector output at the end of each circuit, while requiring
much less computational time to simulate.
IV.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
We first present the impact of the noise models on
training accuracy with and without error correction, fo-
cusing on the effectiveness of the [[4,2,2]] stabiliser code
in detecting errors and protecting the training accuracies.
We then show the impact of ancilla qubit noise on the
fidelities of the physical qubit states and consequently,
the training accuracies. We also reveal that ancilla qubit
noise limits the effectiveness of the stabiliser code, and
use our results to define a threshold for the maximum an-
cilla Pauli Error Rate and the minimum ancilla fidelity
required for reliable error detection and best training ac-
curacies.
A.
Training with Noise without Error Detection
In Figure 3, we show the evolution of the mean train-
ing accuracy achieved during training (where the mean
was calculated from 10 simulations with different start-
ing seeds), under both noise models, with varying noise
levels expressed as Pauli Error Rates and without error
detection.
As we might expect, it is clear from Figure 3 that the
higher the noise level, the lower the final training accu-
racy is. For noise levels where p ≥0.005, the training
curve does not exhibit a significant jump in accuracy
within the first 30 iterations, as it does for the lower
noise level simulations. Instead, they stay close to their
initial training accuracy throughout training, indicating
that the patterns in the data required for training are
lost in the noise. When noise levels are at p ≤0.0025,
learning appears hampered but not impossible.
These results indicate that our simple VQC model is
fairly susceptible to noise, which we suggest is due to its
reliance on only two qubits to learn and make predic-
tions. While larger and more complex QML algorithms
generally have greater learning capacities and may be
more robust to noise and errors, they also require more
qubits and gates, which increases the potential for errors.
Consequently, training and inference for both simple and
complex QML algorithms on NISQ devices (where noise
levels can exceed p = 0.005) will most likely require a
combination of error correction and mitigation. For some
QML algorithms and applications, fully fault-tolerant
quantum computation will still be necessary to achieve
desirable levels of accuracy.
