8
Conclusions
Everett’s Many-Worlds Interpretation resolves the most pressing inconsistency of textbook
quantum mechanics by eliminating the need for wave function collapse, which conﬂicts with
the dynamics of the Schr¨odinger equation. However, there still remains a conﬂict between
the Schr¨odinger equation and the Born rule, because there should not be two separate laws
that govern the time evolution of a physical theory, and because a fundamental postulate
of the theory should not make statements about emergent phenomena — which the Born
rule does by postulating a probability distribution over branches of the multiverse that are
emergent.
In the current paper we have shown that these inconsistencies can be resolved by dropping
the Born rule as a fundamental postulate altogether. Instead, the Born rule can be shown
to emerge as a consequence of a modiﬁed dynamics that adds a mechanism of small-signal
truncation to the Schr¨odinger equation. A key diﬀerence, however, is that the Born rule
that we show to be emergent is not a probabilistic concept, but rather a deterministic state-
ment about branch proliferation in the multiverse — wave function components with higher
amplitudes generate proportionally more future branches than those with lower amplitudes.
This reformulation implies a crucial conceptual shift: Quantum mechanics transforms
from an inherently probabilistic theory into a deterministic one where apparent probabilistic
behavior emerges from the frequency distribution of future multiverse branches. Any pre-
diction with conﬁdence level 1 −α in the standard framework (for some α > 0 near zero)
translates to the statement that we should not expect to ﬁnd ourselves in the small fraction
α of future branches where this prediction fails. Occasionally we will observe violations of
such predictions, but this should occur rarely if our theory is correct.
An interesting philosophical question in understanding our observed reality is how a single
observed path is selected from the vast multiverse branching tree. Our reformulation of the
Born rule, however, only requires selecting a “typical” path — in the sense that for the vast
majority of non-terminated paths our physical predictions already hold true. In contrast,
the standard probabilistic formulation of the Born rule (without small signal truncation)
often requires the selected path to be extremely special, as demonstrated by our repeated
43
