adjoint of ¯∂, as per the remark in footnote 21). These conditions, upon substituting (4.22)
for Wµ, can be written in quaternionic form as
Z
T4
(Wµ[C, S](Wµ[C, S])∗σ4 −¯
W[C, S]W[C, S]†) = 0 .
(4.24)
The above equations impose one real and one complex constraint on the 4r real components
of CA in (4.22), reducing the number of extra moduli to 4r −3. Modding out the constant
gauge transformations in the Cartan, this implies that, including the 4 holonomies ϕµ (the
translational moduli), there are a total of 4r −4 + 4 = 4r moduli, as appropriate for the
self-dual SU(2) instanton of topological charge r/2. The 4r −4 extra moduli are supposed to
make the constant-F solution x-dependent, a behaviour similar to the one of the gcd(k, r) ̸= r
constant-F solutions discussed earlier in this section.
This reduction of the number of parameters describing the self-dual manifold passing
through the constant-F solution is all we can argue here. To find the global structure of
the moduli space requires understanding the solutions of the nonlinear equation (4.23, 4.22),
subject to (4.24), a challenging task beyond the scope of this paper.
5
Testing the ∆-expansion for multi-fractional instantons with Q = 2
3
In this section, we use numerics to study solutions on the slightly detuned T4 and test the
analytical approach of [23], the ∆-expansion, for the multi-fractional instantons found in [1].
This approach constructs analytic solutions on the detuned T4, i.e. with ∆(r, k, ℓ) ≪1, in
a small-∆expansion around the constant-F solution. The use of the analytical solutions for
multi-fractional instantons obtained via the ∆expansion was crucial for the calculation of
the higher-order gaugino condensate on a small-T4.
The ∆expansion was tested numerically already in the original papers, for SU(2) instan-
tons of charge 1/2 and was found to work well for ∆as large as 0.09. Here we want to perform
the first such tests for multi-fractional instantons. Due to numerical constraints we focus on
the simplest theory that permits multi-fractional instantons, i.e. SU(3). We consider N = 3,
r = 2, k = 2, i.e. instantons of charge 2/3. It was analytically shown in [1] that within the
leading order in ∆, these solutions have an “instanton-liquid”-like structure, consisting of 2
closely packed lumps.
Now, while the ∆-expansion for gcd(r, k) = r is a well defined expansion, putting it in
practice is challenging and only a few quantities can be explicitly calculated to leading order
in ∆, as explained in [1]. Here we focus on the local gauge invariants of the form tr FµνFµν,
with no sum over µ, ν, and for µ, ν not both belonging to a two plane where a nontrivial
twist has been applied (i.e., in our convention, the 1-2 or 3-4 plane). The reason is that in
these planes, there is an order ∆0 field strength from the abelian solution and there are also
contributions from the leading-order field strength of Sµ, which is challenging to obtain in
closed form.
– 34 –
