Applications of Hybrid Machine Learning Methods to Large Datasets: A Case Study
Georgios Maragkopoulos,1, 2 Nikolaos Stefanakos,1, 2 Aikaterini Mandilara,1, 2 and Dimitris Syvridis1, 2
1Department of Informatics and Telecommunications,
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Panepistimiopolis, Ilisia, 15784, Greece
2Eulambia Advanced Technologies, Agiou Ioannou 24,
Building Complex C, Ag.
Paraskevi, 15342, Greece
We combine classical and quantum Machine Learning (ML) techniques to effectively analyze long
time-series data acquired during experiments. Specifically, we demonstrate that replacing a deep
classical neural network with a thoughtfully designed Variational Quantum Circuit (VQC) in an ML
pipeline for multiclass classification of time-series data yields the same classification performance,
while significantly reducing the number of trainable parameters. To achieve this, we use a VQC based
on a single qudit, and encode the classical data into the VQC via a trainable hybrid autoencoder
which has been recently proposed as embedding technique. Our results highlight the importance of
tailored data pre-processing for the circuit and show the potential of qudit-based VQCs.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Variational Quantum Circuits (VQCs) refer to quan-
tum circuits with parameterized gates, and they were
first introduced as the core component of variational
quantum algorithms [1]. Soon after, they were adopted
in the field of Quantum Machine Learning (QML) [2, 3]
as the quantum analogue of classical Neural Networks
(NNs) [4, 5]. Today, extensive numerical trials on bench-
mark Machine Learning (ML) problems and theoretical
investigations suggest that VQCs are not yet sophisti-
cated enough to outperform NNs. Moreover, the pres-
ence of barren plateaus [6] poses significant challenges
in training VQCs. On the other hand, research on the
structure, capacity and training of VQCs is still ongo-
ing, and there are conjectures that VQCs may be bet-
ter suited for handling quantum data or for solving spe-
cific problems [7], much like quantum computers. Ad-
ditionally, the performance of VQCs has primarily been
tested on feature spaces of small dimensions, often re-
sulting from pre-processing of initial data with the PCA
method. Open questions thus remain on how VQCs per-
form on big unstructured data and also whether PCA as
a pre-processing technique is the most suitable approach.
In this work, we employ a VQC for a multiclass classifi-
cation task involving unstructured data acquired during
experiments with a Quantum Key Distribution (QKD)
system.
In previous work [8], we performed the same
task using a deep NN, providing a basis for compari-
son.
Although the number of weights in the VQC is
approximately one-sixtieth of those in the NN, their per-
formance, as quantified by several metrics, is shown to
be comparable. To achieve this high level of performance
with the VQC, we carefully design its circuit by replac-
ing qubits with a qudit and by using pre-processing tech-
niques [9] aimed at optimizing the embedding of classical
data on the VQC. The results highlight the importance
of these two aspects of a VQC: their adapted encoding
within the VQC, and the power of qudits.
The manuscript is structured as follows. In Section II,
we review the acquisition and processing of data to per-
form the classification task using purely classical meth-
ods. Specifically, we construct an ML pipeline, the fi-
nal component of which is a deep NN, and we present
the results of the classification achieved by this classi-
cal methodology on the test data.
In Section III, we
review the main aspects of VQCs made of qudits and
explain how they can function as Quantum Neural Net-
works (QNNs). The second key element of this work is
the targeted encoding of classical data onto a VQC using
a hybrid method, which we refer to as Quantum Autoen-
coders (QAEs). QAEs are described in Section IV. In
Section V, we replace the deep NN in the ML pipeline
with a VQC composed of a nine-level qudit, where the
inputs are first pre-processed by a QAE, and present the
classification results achieved. This is the main model
suggested in this work, and we refer to it as QAE–qudit
VQC. For completeness, in the same section, we construct
alternative hybrid models and compare their classifica-
tion outcomes with those achieved by the QAE–qudit
VQC model. In the Discussion section (Section VI), we
summarize the key findings of this work and the elements
of our suggested model.
II.
DATA ACQUISITION AND A CLASSICAL
ML PIPELINE FOR THEIR MULTICLASS
CLASSIFICATION
In a previous work [8], we used a pair of QKD Toshiba
terminals, QKD4.2A-MU and QKD4.2B-MU [10], to col-
lect Quantum Bit Error Rate (QBER) and Secure Key
Rate (SKR) data [11] under different conditions for the
QKD fiber channel.
These conditions include normal
operation, coexisting classical signals at varying power
levels, and different degrees of attenuation. More specifi-
cally, these different conditions define nine distinct labels
for the data, which we briefly describe here as:
• Class 0: Normal function
• Class 1: Coexistence using 1 Laser
• Class 2: Coexistence using 2 Lasers
arXiv:2504.06892v1  [quant-ph]  9 Apr 2025
