(a) One–way function in classical public-key encryption
(b) Quantum key distribution (BB84).
Figure 1: Illustration on the fundamental physical principles behind the need of quantum cryptography – In Fig. (1a) a
colour-mixing analogy represents the encoding in public-key cryptography as a purple sphere, symbolizing an encrypted
message open to all. Yet, only holders of the private key can accurately decrypt it. Alice creates the purple sphere with
a specific combination of colors (20% red, 80% blue) mimicking a one way function (Eve cannot perfectly decompose the
purple shade into component colors). Bob, having some information about the precise mix (the private key), can decrypt it.
In Fig. (1b) quantum cryptography. Colors represents the basis (red {|0⟩, |1⟩}, blue {|+⟩, |−⟩}). Due to no-cloning, Eve’s
interference changes the color and shape of the ball. If Alice uses the red button and Eve guesses the blue button, the result
in Bob’s box is purple. Contrary to classical cryptography, in the quantum case, Eve’s intrusion affects the outcome at
Bob’s station. Bob detecting purple with a red button, signals Eve’s presence. Traditional and QKD protocols are realized
in the same causal cone at today’s distances, respectively ∼106km, and ∼102km.
1. Introduction
1.1. Overview of modern cryptography
The pioneering application of these revolutionary techniques has led to Quantum Key Distribution
(QKD), (and beyond [1]), representing a significant leap forward in security compared to traditional
public-key standards such as Diffie-Hellman [2] and RSA (Rivest-Shamir-Adleman)[3]. Facta lex inventa
fraus – the principle that every established law is followed by the invention of a way to circumvent it
– does not hold, in theory, for modern cryptography. With the advent of Quantum Cryptography [4–
6], the security of communication protocols has shifted from complex, yet vulnerable algorithms, to
fundamental quantum principles (uncertainty, entanglement, complementarity, no-cloning, non-locality,
etc), providing a mechanism for inherently secure communication channels. While traditional public-key
cryptography employs the concept of one-way functions to encrypt/decrypt information, QKD detects the
potential intrusion of an eavesdropper, Eve, due to the principle of no-cloning or, equivalently, through
the uncertainty principle. Fig. 1 visually compares RSA 1 with the prepare-and-measure scenario of
BB84 [7] (emblematic of QKD). The players’ preparation (in Alice’s lab A) and measurements (in Bob’s
lab B) can be the red or blue buttons. While in the classical case, Eve has no button (she can make
perfect copies of the encoded messages sent and manipulate the copies however she chooses), in QKD
Eve must choose and perform a measurement to obtain information. If Alice selects red and Eve selects
blue, then the effect of Eve’s disturbance appears in Bob’s measurements as a purple ball (a mix of red
and blue). Not only has the security of many public-key ciphers never been formally proven, but it is also
well known that many of those currently in use are vulnerable to quantum computers [8]. QKD, on the
other hand, creates robust encryption methods based on Kerckhoffs’s principle [9], which posits that a
cryptosystem’s security should be maintained even if everything about it is public knowledge, except the
secret key. However, theoretical security and practical security are different issues. Several groups have
experimentally demonstrated vulnerabilities in QKD systems [10–15], raising questions about whether
the theory or the experiments of QKD need refinement. Claiming that the principles of quantum theory
are fundamentally flawed would be an exaggeration. The real issues predominantly reside in the practical
implementation of QKD. While the theoretical basis of QKD is robust, its real-world application involves
new technology, such as single-photon detectors, and can be compromised by unavoidable imperfections
in the devices.
“Theory and experiment are the same, in theory, but experimentally different.”
(The Yale Literary Magazine, Feb, 1882, B. Brewster)
1In Fig. 1a, one might think spectroscopy could reveal each purple’s components, but the process resembles a one-way
cryptographic function: easy to mix, hard to reverse. Like password hashing, the color mixture conceals the original inputs,
preventing unauthorized decryption.
3
