13
FIG. 9.
DC voltage drop across Josephson junction, VJ,
as a function of DC voltage bias on both top and bottom
tunnel probes, VT (B), and DC current bias IDC in a Josephson
junction device with Ws = 600 nm, L = 1.6 µm, WN =
100 nm at the zero magnetic field.
The dark blue region
(VJ = 0) indicates the DC Josephson regime.
states, thereby modulating the net critical current.
XI.
MEASUREMENTS OF JOSEPHSON
JUNCTIONS IN VARIOUS GEOMETRIES
The spectral features in the AC Josephson regime dis-
cussed in the main text were observed in four Josephson
junctions with different geometries, as shown in Fig. 10.
These data indicate that the phenomenon is robust and
is not sensitive to the width of the superconducting leads,
WS, or the length of the junction, L, within the ranges
studied. Note that the middle gate voltages, Vmiddle, ap-
plied in Fig. 10(a)-(c) vary: Vmiddle = −0.7 V in (a),
Vmiddle = −0.39 V in (b) and Vmiddle = 0 V in (c).
XII.
POLARITY OF APPLIED DC CURRENT
We also tested for the polarity dependence of the DC
current bias. Fig. 11 (a) and (b) are schematics of the
junction with positive and negative current biases, re-
spectively; the main difference is that the potential of
the left superconducting lead changes to −VJ in the neg-
ative current bias case. Fig. 11(c) and (d) display the
tunneling spectra as a function of the DC current bias,
IDC, using different current bias directions at zero mag-
netic field on the same devices studied in the main text.
Note that the middle gate voltage is set at -0.5 V during
the measurements of Fig. 11 (c) and (d). Conductance
peaks P1 and P3 are centered around zero voltage for
both positive and negative current bias cases. However,
the centers of conductance peaks P2 and P4 shift to pos-
itive voltage in the positive current bias case and to neg-
ative voltage in the negative case, as indicated by dashed
lines in Fig. 11(c) and (d). This behavior is in agreement
with the predictions of the three-terminal model.
XIII.
VJ AS A FUNCTION OF B∥AT IDC =
1.1 µA
Fig. 12 displays the DC voltage drop, VJ, as a function
of the in-plane magnetic field, B|| measured simultane-
ously with the data shown in Fig. 4(i). It is evident that
VJ increases with B||, explaining the observed shift of
the center of P2 and P4 to higher voltages as B|| in-
creases in Fig. 4(i). This increase in VJ at a constant DC
current bias has been previously documented in the liter-
ature [4, 30, 31]. In the AC Josephson regime, the resis-
tance primarily arises from single quasiparticle transport
across the junction, mediated by multi-Andreev reflec-
tions (MARs). We observed MARs feature in our devices
(not shown). This process is influenced by the in-plane
magnetic field, leading to the observed behavior.
