Fn>1 (x) ⊃
∼
Z x
0
dt tn−3 [ F1 (t) ]n−1
dn−1
dtn−1
h
ω(1)(2t/3)
i
.
(13)
Clearly, the partial contribution of ω(1) to Fn for n ≥2 is not enough to recover them
completely, as for such purpose one would need the other ω(k) for k ≤n, yet, it is natural
to sum all the ω(1) contributions to the β−function to see their effect.
In the top panel of Fig.8 we plotted ω| 1
Nf (ϵ) = ϵ+ ω(1)(ϵ)
Nf
and highlighted its poles. We
notice that, except around the poles, it is well approximated by the ϵ term reconstructing
the 1-loop term 2
3x2 of the beta-function in Eq.10 (compare also with Eq.4). We also
zoomed into the region around the first pole. Here region I is defined from the origin to
the first zero of ω(1), region II extends from this zero to the pole and region III from the
first pole to the second zero. In the bottom panel of Fig.8 highlighted in blue we plot
the corresponding solutions of the SCR for these three regions. We observe that due to
existence of a zero at a finite value of the coupling for ω(1) in the region I the solution
asymptotes to a straight line for x →+∞while in regions II and III it is double-valued
due to the different sign of ω(1) across the singularity. This is best seen from the zoom into
the narrow region II. Because of the multi-valued nature of the resulting beta function no
conclusions can be drawn about the fate of the 1/Nf UV FP.
3.2.2
O(N) model at order 1/N2
As another relevant example we investigate the O(N) mode to the next-to-leading order
corrections in 1/N [22] [23].
Figure 9: The O(N) critical exponent truncated at first order in orange and
second order in blue.
In Fig.9 we plot, in orange, the 1/N contribution to the critical exponent for N = 100.
This features zeros and poles similarly to the gauge theory example above. However, the
O(1/N2) corrections feature stronger singularities so their addition allows to change the
sign around the 1/N poles (shown by the blue curve in Fig.9) permitting to obtain a
single-valued solution for the four-dimensional beta function.
In Fig.10 we show the reconstructed solutions where each ”kick” corresponds to the
solutions getting closer to a pole delimiting the region where the SCR is numerically
solved. Within each interval, we had to adjust the initial condition to glue the solution to
