Illusion Spaces in VR: The Interplay Between Size and Taper Angle Perception in Grasping
CHI ’25, April 26-May 1, 2025, Yokohama, Japan
Physical object (example) : 6cm-8°
Illusion space for 
this physical object
Smallest, least tilted virtual object 
in this physical object’s illusion space: 
5.17cm (86.15% of 6cm)-4.16°(51.96% of 8°)
Largest, least tilted virtual object 
in this physical object’s illusion space: 
7.70cm (128.34% of 6cm)-5.07° (63.42% of 8°)
Largest, most tilted virtual object 
in this physical object’s illusion space: 
7.29cm (121.42% of 6cm)-11.57° (144.67% of 8°)
Smallest, most tilted virtual object 
in this physical object’s illusion space: 
5.13cm (85.47% of 6cm)-9.39° (117.37% of 8°)
Figure 10: Illusion space for an example physical object (6cm-8°. The vertices are the smallest-least tilted, smallest-most tilted,
largest-least tilted and largest-most tilted virtual objects it can represent in VR.
physical object cannot be fitted to a sigmoid function and show
a different pattern from our other results. This different pattern
stems from the fact that the haptic feedback was always less tilted
(other than when it exactly matched) and this disrupted the 50%
probabilities in 2AFC results (the ambiguous point where haptics
and visual feedback are considered to be perceived as the same).
However, we believe it’s still important to study the perception of
virtual angles around both sides of a straight object (0° taper angle).
Studying these objects will require a different formulation of the
question or, perhaps, a different psychophysics method. Alterna-
tively, other biometric methods are emerging that leverage gaze
tracking and EEG to determine perceptual thresholds [21], and they
could prove valuable here. This remains an interesting avenue for
future work.
While we highlight that prior studies have only concentrated
on a single factor, our study is constrained to size and taper angle.
There remain many other factors, some of which have been studied
solely but we expect likely interplay with other factors in inter-
esting ways should be explored and added into the illusion space.
Surface texture, for example, has influence on the friction cones
in grasping according to the grasping model [56] and thus may
influence the angle perception. However, its influence on pressure
magnitude and force direction may have a lesser influence on the
size perception limits. Mass, on the other hand, has been considered
related with size perception in many previous studies [15, 44] and
can be included as another factor in the illusion spaces. Mass likely
impacts joint torques when lifting, which goes beyond the angular
joint configurations that we have been largely concerned with here.
Curvature, conversely, is a further dimension of shape that could
perform similarly to taper angle as its effects on finger span and
friction should be limited.
Apart from factors of the grasped objects, the grasp types can
also alter the limits of the illusion spaces. We chose to examine the
Palmar Pinch as a popular choice in human computer interaction
(HCI) (e.g., [33, 34], but other grasp types could easily result in quite
different joint orientations, torques, and force profiles. From the
GRASP taxonomy[23], for example, grasps such as Large Diameter,
Power Sphere and Sphere Finger include the palm in grasping
and the force distribution changes dramatically, with the fingers
largely acting as stabilisers into the palm, highly likely resulting
in changing of perception limits. When the thumb is adducted in
grasping (e.g. Adducted Thumb and Fixed Hook), or when more
fingers are included in grasping (e.g. Quadpod and Precision Sphere)
the fingers collaborate in a different way which will change the
perception limits estimated in our illusion spaces. Each of these
properties and grasp type has a unique impact on the biomechanical
