thereby expanding the sampling capacity and providing useful complementary infor-
mation. With more access to AIS data, our approach can better study the temporal
variability over more regions and under more diverse conditions.
Given the pronounced diel changes, analyses of tracks that disregard the tempo-
ral dynamics of aerosol-cloud interactions may represent a certain average of cloud
responses with varying ages, in accordance with previously raised cautions [18]. Recent
statistical analyses of observational data that are not based on opportunistic exper-
iments also found notable diurnal changes [45, 46], hinting that temporal changes
of aerosol-cloud interactions due to variation in solar heating may be a general fea-
ture. We suggest that resolving the temporal evolutions of aerosol-cloud interactions
is important to reveal new insights and provide better observational constraints of
aerosol effective radiative forcing.
Uncertainty in cloud retrievals can affect our quantitative results. A potential
example is the near instantaneous increase of L in response to ship pollution, which
does not seem physical and requires investigations on how retrieval artifacts may play
a role. However, our results rely on the relative difference between polluted and back-
ground clouds that are equally affected by retrieval biases. We thus do not expect our
results to be less systematically impacted.
Trajectory modeling is an excellent tool, but factors such as quality of reanalysis
winds introduce errors in the locations of virtual ship-tracks, which limits our sam-
ple size because of unmatched ship-tracks. This impact on sample selection becomes
larger with increasing length of simulation periods, which limits our ability to study
temporal evolutions at longer time scales. We did not use all virtual ship tracks in our
study due to this concern as positional errors in virtual tracks could have systematic
biases or potentially introduce artificial signals that otherwise are not present. Further
development that addresses this issue could make virtual ship-tracks more useful.
7 Methods
Space-time interchangeability
We adopt the space-time interchangeability [28, 47] assumption to study the tem-
poral evolution of cloud adjustments in ship-tracks. With this assumption, we assume
that ship-track segments with various ages but from different ship-tracks can reli-
ably provide a good approximation of the typical temporal evolution of a ship-track.
In other words, ensemble of segments that have different ages from different loca-
tions allow us to study the temporal evolution of a ship-track. This interchangeability
assumption is not perfect, but provides useful approximation of the composite behav-
ior of temporal dynamics of cloud adjustments to aerosols. The temporal evolutions of
several ship-track properties such as Reff, width and ∆Nd obtained with this approach
agree well with results in the literature that track temporal evolution in individual
long ship-tracks, as shown in the main text. Our approach takes advantage of the
numerous detected ship-tracks and allow us to expand the scale of our analysis, which
helps to build our results on more samples. It is relatively straightforward to deter-
mine the ages of ship-track segments if a head of ship-track can be clearly determined
and the ship’s speed is known. However, it is not the case for vast majority of detected
10
