is affected by the inflaton field decay rate (Γϕ) into radiation via a decay rate Γϕ, whose
values we choose according to the Starobinsky model [82].
Then, the evolution of the
energy densities is solved with a system of coupled Boltzmann equations (3.12). If PBH
dominate for a sufficient amount of time (that depends on inflaton decay rate through
(3.19)), the Poissonian density fluctuations they produce induce GWs at second order in
perturbation theory [12–14] that could reach the BBN bound (4.8). Our study revealed
that the duration of the PBH-dominated phase, and thus the production of GWs phase is
highly sensitive to:
• The decay rate of the inflaton field, Γϕ: A lower decay rate allows PBH to dominate
for longer and induce more GWs.
• The fractional energy density of PBH, ΩPBH: If the PBH are produced more abun-
dantly, they dominate sooner and induce more GWs. This quantity is directly related
to Apeak and σ, see Appendix B.
• The mass of the PBH distribution, MPBH,0: The higher the mass, the later evapora-
tion occurs and a longer PBH-dominated phase, which induces more GWs. This is
inversely related to kpeak (3.9).
We computed the power spectrum of these induced GWs and found that the resulting
signal could be within the detectable range of future gravitational wave detectors such as
the LSD and ET, see Fig. 5. Further, our results indicate that considering an early matter-
dominated phase together with a decay rate for the inflation field allows for a relaxation of
earlier constraints on PBH, as Fig. 4 reveals. This suggests that PBH could have played
a more significant role in cosmic evolution than early studies indicate, which highlights
the importance of considering the interplay between PBH formation during a matter-
dominated phase using the Khlopov-Polnarev formalism, the inflaton decay to radiation,
and the emission of induced gravitational waves in the early universe.
Acknowledgments
Daniel del-Corral is grateful for the support of grant UI/BD/151491/2021 from the Por-
tuguese Agency Funda¸c˜ao para a Ciˆencia e a Tecnologia. This research was funded by
Funda¸c˜ao para a Ciˆencia e a Tecnologia grant number UIDB/MAT/00212/2020 and COST
action 23130. KSK acknowledges support from the Royal Society Newton Fellowship Grant.
The authors thank David Wands and Andrew Gow for useful discussions.
A
Mass fraction for high σk
Following App. B of [26], the mass fraction under the KP formalism is obtained by com-
puting the following integral:
β(k) = −675
√
5
2πσ6
k
Z
1
2
−1
2
du (2u −1)(2u + 1)
Z ∞
−1−2
3 u
dt 2 + 2Az2
∗+ A2z4
∗
A3
e−Az∗,
(A.1)
– 18 –
