solar radiative zone, complementary to experimental values40;42. We use it in detailed compar-
isons with theoretical computations, as shown in Figure 3 for two models of our set, namely
Models 1 and 2 (See Table 1), using either the AGSS09 (left panel) or AAG21 (right panel)
abundances. We compare our results to the most recent versions of two opacity computation
codes, OPAS57 (left panel) and SCO-RCG (right panel)58 (see Methods, subsection Theoret-
ical opacity computations). The “seismic” opacity shows for all models a localized increase
of ≈10%, at the position of the iron opacity peak at the BCZ. Tests investigating the impact
of radiative accelerations show that they are insufﬁcient to explain this increase (see Methods,
subsection Parametrization of the solar core).
Detailed computations have been performed for the exact thermodynamic conditions of both
the evolutionary model, before reconstruction, denoted “Ref” and the seismic model, denoted
“Seismic”. Results for evolutionary models are shown in brown and in orange for seismic mod-
els. The plain lines denote results from the models and the dashed ones those of detailed theo-
retical computations for the exact same thermodynamic coordinates, namely T, ρ and chemical
composition. In the OPAS case (left panel), the dashed and plain brown lines show the consis-
tency between the 2015 and 2021 versions. The SCO-RCG results are compared to the OPAL
tables used in the solar model. They are higher than OPAL values by about 9% at 0.35R⊙and
about 35% at the BCZ for the exact conditions of the model.
For both seismic models, the opacity from theoretical computations is reduced by about 2%
compared to the evolutionary results (comparing the dashed orange line to the dashed brown
one), due to the change in ρ and T from the reconstruction. OPAS computations show a lower
opacity than the seismic value by about 10% at the BCZ, while SCO-RCG results show excess
of approximately 6% at lower radius (thus higher temperature) and about 24% at the BCZ.
To investigate the physical origin of the changes, we look at the contributions of the most im-
11
