26
predicts that motion sickness is induced in situations where there is a disagreement between
visual or vestibular cues and the information anticipated by the nervous system (Benson
1990). Since the vestibular system may be expected to provide information that matches
neither the true acceleration or the true velocity around the transition point we suggest that
it may be the transition point between small and large 𝜅that causes motion sickness.
Evidence suggests that susceptibility to motion sickness peaks at a higher frequency for
animals smaller than humans Golding & Gresty (2016); Javid & Naylor (1999). Given the
preceding discussion, this is a little surprising: if we assume that the size scales of the
vestibular system scale in proportion then (7.1) shows that the critical frequency should
remain the same. If the preceding hypothesis is correct, it would suggest that either the
material parameters of the cupula change or that some non-trivial allometric scaling of the
dimensions of the canal must occur. (We are unaware of any data on the allometric scaling.)
In §3.2 we also mentioned that in the transition region (when 𝜅is nether large nor small)
the response develops an overshoot at the end of the manoeuvre: the deformation, and hence
a sensing signal persists after the motion has concluded. This feature seems undesirable
(the “neural mismatch” hypothesis would predict a high likelihood of experiencing motion
sickness, as the vestibular input will disagree with the visual input) but also in line with
everyday experience of dizziness.
From an engineering perspective, the insights gained from this study could inform the
design of biomimetic sensors, prosthetics and systems, for example the MEMS prototype
from Raoufi et al. (2019). For instance, understanding the interplay between fluid dynamics
and flexible structures in the semicircular canals could inspire the development of flow sensors
or inertial measurement devices that mimic the sensitivity and robustness of the vestibular
system, for instance, biologically-inspired inertial navigation systems. Additionally, the
analytical framework developed here could be extended to other biological systems involving
thin fluid-filled structures, such as the cochlea or cardiovascular vessels.
7.2. Limitations and future directions
Our model has been based on a number of approximations that have facilitated the analysis that
we have presented here. Of these, perhaps the most important is our use of a thin plate model
of the cupula — this is mathematically convenient but is likely to be an over-simplification
of the true behaviour of the cupula. In particular, its validity would require the cupula to
be slender; concrete measurements of the cupula’s aspect ratio are not available, meaning
our thin-plate model of the cupula might not be appropriate in all cases. As an alternative
strategy, we note that the strains are small, and so a solution of the Navier equations (2.2)
that does not assume the thickness of the cupula to be small might be required. At the same
time, we note that our existing analysis assumes that the cupula’s thickness is constant, but
photographic evidence suggests this is likely not the case (Rabbitt et al. 2004).In particular,
the cupula seems to be thinner in the centre and thicker towards the edge. Modelling this
effect, via a plate equation with a spatially dependent thickness, might be enough to warrant
further work with the plate model. Whilst this will influence the shape of the deflection
profile of the cupula, it is unlikely to give rise to new phenomena.
The model we have presented allows for the cupula to have some pre-tension, 𝑇, although
this has not been observed experimentally. This lack of direct observation is in part because
of the great difficulty in accessing this delicate tissue. (Pre-tension is often present in thin
biological structures due to residual stresses from development or mechanical interactions
with surrounding tissues (Goriely 2017).) Experiments that determine the presence of pre-
tension in the cupula (and its magnitude) could prove useful in understanding the role of
parameters like the inverse bendability, 𝑏.
Another simplification in our model is that that the cupula is uniformly clamped to the
