ELECTRONIC STRUCTURE GUIDED INVERSE DESIGN
USING GENERATIVE MODELS
Shuyi Jia†, Panchapakesan Ganesh‡§, Victor Fung†§
†Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
‡Center For Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA
§Corresponding authors: ganeshp@ornl.gov, victorfung@gatech.edu
ABSTRACT
The electronic structure of a material fundamentally determines its underlying physical,
and by extension, its functional properties. Consequently, the ability to identify or gener-
ate materials with desired electronic properties would enable the design of tailored func-
tional materials. Traditional approaches relying on human intuition or exhaustive compu-
tational screening of known materials remain inefficient and resource-prohibitive for this
task. Here, we introduce DOSMatGen, the first instance of a machine learning method
which generates crystal structures that match a given desired electronic density of states.
DOSMatGen is an E(3)-equivariant joint diffusion framework, and utilizes classifier-free
guidance to accurately condition the generated materials on the density of states. Our
experiments find this approach can successfully yield materials which are both stable
and match closely with the desired density of states. Furthermore, this method is highly
flexible and allows for finely controlled generation which can target specific templates
or even individual sites within a material. This method enables a more physics-driven
approach to designing new materials for applications including catalysts, photovoltaics,
and superconductors.
1
INTRODUCTION
The ability to design novel materials with specific functional properties is fundamental to technological
breakthroughs, driving innovation in fields such as energy storage, electronics, and healthcare [1, 2, 3, 4,
5]. While traditional approaches to materials design rely heavily on Edisonian trial-and-error testing, or
exhaustive screening through experimental or computational methods, these methods are often both time-
consuming and resource-intensive [6, 7]. In contrast, recent advances in deep generative models have
enabled them to be a potentially transformative approach to materials design. Specifically, this approach to
inverse design eliminates the need for exhaustive screening of the materials space by working backwards to
create materials from the ground up via a data-driven process [8, 9, 10, 11].
Deep generative models for materials design can be trained to conditionally generate the precise crystal
structure of materials, which allows for further computational investigation followed by eventual experi-
mental synthesis and validation. Current state-of-the-art approaches generally operate by generating new
candidates within a given materials representation, or by applying an iterative process such as denoising
directly on atomic coordinates in the Cartesian space. Examples of the former case include text-based rep-
resentations for autoregressive language modeling of materials [12, 13, 14], 3D voxelized images for varia-
tional autoencoders and generative adversarial networks (GANs) [15, 16, 17], among others [18, 19, 20, 21].
In the latter case, a seminal early example would be the crystal diffusion variational autoencoder (CDVAE)
[22], which employs a diffusion model [23] to denoise atomic coordinates while predicting composition
and lattice parameters from a latent representation. Building on this foundation, recent diffusion-based
and flow-matching approaches have advanced to jointly generate all relevant structural and compositional
attributes in a unified process [24, 25, 26]. Using these methods, new materials have been generated with
desired properties which have been validated with density functional theory (DFT) [27, 28, 29, 30] and in
some cases, experimental studies [25].
In this work, we introduce DOSMatGen, a conditional diffusion model designed to generate stable crys-
talline materials with targeted atomic-level electronic properties. Extending the periodic E(3)-equivariant
denoising framework of DiffCSP [24], DOSMatGen achieves high-quality conditional generation by care-
fully tuning the balance between the structural validity of the generated materials and their alignment with
the target properties. As a concrete demonstration, we focus on conditioning the diffusion process on
node-level density of states (DOS). The DOS corresponds to a 1D spectral property that encodes the key
electronic-level functionality of a material, from its metal, semiconducting, insulating states, to more ex-
1
arXiv:2504.06249v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  8 Apr 2025
