13 
 
and then a slow decrease to a constant for high ionic strength. Interestingly the red and the yellow 
curves merge at high ionic strength. The blue curve shows the variation of the phase factor with 
the ionic strength, which increases rapidly in the low ionic strength and then remains constant with 
the increase of the ionic strength, as shown in the right axis. So Fig. 4 f) significantly shows how 
the overall nlostatic is controlled by both the phase factor and the surface potential part. 
In Fig. 4 g) we plot nlostatic as a function of the log of ionic strength for different phase 
mismatch ∆kz, which shows for the range of ionic strength (10−6M < x < 10−3M) the nlostatic 
increases and then again decreases with the increase of the ionic strength. 
Fig. 5 is the 2DES spectra for different ionic strengths, 0.000001 M, 0.00005 M, and 0.005M. 
There is distinctly phase change and also a change in the intensity with the variation of the ionic 
strength. As at low ionic strength phase angle approaches π/2 hence as a whole signal decreases. 
At intermediate ionic strength, intensity is highest with distinct phases compared to higher con- 
centrations.Hence it clearly reflects that at intermediate ionic strength ((10−6M < x < 10−3M)), 
NLOstatic is distinctly different from NLOoscillating. Hence we propose 2DES experiment can dis- 
entangle NLOstatic from NLOoscillating in this ionic strength range. 
SI shows the 2DES spectra for NLOoscillating which is independent of ionic strength and is the 
same phase as NLOstatic of high ionic strength but with much less intensity. We also anticipate 
NLOstatic is the main contributing part of NLOTotal signal. At high ionic strength, it acts like 
NLOoscillating, and we may not distinguish them separately. 
Also, we suggest the likeliness of spectral broadening in the NLOstatic at low ionic strength. 
As shown in S.I. We also bring up the plausibility of other kinds of potentials and the necessity 
of profound research that could be interesting for H-bonded solvent molecules at the interface or 
because of surface passivating ligands, etc. 
