SI- 1
: Loading device for experiment with an in-plane magnetic field (B||)
We have performed measurements with B|| in a cryo-free dilution refrigerator fitted with a superconducting
magnet. Though there are (dilution) fridges available commercially that come with a magnet that can be
applied in all three cartesian directions, X, Y , and Z, we were limited to a setup that can generate field lines
only in one direction (the proverbial Z−axis or out of plane). To overcome this limitation, our device was
loaded on a custom-made chip holder that essentially rotates the plane of the device by 90◦while loading,
such that now the plane of the device becomes parallel with the Z−axis as shown in SI-Fig. 1a,b. The whole
arrangement can now be loaded on the cold finger (SI-Fig. 1c,d) sitting inside a ‘sample puck’, which can
then be bottom loaded in the dilution fridge. In this arrangement, the magnetic field lines run parallel to the
sample puck’s and cold finger’s central axis.
SI- 2
: Butterfly Magnetoresistance (BMR) - A discussion
BMR are a cross magnetoresistance (MR) hysteresis curves resembling the shape of wings of a butterfly
and observed in a diverse range of magnetic systems including but not limited to van der Waals materials,
strongly correlated systems, and traditional magnets 1–4 along with other ubiquitously observed traditional
MR hysteresis curves, for example, in the shape of a parallelogram. An MR curve reflects the evolution path
of the magnetic structure of a system when subjected to an external varying magnetic field. An MR curve
becomes a BMR when the MR passes through two higher (lower) resistance states in the sweeping-forward
and sweeping-backward processes of the applied magnetic field. The MR curve displays two crossed peaks
(valleys) and results in an upward (downward) BMR, as shown in SI-Fig. 2a,b. As seen from the schematics,
for large enough +ve and −ve B (> coercive field, |Bco|), magnetoresistance is almost similar, indicating
an ordered phase of a magnetic system. It is evident from SI-Fig. 2a,b, the peaks (valleys) appear during the
switching of the magnetization direction with a sweep of the magnetic field, moving the ordering through
two volatile states (one in forward sweep and another in backward sweep), resulting in hysteresis between
MR curves. As we are talking about layered 2D materials, it is imperative to consider the anisotropy of
the system, i.e., the direction of the easy/hard axis. The arrangement of magnetic ordering favoured by a
particular anisotropy can lead to resistance values lower or higher than the volatile states for |B| > |Bco|.
For a given anisotropy of a system, it is possible to change/switch the magnetic anisotropy by subjecting the
system to various external experimental perturbations like applied current, temperature, and electric field.
The implication of this is, that a magnetic system showing BMR hysteresis can be switched from a magnetic
ordering with ‘upwards’ BMR (SI-Fig. 2a) to a magnetic ordering ‘downwards’ BMR (SI-Fig. 2b) or vice
versa under appropriate tuning of experimental conditions/parameters.
3
