10
VI.
A SHALLOW GAUSSIAN ELIMINATION
FRAMEWORK FOR BOSON SAMPLING
INTERFEROMETER DESIGN
In Section V we showed how to minimize the
number of MZIs for boson sampling, and how to
design universal interferometers by coupling smaller
interferometers.
Here we combine these to explore
circuits that can perform boson sampling with several
coupled interferometers.
We make the following two assumptions. First, we
assume that we have access to universal interferometers
acting on k modes for some integer 2 ≤k ≤m. Based
on the QR decomposition we know that they can
transform any k × k matrix into a triangular one.
Secondly, we are free to permute arbitrarily the modes
when coupling interferometers together.
Being able to perform unitary transformations on ar-
bitrary sets of modes make it possible to design shal-
lower circuits for boson sampling. Given a rectangular
matrix V ∈Cm×n representing a boson sampling exper-
iment on m modes with n photons, the following greedy
algorithm, inspired from [13], constructs a shallow lin-
ear optical circuit implementing V :
1. assign to each row i of V a label pi such that
pi = minj V [i, j] ̸= 0. If no such label exists then
pi = n + 1.
2. sort the labels in ascending order and permute the
modes accordingly.
3. define istart = min(mini pi = pi+1, n −k)
4. starting from the mode istart, group the modes by
k. For one such group
gj = [istart + jk, istart + (j + 1)k[
look at the smallest label qj = mini∈gj pi. If qj ̸=
n + 1 consider the submatrix
Wj = V [gj, qj : min(qj + k, n)].
5. based on the QR decomposition, compute a uni-
tary Uj such that UjWj is triangular, synthesize
Uj and add it to the circuit on the corresponding
modes.
6. repeat steps 1-5 until V is diagonal.
Each iteration of the loop can only increase the
number of zero elements in V .
Once V
is upper
triangular it will also be diagonal and the synthesis is
complete. The inverse of the computed circuit gives a
valid implementation of V . This process is shown in
Fig. 9.
The minimum MZI-depth is obtained in the case k =
2, i.e, when we only couple single MZIs together.
Theorem 4. Given layers of MZIs with arbitary con-
nectivity, any non adaptive m-mode n-photon linear op-
tical algorithm can be executed with a linear optical cir-
cuit of MZI-depth O(n + log(m)).
Proof. See Appendix A.
This improves the O(n log(m)) scheme proposed by
Aaronson and Arkhipov [1, Theorem 45] which, to our
knowledge, is the shallowest analytical scheme in the
literature with nonlocal MZIs.
The work of [28] proposes a long range MZI architec-
ture and provides numerical evidence that O(log(m))
depth of this architecture suffices to mimic relevant
properties of the Haar measure on U(m), and conse-
quently that boson sampling with average-case hard-
ness could be performed at this depth with this ar-
chitecture. In contrast, Theorem 4 shows that we can
do any m-mode transformation acting on n photons in
O(n+log(m)) depth. Notably this means we can exactly
sample outputs of linear optical circuits whose unitaries
are chosen from the Haar measure over U(m).
Note that O(mn) MZIs are necessary to implement an
arbitrary n-photon m-mode experiment (see Section V)
and at most m/2 MZIs can be executed in one time-
step.
Hence, the minimum depth required to imple-
ment any unitary is O(n). When n = 1, the synthesis
process essentially consists in zeroing m −1 coefficients
of a vector. We can only half the number of nonzeros
coefficients at each time step, resulting in a necessary
O(log2(m)) depth. These two lower bounds give strong
evidence that the depth complexity of Theorem 4 is the
best achievable.
VII.
OPTIMIZING THE TOTAL
TRANSMISSION IN BOSON SAMPLING
EXPERIMENTS
In the following we perform a numerical analysis of
coupled interferometer designs for boson sampling. We
show that with the scheme described in Section VI we
can study the optimal chip-size for a given MZI loss
and coupling loss. To reach a quantum computational
advantage we likely need to perform boson sampling
with n ≈50 photons. Here we arbitrarily work with
n = 48.
Total transmission.
Our metric of interest is the
total transmission of the interferometer.
This relates
directly to the probability of success of the experiment,
where success means that no photon is lost. Let:
• ηmzi be the transmission of one MZI,
• ηc be the chip-to-chip coupling transmission,
• k the chip size,
• dm,n the depth, as an interferometer-based circuit,
to perform the greedy algorithm on a matrix of
