Entropy 2024, 26, 612
55 of 84
6.5.1. Trajectories
Expressing relative masses as a ratio m1 : m2 : m3, annulus, pretezel and chaotic
trajectories are obtained and the symbol sequence always takes the form
∏
i,j,k
(Ami, B3nj)lk
(189)
as in the equal mass case. Equation (189) implies that B motion always comes in multiples
of three; no motions have been observed that depart from this situation [116].
The situation where two masses are equal (m1 : m2 : m3 = 1 : 1 : α) is instructive,
and the plots of the relative motion of the particles for both the N and R systems is given in
Figure 37 for decreasing values of α. For equal mass (α = 1), there is an annulus motion:
no particle ever crosses another twice in a row. But as m3 decreases (α decreases), its
frequency of oscillation decreases while its amplitude increases with respect to the other
two, which provide a gravitationally bound subsystem. The binding becomes tighter as α
decreases, more so for the R system. Eventually, the binding becomes so tight that the more
massive particles execute an additional A motion before crossing the third particle, and the
hex-particle transitions from annulus to pretzel motion. The greater the mass difference,
the more difﬁcult it is to set up initial conditions at a given energy so that particles 1 and 2
do not cross more than once during the long period oscillation of particle 3.
Large and small values of α are likewise instructive, and plots for α = 100 (particle
3 very massive) and α = 0.01 (particles 1 and 2 very massive) are, respectively, shown in
Figures 38 and 39. As expected, for large α, the heavy particle 3 barely moves as the other
two oscillate about it, depicted in Figure 38. However, the passing of the other two particles
causes small perturbations in the motion of the heavy body, as shown in the insets. The
perturbation is smooth and regular in the N system, whereas in the R system, the velocity of
the large mass increases much more suddenly, leading to a more erratic and jerky trajectory.
For small α (Figure 39), a stable gravitationally bound subsystem is formed by the
two heavy particles, with the third oscillating about their centre of inertia. The oscillation
amplitude is much larger and its frequency much smaller in the N system than in the
R system, commensurate with the two-body system in Section 5. The effect of the light
particle 3 is to cause the oscillatory motion of the centre of mass of the two more massive
particles, which is clear from the insets in the N and R systems. This perturbation is almost
imperceptible due to the two heavy particles being twice as massive as the single particle
in the α = 100 case (Figure 38); consequently, they are less susceptible to changes in motion
from the smaller mass body.
