the fact that the Primakoff production mechanism, which is the contribution sensitive to
the effective coupling, is dwarfed by the tree-level DB production channel, as can be seen
in figure 5. No matter which coupling type is used, their differing effects are irrelevant
compared to DB production, hence the agreement is good for low masses as well. At the
tip of the exclusion, on the other hand, the Primakoff production actually outweighs the
DB production (see figure 5), such that the two coupling scenarios give slightly different
results.
This difference becomes much more pronounced in the top-right panel of figure 9,
which shows the comparison of the bounds derived using Scenario M. Since in this scenario
only the muon coupling is present at tree level, the only production mechanism in E137 is
Primakoff production. Below the threshold ma = 2mµ ≈211 MeV, the ALP can only decay
into photons, whereas above the muon threshold, the decay into muons proceeds so fast
that the ALPs can never leave the dump and reach the detector. As a result, the bounds
on this model are very sensitive to the type of coupling used. Indeed, since the effective
coupling in the derivative basis is smaller than in the pseudoscalar basis for large lepton
masses, the bounds for the derivative coupling are shifted to higher ˆgaµ to compensate.
In addition to the derivative and pseudoscalar couplings, we also show the bounds
derived using constant couplings. For the constant approximation of the pseudoscalar cou-
pling, the bounds are generally in very good agreement with the bounds derived from the
full pseudoscalar coupling, except close to the threshold ma = 2mµ where the approxima-
tion τ ≫1 becomes invalid. For the constant approximation of the derivative coupling,
the bounds of the full and approximate couplings start to deviate significantly for low
masses. In other words, it is essential to consider the full momentum dependence of the
effective photon coupling to accurately describe the bounds on the ALP-muon coupling for
the derivative coupling case.
One can observe the same effect in Scenario T, which is shown in the bottom-left
panel of figure 9. Since the ALP masses are far below the tau threshold, the ALPs can
only decay into photons via the effective coupling. As in Scenario M, the ALPs can only be
produced via Primakoff production. As a result, the qualitative discussion for Scenarios M
and T are almost identical. The only major difference is that, since the relevant ALP mass
range remains well below 2mτ, the constant coupling approximation works very well for
ma ≳100 MeV. For lower masses, however, the momentum dependence of the couplings
in the derivative case again becomes apparent.
Finally, the bottom-right panel of figure 9 considers Scenario U, i.e. universal couplings
to all leptons. The general shape of the bounds is similar to Scenario E for ma < 2mµ, but
features the cutoff at ma = 2mµ seen in Scenario M. Since there is now once again a tree-
level coupling to the beam electrons, the DB production of ALPs is the dominant process
for lower ALP masses, such that pseudoscalar and derivative couplings agree in this mass
range. The difference between the two coupling types only becomes apparent at masses
around ma ≳100 MeV, when the loop-induced decays into photons start to compete with
the tree-level decays into electrons [8].
Similarly to Scenario E, both the derivative coupling and the pseudoscalar one are
described quite accurately by their relative constant coupling approximation in most of
– 27 –
