12 
 
induced change into account, which may modify the charge distribution among 
different layers in tetralayer graphene.   
Domain wall sliding in polar stackings  
We now turn to describe the DW sliding at distinct interfaces in tetralayer graphene that 
causes the switching of polar stackings. Figures 3a-3e display the representative SNOM 
snapshots in our gate-dependent SNOM measurements for device 1, in which Figs. 3a-
3c and Figs. 3d-3e are obtained in the first cycle and second cycle scan, respectively 
(also see Figs. S5&S6). The data in Figs. 3a-3e captures the most pronounced DW 
sliding motions with gating in a time sequence. We observe two distinct types of DWs 
confined at different interfaces in tetralayer graphene, which are indicated by the blue 
and green dashed lines in Figs. 3a-3e, respectively, with arrows indicating the 
corresponding sliding directions. The schematic drawing of domain patterns and DWs 
in Fig. 3f reproduces the pronounced DW sliding revealed in Figs. 3a-3e. The blue solid 
line in Fig. 3f depicts the DW shared between polar ABAC and ABCB, and between 
nonpolar ABAB and ABCA. The green solid line depicts another type of DW shared 
between polar ABAC and nonpolar ABAB, and between polar ABCB and nonpolar 
ABCA. The direct visualization of DW sliding indicated by the blue dashed lines in 
Figs. 3a-3e unambiguously demonstrates the DW sliding mechanism on switching one 
polar stacking to another with opposite out-of-plane polarization in tetralayer graphene, 
providing the first microscopic observation in graphitic multilayer systems to the best 
of our knowledge.  
The observed DW sliding of different types in Figs. 3a-3e rationalizes the formed 
domain patterns under investigation. It can be directly translated into interlayer sliding 
in tetralayer graphene as follows. The movement of the blue DW in Fig. 3f corresponds 
to a simultaneous sliding of the bottom two layers with the top two layers fixed (change 
from ABCB to ABAC and from ABCA to ABAB) as illustrated in Fig. 3g. It can also 
be attributed to sliding of the top two layers with the bottom two layers fixed (change 
from ABCB to CACB and from ABCA to CACA) as illustrated in Fig. S19b. The two 
scenarios are totally equivalent with the DWs both confined in the middle two layers 
L2 and L3 (Fig. S19). On the other hand, the movement of the green DW in Fig. 3f 
corresponds to the sliding of the bottom layer alone (change from ABCB to ABCA and 
ABAC to ABAB) as illustrated in Fig. 3h, for sliding the top three layers together in an 
opposite direction is energetically unfavorable. We note that the sliding of green DW 
