A Self-Supervised Framework for Space Object Behaviour Characterisation.
2
Figure 1: Graphical structure of the paper. First, in Section 2.1 we describe pre-training our Foundation Model with a large unla-
belled dataset of real light curves. We encode these into a rich latent representation with a Perceiver-VAE architecture, updating
these representations based on three self supervised learning (SSL) tasks: Reconstruction, Forecasting, and Masking. We next
analyse the results of pre-training, which includes pre-flagging of anomalies based on reconstruction difficulty (Sections 2.2-2.3,
and forecasting quality of the model (2.4. Following this, we descibe fine-tuning our rich representations for two downstream
tasks: a) anomaly prediction (Section 2.5, and b) motion prediction (Section 2.6). Finally, we demonstrate further utility of our
representations by generating de novo datasets according to a particular motion type (Section 2.7).
ing space objects that are behaving in an unusual way, such
as motions, manoeuvres, or those that are performing atypi-
cal functions. Characterising these atypical behaviours can be
done through simulation of space object observations, but this
is challenging, due to imperfect physical models and compu-
tational cost. Therefore, a Foundation model for SDA should
be able to perform anomaly detection, integrating real observa-
tions with physical models in a computationally efficient way.
Foundation Models are typically pre-trained on large datasets
to learn some compressed rich, general latent representation
of the data distribution. They are then fine-tuned for specific
tasks by further using those latent representations, for example,
classifying them according to a small amount of labelled data.
Whilst in pre-training, the goal is usually to keep the optimisa-
tion task relatively unconstrained to encourage general features
to be learned, we can still make architectural decisions to build
in anomaly detection from the ground up through the use of
Variational Autoencoder (VAE) components.
VAEs are generative models which are trained by learning to
reconstruct the input data from a sampling of the learned la-
tent space [9]. They provide a simple and intuitive way to per-
form anomaly detection, as they inherently produce a recon-
struction error at inference. This error is the difference between
the model’s reconstruction of an input and the actual input. If
a specific data point is unusual compared to the training data,
or is not well represented in the training data, it will produce
a high reconstruction error, suggesting anomalous behaviour
or properties. Unsupervised models with Variational Autoen-
coders (VAEs) have been used extensively as anomaly detec-
tors, (for a recent review in the context of solar images see the
Introduction in [10]).
Whilst VAEs offer an effective anomaly detection mechanism,
they still need integration into a broader neural network frame-
work to effectively process complex, high dimensional space
object data. Transformer architectures are an attractive choice
here, due to their ability to capture long range dependencies
in sequential data.
When choosing a Transformer architec-
ture, there are numerous variants with respective strengths and
weaknesses. For example, conventional transformer-based neu-
ral networks perform the computationally costly full self at-
tention mechanism between all the inputs.
This means that
standard transformers scale poorly with larger dataset sizes.
