2
FIG. 1.
Schematic of the Kerr cavity optomechanical sys-
tem consisting of a mechanical mode b optomechanically cou-
pled to a optical mode a containing a Kerr nonlinear medium
with nonlinear constant χ. The g0 is the single-photon op-
tomechancial coupling strength. The cavity field and the me-
chanical resonator are, respectively, contacted to a squeezed
vacuum reservoir (with decay rate κa, squeezing parameter
re, and reference phase θe) and a heat bath (with decay rate
κb and average thermal phonon occupation ¯nth). In addition,
the cavity field is driven by a monochromatic field with driv-
ing amplitude Ωand frequency ωd.
The optomechanical entanglement is evaluated using
the logarithmic negativity [53, 54] based on the covari-
ance matrix. We find that the entanglement behavior,
similar to the effective coupling strength, exhibits a non-
monotonic dependence on the Kerr constant χ, namely
first increasing and then decreasing with the increase of
χ. In the small χ region, the coupling strength reaches
its maximum, leading to enhanced optomechanical en-
tanglement. In addition, increasing χ could enlarge the
steady-state parameter range, allowing the system to re-
main stable in the blue detuning region, thus enabling
entanglement in this region as well. Our work will high-
light the potential of the Kerr nonlinearity in controlling
optomechanical entanglement, opening new avenues for
further investigations into the stability and manipulation
of entanglement across various parameter regimes.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II,
we introduce the physical model and present the Hami-
tonian, we also introduce the quantum master equation
governing the evolution of the open system. In Sec. III,
we perform the linearization of the system and analyze
the change of both the normalized detuning and the lin-
earized optomechanical coupling strength induced by the
Kerr nonlinearity. In Sec. IV, we study the optomechan-
ical entanglement between the cavity field and the me-
chanical resonator. Finally, we present some discussions
on the experimental implementation of this scheme and
conclude this work in Sec. V.
II.
PHYSICAL MODEL
The system under consideration is a Kerr cavity op-
tomechanical system, which is formed by an optomechan-
ical cavity containing a Kerr nonlinear medium. We con-
sider the adiabatic regime of the cavity field, and hence
focus on a single field mode in the cavity.
The cav-
ity field is coupled to the mechanical mode through the
radiation-pressure interaction. The cavity is driven by a
monochromatic field, and it is connected to a squeezed
vacuum bath, while the mechanical mode is coupled to
a heat bath. In a rotating frame defined by the unitary
transformation operator exp(−iωdˆa†ˆat), with ωd being
the driving frequency, the Hamiltonian of the Kerr cav-
ity optomechanical system reads (ℏ= 1)
ˆHI = ∆cˆa†ˆa + ωmˆb†ˆb −g0ˆa†ˆa(ˆb† + ˆb)
+χˆa†ˆaˆa†ˆa + (Ωˆa + Ω∗ˆa†),
(1)
where ˆa (ˆa†) and ˆb (ˆb†) are, respectively, the annihila-
tion (creation) operators of the cavity-field mode (with
resonance frequency ωc) and the mechanical mode (with
resonance frequency ωm). The g0 term describes the op-
tomechanical coupling, with g0 being the single-photon
optomechanical coupling strength. The parameter χ is
the Kerr constant, which defines the optical Kerr nonlin-
earity in the cavity. The Ωterm represents the cavity-
field driving with the driving amplitude Ωand frequency
ωd. The ∆c = ωc −ωd is the detuning of the cavity-field
frequency ωc with respect to the driving frequency ωd.
To include the dissipation in the system, we assume
that the cavity mode is connected to a squeezed vacuum
reservoir with the central frequency ωd, and the mechan-
ical mode is coupled to a heat bath. Here, the squeezed
vacuum reservoir is introduced to counteract the thermal
noise caused by the two-photon terms, which is induced
by the Kerr nonlinearity under the linearization. In the
Markovian-dissipation regime, the evolution of the sys-
tem is governed by the quantum master equation
˙ˆρ = −i[ ˆHI, ˆρ] + κa(N + 1) ˆD[ˆa]ˆρ + κaN ˆD[ˆa†]ˆρ
−κaM ˆG[ˆa]ˆρ −κaM ∗ˆG[ˆa†]ˆρ
+κb(¯nth + 1) ˆD[ˆb]ˆρ + κb¯nth ˆD[ˆb†]ˆρ,
(2)
where ˆρ is the density matrix of the optomechanical
system and
ˆHI is given by Eq. (1).
The
ˆD[ˆo]ˆρ =
ˆoˆρˆo† −(ˆo†ˆoˆρ + ˆρˆo†ˆo)/2 (for ˆo = ˆa,ˆb, ˆa†, and ˆb†) and
ˆG[ˆo]ˆρ = ˆoˆρˆo−(ˆoˆoˆρ+ ˆρˆoˆo)/2 are the super-operator acting
on the density matrix ˆρ. The parameters κa and κb are
the decay rates of the cavity-field mode and the mechan-
ical mode, respectively. The N = sinh2(re) is the mean
photon number of the squeezed vacuum reservoir, with re
being the squeezing parameter that characterizes the de-
gree of squeezing. The M = cosh(re) sinh(re)e−iθe quan-
tifies the strength of the two-photon correlation, where
θe is the reference phase of the squeezed field. The ¯nth is
the thermal excitation number associated with the me-
chanical mode b.
III.
ENHANCED OPTOMECHANICAL
INTERACTION
In the strong-driving regime of the optomechanical
cavity, the dynamics of the system can be linearized.
