3
where ψ(t) represents the nuclear state and the S-
dimensional complex vector ct consists of the components
of the electronic wavepacket in a chosen electronic basis.
The complex vector ct also appears in Ehrenfest dynam-
ics, where the nuclear part is represented by the position
and momentum vectors qt and pt, because the nuclear
wavefunction is assumed to be infinitesimally narrow in
phase space. For this reason, the molecular wavefunc-
tion is no longer defined, and single-trajectory Ehrenfest
dynamics does not capture nuclear quantum effects. In
contrast, the TGED21 represents the nuclear state by a
Gaussian wavepacket
ψ(q, t) = exp
 i
ℏ
1
2xT · At · x + pT
t · x + γt

,
(6)
x := q −qt,
(7)
where qt and pt are the phase space coordinates of the
center of the wavepacket, At is a complex symmetric
width matrix with a positive-definite imaginary part, and
γt is a complex number whose real part adds a dynam-
ical phase and imaginary part ensures normalization at
all times. The TGED is based21 on replacing the exact
potential V with some locally quadratic effective poten-
tial Veff. Here, we will use the single-Hessian TGED,
where the approximate effective molecular potential is
Veff(q; ψ) = V0(qt) + VT
1 (qt) · x + xT · V2(qr) · x/2. (8)
Coefficients V0 and V1 are the diabatic potential energy
matrix and its gradient at the center of the wavepacket qt,
while V2 is the Hessian of the potential energy matrix at
a reference point qr. In the Hartree mean-field approach,
the nuclear wavepacket (6) is propagated with an effective
nuclear potential
Vn,eff := c†
tVeffct = Vn,0 + V T
n,1 · x + xT · Vn,2 · x/2,
(9)
Vn,j = c†
tVjct,
(10)
obtained by averaging the multistate potential (8) over
the electronic wavepacket.
Consequently, the time de-
pendence of the nuclear Gaussian wavepacket is given by
a set of differential equations21
˙qt = m−1 · pt,
(11)
˙pt = −Vn,1,
(12)
˙At = −At · m−1 · At −Vn,2,
(13)
˙γt = T(pt) −Vn,0 + (iℏ/2)Tr(m−1 · At),
(14)
identical to that of the TGWD, with the exception that
the potential is Vn,eff instead of Veff, the single-surface
analog of Eq. (8).
Conversely, the effective electronic
potential matrix is obtained by averaging the effective
molecular potential (8) over the nuclear wavepacket (6):
⟨Veff(q; ψ)⟩n = ⟨ψ|Veff(q; ψ)|ψ⟩
= V0(qt) + Tr[V2(qr) · Cov(q)]/2.
(15)
The position covariance matrix Cov(q) = (ℏ/2)(ImAt)−1
adds a correction to the Ehrenfest electronic potential
V0 due to the finite width of the nuclear wavepacket.
In the TGED, the equation of motion for the electronic
coefficients
iℏ˙ct = [T(pt) + ⟨Veff(q; ψ)⟩n]ct
(16)
resembles that of Ehrenfest dynamics, but the potential
V(qt) is replaced by ⟨Veff(q; ψ)⟩n.
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we begin by demonstrating the condi-
tions under which TGED becomes exact and outperforms
both Ehrenfest dynamics and the TGWD. Then, using
pyrazine as a case study, we show that single-trajectory
mean-field methods fail to capture electronic popula-
tion transfer near conical intersections between electronic
states of different symmetry and explain the underlying
cause. Finally, we apply the TGED to a model repre-
senting a conical intersection between electronic states
of the same symmetry. We show, and also explain why,
here the TGED agrees qualitatively with exact quantum
dynamics evaluated with the split-operator algorithm31.
A.
Vertically displaced harmonic oscillators
The first example demonstrates when TGED is exact.
Our model is loosely based on the system proposed by
Tully and coworkers32, involving a heavy and a light par-
ticle, both represented by harmonic potentials, and mu-
tually coupled with a bilinear coupling. As a result, the
potential energy surfaces along the heavy particle coor-
dinate correspond to equally spaced vertically displaced
harmonic potentials.
Physically, this system topology
can represent a harmonic vibration with electronic states
broadened by the solvent33.
In this model, Ehrenfest
dynamics was demonstrated to produce more accurate
results than surface hopping, which introduces an ar-
tificial loss of coherence32,33.
However, one should re-
member that a mean-field trajectory generally underes-
timates electronic decoherence effects, since all electronic
states share the same nuclear configuration. In contrast,
when multiple “locally” mean-field trajectories are prop-
agated34, although each individual path remains fully co-
herent, the total Hamiltonian no longer follows the mean-
field approximation, enabling decoherence to occur.
Here, we consider two nuclear degrees of freedom and
ten electronic states. Retaining the energy gaps of
√
5
a.u., vibrational frequency of ki = 15 a.u.
and mass
of mi = 10 of the original paper of Tully and cowork-
ers, our system consists of ten vertically displaced two-
dimensional harmonic surfaces centered at the origin.
The diabatic couplings between each pair of electronic
states are arbitrarily set to the constant value Wmn = 0.6
