Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Setup
3
3
Heisenberg equation
4
3.1
Free theory
4
3.2
Interaction theory
5
3.3
Backward scattering
7
3.4
Stimulated emission
8
3.5
Summary so far
9
4
Flat Background
9
5
FLRW Background
13
6
IR regularization and large gauge transformation
15
7
Conclusions
17
A The formulas obtained in the in-in formalism
19
1
Introduction
Gravity is omnipresent, intricately coupled across all scales of known physics, yet it is the weakest
in coupling strength among all fundamental forces, making it exceedingly difficult to capture its
presence. While the elegant framework of General Relativity was established already a century ago,
the direct detection of gravitational waves was only recently confirmed with extremely sensitive
experiments [1, 2]. Although the curvature fluctuations predicted by inflation are already observed
in the anisotropies of the cosmic microwave background, primordial gravitational waves remain
elusive. Despite the fact that inflation might be the highest energy scale accessible to us, due to
Planck mass suppression, the strength of such signals is extremely small, and now the tensor-to-
scalar ratio is constrained to r ⪅O(0.01) [3]. To capture more signals, we either keep improving the
sensitivity of experiments or look for more dramatic sources, such as the merger of more massive
compact objects, large scalar perturbations acting as secondary sources [4–8], and so on.
This paper explores an alternative possibility. The weakness of gravitational interactions orig-
inates from the tiny gravitational coupling constant. As a result, scattering processes in vacuum
states are rare, making gravitational interactions difficult to detect. For an event of a small scat-
tering cross section, a straightforward solution is to increase the number of target particles that
interact with gravitons. Under the assumption of general relativity, the coupling between matter
and gravitons is ubiquitous. In the high-temperature limit, the number of target particles diverges.
Naively, one might expect that graviton dynamics could be observed if the temperature is sufficiently
high. Is this expectation correct?
As a simple toy model, let us consider a free massless scalar field χ, minimally coupled to
gravitons, hij. The cross-section of gravitons is M −2
pl , with Mpl being the reduced Planck mass. On
– 1 –
