22
FIG. 15. X-ray photon correlation spectroscopy from square ASI.
(a) X-ray scattering pattern from square ASI. The half-integer peaks
are due to the antiferromagnetic ordering in the lattice. (b) The in-
termediate scattering function as a function of temperature. Faster
dynamics with a more rapid decorrelation time occur as the temper-
ature is increased. Adapted from Ref. [113]
g2(q,τ) = ⟨I(q,t)I(q,t +τ)⟩
⟨I(q,t)⟩2
= 1+β|F(q,τ)|2,
(38)
where I(q,t) is a position in reciprocal space q at time t.
The brackets ⟨⟩indicate an average over the time t and over
equivalent q values. The function g2(q,τ) is often written in
terms of the intermediate scattering function F(q,τ)113,232,233.
XPCS has been measured to study dynamics in square
ASI113,233. A typical resonant x-ray scattering pattern from
a square ASI pattern is shown in Fig. 15(a). The ground state
of the square lattice is ordered antiferromagnetically, which
gives rise to magnetic diffraction peaks at half-integer recip-
rocal space values. To perform XPCS, a magnetic peak is
selected, and the intermediate scattering function is calcu-
lated and plotted as a function of temperature, as shown in
Fig. 15(b). At higher temperatures where dynamics are ob-
served, the magnetic peaks have speckles113,233. The inter-
mediate scattering function is a measure of how correlated
the speckle pattern is as a function of time.
For shorter
time scales, F(q,τ) = 1, indicating the speckle pattern has
remained unchanged. For longer time scales, F(q,τ) decays
to 0, which indicates the speckle pattern at later times is com-
pletely decorrelated to the initial time.
The temperature dependence of F(q,τ) can be compared to
dynamic models of the ASI behavior. For example, it has been
shown that some square ASI have glass-like dynamics and can
be described by the Vogel-Fulcher-Tammann law233, while
another study used XPCS to show the effect of superdomain-
wall behavior on dynamics113. XPCS has the advantage of
probing the collective dynamics over many domains in a sys-
tem. Thus far, ASI behavior has been studied with the one-
time autocorrelation function g2(q,τ), but other methods ex-
ist such as the two-time autocorrelation function, which can be
used to study systems with more complicated behavior, such
as out-of-equilibrium or aging dynamics232.
VII.
RECENT ADVANCES BEYOND 2D ASI: 2.5D AND
3D ASI
In recent years, ASI systems have achieved significant
progress, with the introduction of novel lattice geometries
such as Santa Fe, Tetris, Shakti and others (see also Sec. I).
These innovations have expanded our understanding of emer-
gent magnetic monopoles and geometrical frustration in ASI.
Beyond these 2D systems, research has now extended into
2.5D and 3D architectures, unlocking additional degrees of
freedom for studying complex interactions, novel physical
phenomena, and advanced functionalities11,20,58,234.
These
developments are pivotal in designing systems capable of ex-
hibiting properties unattainable in planar structures, marking
an essential step toward practical applications in magnonics,
data storage, and quantum computing.
3D ASI systems, in particular, allow the exploration of vol-
umetric frustration, interlayer coupling, and intricate spin tex-
tures. These multilayered systems offer enhanced coupling
between layers, leading to unique magnetization dynamics
and hybrid SW modes not observed in traditional 2D sys-
tems. For instance, 2.5D ASI structures, composed of mul-
tiple stacked layers, have shown improved control over mag-
netization behavior and SW interactions. Advanced nanofab-
rication methods, such as TPL, FEBID, and EBL, have en-
abled the creation of customized ASI structures with excep-
tional resolution, allowing for precise control of lattice ge-
ometries and thickness variations in fully 3D and 2.5D sys-
tems. To illustrate these advancements, Fig. 16 presents key
observation of variations in spin-wave dynamics in 2.5D and
3D ASI systems, along with their tunability through various
external parameters.
Figure 16(a) illustrates a ‘remanence
FMR’ sweep to highlight the degree of zero-field magnon
reconfigurability, with all spectra taken at H = 0 for NiFe
(30nm)/Al (35nm)/NiFe (20nm) ASI stack21. The x-axis rep-
resents the ‘state preparation field’ (Hprep), which is applied
prior to recording the spectra. As is obvious from the ex-
perimental results, many different states and their unique dy-
namics can be accessed by mcirowave spectroscopy. On the
other hand, Fig. 16(b) illustrates how the SW mode shifts as a
function of the ferromagnetic layer thickness and spacer layer
