4
(See Appendix C for further details) and M(t) ∼t2.
Therefore, M ∼n2, and hence Eq. (1) may be approxi-
mated as,
dn(t)
dt
= Cn3/N + η(t)√n.
(2)
The corresponding backward Kolmogorov equation for
the chance of network collapse [22], Π, as a function of
the initial damage n0, can be written for the process de-
scribed in Eq. (2) as,
nΠ′′(n) + C n3
N Π′(n) = 0,
Π(0) = 0,
Π(N ∗) = 1,
(3)
where N ∗≡N(˜p −pc). The solution is
Π(n0) = 1 −Γ(1/3, z/3)/Γ(1/3),
(4)
where z = Cn3
0/N ∗and Γ(a, x) =
R ∞
x ta−1 exp(−t)dt.
In Figure 3 we see a comparison between this solution
and the chance for two interdependent networks will col-
lapse, as obtained from direct simulations.
FIG. 3. The chance of collapse, Π, as a function of the
initial damage. The dashed line shows Π(z) as a function
of z = Cn3
0/N, as predicted in Eq. (4), for the chance of a
demographic process that satisfies Eq. (2) to reach fixation
at n = N. Each circle corresponds to the chance of collapse
of interdependent networks for a given N (as indicated in the
legend) and n0, as obtained from an average over 103 random
initial conditions.
Another immediate result of Eq.
(2) is the general
scaling behavior at criticality. The Langevin equation for
a stochastic population and selection s is given by [22],
dn(t)
dt
= sn + η(t)√n.
(5)
Comparing Eq. (5) with Eq. (2) one can see that s
is analogous to Cn2/N. In processes described by Eq.
(5), the stochastic component becomes negligible (i.e.,
the process becomes, effectively, deterministic exponen-
tial growth) at n ≈1/s [24]. Equivalently, the transition
for interdependent networks takes place at n ≈N/Cn2.
Therefore, the basic scaling of the cascading collapse pro-
cess is n3 ∼T; since under neutral dynamics n ∼T, we
obtain T ∼N 1/3, in agreement with the simulation re-
sults of [17].
Discussion:– In large systems, cascading failure pro-
cesses can be described as branching processes [14], where
each failed element has a certain probability of causing
additional elements to fail. This situation is analogous
to a demographic process in which each individual has
a probability of producing a certain number of offspring.
The process becomes critical, or "neutral," when the av-
erage number of offspring per element equals one.
In a neutral process, the probability of an individual
lineage surviving indefinitely approaches zero over infi-
nite time.
Since individuals are uncorrelated, for any
finite number of initially failed elements, the cascading
failure must eventually stop if the system is large enough.
However, in the case of interdependent networks, the sys-
tem becomes increasingly fragile as the number of failed
components grows. Therefore, if the process persists long
enough, it will become supercritical, and the network will
collapse.
The key question is how fragility increases relative to
the extent of the damage. In our case, the deviation from
criticality is determined by the ratio between the number
of failed components and the system size. Consequently,
the time during which the process remains approximately
neutral depends on N and, in our case, scales as N 1/3.
If the damage requires for a substantial deviation from
criticality does not depend on N, one observes a standard
nucleation process, where the amount of damage required
to ensure transition to the propagative phase does not
scale with the system size.
It is noteworthy that, overall, our avalanche process re-
sembles the spread of epidemics at their critical point [25–
27]. In both cases, as long as the total number of in-
fected individuals remains much smaller than the popu-
lation size N, the process is entirely neutral. Further-
more, as in our case, when the demographic process per-
sists long enough and the number of infected individu-
als scales with N to some power, the dynamics become
non-neutral. The key difference between avalanches and
epidemics lies in the sign of the effect. In ecological demo-
graphic processes, the number of offspring per individual
typically decreases as population size increases, leading
to a continuous, second-order transition. For example, in
infection processes, as more individuals become infected,
fewer remain susceptible. In contrast, in interdependent
networks, the opposite effect occurs: as more nodes fail,
the number of offspring (failures) increases, resulting in a
discontinuous, first-order collapse. The relevant equation
(Eq. 2) describes a process that reaches an infinite pop-
ulation in finite time, so the central question is whether
the neutral process can survive long enough for M(t) to
reach a level where significant deterministic growth oc-
curs.
This type of dynamics, where the failure of one compo-
nent triggers a cascading failure, is not unique to inter-
