3
input into the cavity to be transfered between different
sidebands. Consequently, any input pump tone, even in
the few-photon regime, is emitted across multiple side-
band modes, forming a frequency comb with spacing Ω,
as illustrated in Fig. 1f.
Considering a input pump tone ωin, from the equation
of motion, we obtain that the complex amplitude in the
cavity satisfies (Supplementary Note II.A):
a(t) =√κeaine−i∆t
×
∞
X
m=−∞
∞
X
l=−∞
Jl(β)Jm−l(−β)
ilΩ+ κ/2 −i∆eimΩt
(1)
where ∆= ωin −ω0 arises from the rotation of the frame,
κ represents the total dissipation of the cavity, κe denotes
the external dissipation due to the coupling between the
cavity and the external input/output, and ain represents
the externally injected pump photons.
In contrast, in Kerr optomechanical combs, the mod-
ulation coefficient β depends on the pump tone itself,
meaning it is influenced by both ain and ∆.
Conse-
quently, ain must reach a sufficient intensity to over-
come non-linearity initiation thresholds.
Additionally,
∆needs to be constrained within a range that can ef-
fectively excite the oscillator (For κ < Ω, ∆≈Ω) in
Kerr optomechanical combs. However, in our approach,
β is predetermined and independent of ain, allowing for
the threshold-less ain.
In other terms, the pump tone
does not induce nonlinear effects but instead serves as a
probe for the pre-established frequency components. Fur-
thermore, we found that the pump tone exhibits highly
flexible tuning capabilities within the approximate range
−2βΩ≲∆≲2βΩ, as detailed in the Supplementary
Note II.A. From equation 1, the term e−i∆t indicates that
the comb teeth are referenced to the pump tone. When
∆̸= 0, the pump tone alters the relative intensities of
the frequency comb components to some extent.
The Device
We demonstrate Floquet cavity frequency comb in a
superconducting microwave circuit, as illustrated in Fig.
2a. The resonance frequency of the cavity is modulated
by a displacement-dependent capacitors.
The sample
used in this study is similar to that reported in our pre-
vious work [50, 51] (detailed fabrication in Supplemen-
tary Note III.A). Our device consists of two aluminum
drumhead mechanical oscillators [52, 53] optomechani-
cally coupled to two microwave cavities, as schematically
shown in Fig. 2b. Here, we ignore one of the mechani-
cal oscillators. The Hamiltonian of such a system can be
expressed as,
Hsys =
X
j=1,2
ℏ(ωc,j + g0,j
xzpf
ˆx)ˆa†
jˆaj + ℏωmˆb†ˆb,
(2)
where ωc,j represents the j-th cavity’s intrinsic frequency.
ωm represents the mechanical resonant frequency, and aj
(a†
j) and b (b†) represent the annihilation (creation) op-
erators of the cavities and mechanical oscillator, respec-
tively. ˆx is the displacement of the mechanical oscilla-
tor, and xzpf represents the zero-point fluctuation of the
mechanical oscillator’s displacement. Besides, the coeffi-
cient g0,j represents the single photon coupling strength
between the j-th cavity and oscillator.
Our entire device operates in a dilution refrigerator at
a temperature of 10 mK (detailed setup in Supplemen-
tary Note III.B). The first cavity’s (cavity-1) intrinsic
frequency is ωc1 = 2π × 4.91 GHz, with external de-
cay rate κe1 = 2π × 49.6 kHz and intrinsic decay rate
κi1 = 2π × 298.9 kHz. For the other microwave cavity
(cavity-2), the intrinsic frequency is ωc2 = 2π×6.47 GHz,
accompanied by κe2 = 2π×21.7 kHz and κi2 = 2π×245.7
kHz. The oscillator is characterized to have frequency of
ωm = 2π ×9.1 MHz and the damping rate γm = 2π ×124
Hz. Additionally, from the measurements based on fre-
quency modulation technique, the single-photon coupling
strengths are measured to be g01 = 2π × 79 Hz and
g02 = 2π × 46 Hz. The detailed characterization method
is described in Supplementary Note III.C.
Construct the giant-mode cavity
We choose the cavity-2 and the mechanical oscillator
together to form the complete Floquet cavity system with
modulation frequency ωm, as schematically shown in Fig.
2c. It is worth noting that, in the absence of excitation,
the mechanical oscillator is in a thermal state in equilib-
rium, with an extremely small time-averaged amplitude.
To achieve Floquet modulation of the cavity-2 in a sinu-
soidal (cosinusoidal) periodic manner, we designate the
cavity-1 as auxiliary driving cavity to drive the mechan-
ical oscillator into a self-induced oscillation or phonon
lasing state (Supplementary Note IV) through optome-
chanical parametric excitation [43, 54, 55] .
By applying a blue-sideband drive with ∆d = ωd −
ωc1 = ωm, the mechanical oscillator’s vibrations are grad-
ually amplified and enter self-induced oscillation at a
critical power of Pd = Pde = 3 dBm, where ωd repre-
sents the drive signal applied to cavity-1, Pd denotes the
drive power, Pde is the critical power point, shown in Fig.
2d. The power values correspond to the signal generator
output powers and are therefore expressed in arbitrary
units. We assume that the displacement ˆx(t) is a classi-
cal state x(t) = Xm cos(ωmt+ϕm)+X0, which is valid for
γm/ωm ≪1 [56]. Xm is a classical amplitude and the X0
is the the mean value of the displacement (see Methods).
Correspondingly, the modulation strength is A = g02Xm
xzpf
that is proportional to Pd.
We characterize the Floquet sidebands of cavity-2 by
using a vector network analyzer (VNA) to extract the re-
flection coefficient S21 = R = 1−√κe
⟨a(t)⟩
⟨ain(t)⟩. Combining
with equation-1, the depth of the different sidebands is
also determined by the Bessel function (detailed in Sup-
plementary Note II.B), as shown in Fig. 2e. These side-
bands are symmetrically distributed with a spacing corre-
