10 
poor antisymmetry (from -0.53 to -0.68 of antisymmetry in Ssym). More generally, 
MBC preserves the antisymmetry of the improved methods whenever the original 
methods exhibit this property. 
This finding strongly supports our hypothesis that a better description of the unfolded 
state of the proteins might be a necessary step to improve the current state-of-the-art 
protein stability-change predictions. The MBC correction is just a simple, yet 
effective, zero-order correction. Thus, it is clearly possible to envision more 
sophisticated and, eventually, better-performing methods. Nonetheless, we believe 
that the simplicity of our approach has its own merits per se, since it allows the 
retrofitting of several existing approaches, achieving  good performance and 
avoiding extra computational costs. 
 
Materials and Methods 
Datasets composition 
The main training set used in this work, namely VBS3322, consists of 3,322 
mutations obtained by combining the VariBench35 and the S264834 data sets. In the 
cases where the same mutation is reported in both data sets, the VariBench value is 
considered. We also augmented the dataset by including the antisymmetric 
complement of each mutation, as suggested in a previous work36. 
The test set used for the benchmarking is the S461. For all the structures that 
showed missing backbone atoms, we preprocessed the structure using the 
PDBFixer utility37. 
The FoldX results used for both training and evaluation have already been 
published38, while Stability Oracle results for the S461 dataset have been computed 
from 
the 
data 
provided 
by 
its 
authors 
on 
Github 
(https://github.com/danny305/StabilityOracle) 
 
Mass balance Correction 
The simplest approach to calculate the Î”Î”G for the sequence-mutation process is to 
assume that the second term of equation [1] depends only on the amino acids 
involved in the mutation.  
This simplification leads to the following reaction, considering the wild-type (ğ‘¤) and 
mutated  (ğ‘š) residues: 
  
ğ‘ƒğ‘Ÿğ‘œğ‘¡ğ‘’ğ‘–ğ‘›(ğ‘¤, ğ‘–) + ğ‘…ğ‘’ğ‘ ğ‘–ğ‘‘ğ‘¢ğ‘’(ğ‘š) â‡„ğ‘ƒğ‘Ÿğ‘œğ‘¡ğ‘’ğ‘–ğ‘›(ğ‘š, ğ‘–) + ğ‘…ğ‘’ğ‘ ğ‘–ğ‘‘ğ‘¢ğ‘’(ğ‘¤)  
 
[6] 
 
where ğ‘ƒğ‘Ÿğ‘œğ‘¡ğ‘’ğ‘–ğ‘›(ğ‘¥, ğ‘–) represents a protein with residue ğ‘¥ in position ğ‘–, while ğ‘…ğ‘’ğ‘ ğ‘–ğ‘‘ğ‘¢ğ‘’(ğ‘¥) 
refers to a single amino acid. Conceptually, this corresponds to estimating the 
difference in the (effective) Gibbs free energy of solvation for two amino acids in 
