when the GNM model is trained with either the noiseless
(simulator generated) or SREM training datasets of the
snippets.
Similarly, on the ibmq-Guadalupe machines,
the maximum observed error for GNM mitigated energy
reaches around 20 mEh for both the noiseless and SREM
training datasets generated from the snippets.
The stretching of the B −H bond represents one of
the most challenging test cases for NISQ implementa-
tions.
In STO-3G basis with frozen 1s core orbital of
B, it turns out to be a system of 4 electrons in 10 spin-
orbitals.
Observing Figure 4, it becomes evident that
the energy error between the noisy and noiseless scenar-
ios for full circuit fall within the range of 0.82 to 0.59
Eh on fake-ibmq-Melbourne device, and within 0.21 to
0.19 Eh on the fake-ibmq- Guadalupe device.
In con-
trast, the GNM model predicts the mitigated energies
which are within 20 mEh and 18 mEh (at max over the
potential energy surface, with respect to the correspond-
ing noiseless values) on fake-ibmq-Melbourne and fake-
ibmq-Guadalupe machine respectively, irrespective of the
training dataset used for the snippets.
We also tested the robustness of our model against
varying noise levels for H4 at 2Å. For this particular anal-
ysis, we specifically accounted for the depolarizing noise
(which is one of the primary sources of noise in NISQ
hardware) with noise strength varying from {0.0001,
0.001} to {0.001, 0.01} for one-qubit and two-qubit gates,
respectively. Here the training labels are generated via
the SREM mitigated values. The results are shown in
Fig. 5. We test for different variations of machine learn-
ing models, from only one-feature regression to GNM
and in all occasions, GNM predicts the most accurate
energy, establishing its robustness across a spectrum of
noise strengths. It is particularly interesting to note that
with the decrease in noise strength, as expected with the
improvement of the hardware quality, GNM predicted
values linearly approach the corresponding ’exact’ value,
demonstrating its ability to handle the spectrum of noise
strength.
without overestimating or underestimating.
Despite its good performance with some of the most dom-
inant noise channels as discussed so far, its robustness is
subject to further validation when the state preparation
and measurement (SPAM) errors, without sampling noise
suppression models14,42, are accounted for. In principle,
a separate SPAM error mitigation strategy may be com-
plemented as an additional mitigation layer for better
state preparation. However, the current graph network-
based model gives us a practical tool to mitigate gate er-
rors that otherwise incur exponential overheads and deep
mitigation circuits.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE OUTLOOK
In this work, we developed a learning-based error mit-
igation technique to accurately predict the ground state
energy of molecular Hamiltonian. The developed GNM
FIG. 5. Noisy and Mitigated energy expectation val-
ues are plotted at different two-qubit depolarizing
noise strength.
Three different models (regression
model with only one feature, regression model with
additional circuit features, and GraphNetMitigator
model) are trained under these scenarios.
model successfully predicts the ground state energy of
the many-electron Hamiltonian without the need for any
additional mitigation circuits and bypasses exponential
overhead. GNM outperforms current EM methods like
digital-ZNE and PEC which fail at larger and complex
circuits. Unlike other NN-based techniques which often
use ideal expectation values generated on the simulator
as labels, we generate our labels, either by ideal values or
by sequentially mitigating the reference error over much
shallower snippet circuits, thus eliminating the need to
access the ideal quantum computer. The data for train-
ing the model is generated on the fly while the ansatz is
constructed in a noisy quantum environment. GNM is
entirely general mitigation model, and does not have any
specific dependence to the underlying ansatz. Our results
consistently demonstrate the robustness and effectiveness
of GNM across hardware connectivity and a spectrum of
synthetic noise strengths, and thus GNM is expected to
hold its ground when the qubit quality improves over the
coming years.
One important future research direction is the gener-
alization of the model across diverse and larger classes
of Hamiltonians and ansatze. Testing the model while
considering different noise channels with nonlinear sam-
pling complexity is an important future direction towards
establishing its robustness. More importantly, feature se-
lection can be improved using a different set of features
altogether. The current method captures the device char-
acteristics through a CNOT-connectivity graph adhering
to the coupling map of the device and gate errors. An
additional set of features like decoherence time of qubits
and other device-specific parameters can be incorporated
to further capture the noise profile accurately.
8
