3
Let Nature guide us
It is often argued that, due to the lack of experimental and observational data, we cannot use
experiments and observations to guide us towards a theory of quantum gravity that goes beyond
GR and, therefore, we can only resort to theoretical consistency requirements [110, 34, 111] or
numerical tools [112]. Instead, we will now provide solid, concrete evidence showing that we can
actually use guidance from observations.
The following two steps are quite logical and scientifically reasonable:
(i) If new experiments or observations cannot be explained by pure GR, then we can use them
to guide us toward understanding what kind of additional terms need to be added to the
Einstein-Hilbert action to describe the observed new physics;
(ii) After having phenomenologically modeled the new terms, we ask whether there is any
fundamental guiding principle or mechanism that can justify the new Lagrangian.
For this second step, it is very natural to first check whether what has worked in the past as a
selection principle can be useful for gravity as well, in particular whether the QFT framework and
the strict renormalizability criterion can successfully select a gravitational Lagrangian through
which the new physics can be described.
3.1
Early universe cosmology and R2-driven inflation
It is well-known that the Einstein-Hilbert action alone fails to provide a satisfactory physical
description of our universe at early times, in particular it cannot explain the observed temperature
anisotropies in the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) [113,114].
A simple way to interpret the CMB data is to assume that at very early times there was some
sort of accelerated expansion phase, driven by some field whose subsequent quantum fluctuations
would have acted as inhomogeneous seeds for the formation of large-scale structures and galaxies,
thus leaving an imprint in the CMB in the form of temperature anisotropies.
Phenomenologically, this primordial inflationary phase is usually described by adding by hand
a scalar field ϕ coupled to gravity and with a suitable self-potential, i.e.
SEH[g]
→
SEH[g] + Sϕ[g, ϕ] ,
(13)
where Sϕ is the contribution of the self-interacting scalar field coupled to gravity. Some of the
free parameters appearing in Sϕ can then be fitted by matching with CMB observations. Of
course, to have a consistent picture of our universe we should also add other contributions due
to ordinary and dark matter, in addition to the cosmological constant one.5
5Here we are not concerned with the problems of dark matter and dark energy. In any case, we are comfortable
with having a small cosmological constant which, in quadratic gravity, is simply a free parameter that can be
renormalized to any measured value.
13
