Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
(a) Temporal extrapolation
(b) Spatial generalization
(c) Latent physical quantities Estimation
Training
Testing
Training
Testing
Predict
Predict
Latent physical quantities
Figure 1: Model has the following capabilities: (a) Temporal extrapolation, (b) Spatial generaliza-
tion, (c) Latent physical quantities Estimation.
In this paper, we propose the Physics-Informed Neural Predictor, a new approach designed to address
the challenges outlined above. For fluid dynamics prediction, we discretize the NS equations in both
time and space, incorporating them into model architecture and loss functions. Neural networks are
employed to establish a mapping function from past measurement (observed data) to both interme-
diate observed quantities and latent physical variables, enabling predictions through the discretized
NS equations. Unlike methods that solely establish mappings between past and future states or focus
only on velocity modeling, our approach estimates multiple physical quantities (e.g., velocity and
pressure) to assist in the prediction. To ensure the physical validity of the estimated physical quan-
tities, we impose both physical and temporal constraints. By explicitly modeling physical quantities
and incorporating the NS equations into the model, our method inherently possesses interpretability
and enhances the extraction of latent fluid dynamics from observed data. This integration further
improves the model’s temporal extrapolation and spatial generalization capabilities in prediction.
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method, we conducted a comparative study against
several state-of-the-art models for predicting future observed data. The evaluation was performed
using both numerically simulated 2D and 3D datasets, as well as real-world nowcasting benchmarks.
The predictive accuracy of the models was quantitatively assessed across various scenarios.
Experimental results demonstrate that our approach achieves SOAT performance in predicting ob-
served data, while simultaneously estimating multiple latent physical quantities for interpretability,
and exhibiting better temporal extrapolation and spatial generalization capabilities (Figure 1).
In summary, our main technical contributions align to tackle the key challenges, given by:
1) Estimation of Multiple Physical Quantities and Assisted Prediction: We estimate latent
physical quantities, which can assist in the prediction of observable physical quantities and
serve as interpretable evidence to support our predictions.
2) Temporal Extrapolation and Spatial Generalization: Our model demonstrates the ability
to extrapolate beyond the training steps and generalize across varying spatial domains.
3) Superior Performance: Our model consistently achieves SOTA performance across a wide
array of benchmark tests, including synthetic and real-world datasets (both 2D and 3D).
2
RELATED WORK
Modeling fluid flows has always been a significant challenge. Since it is typically impossible to cal-
culate explicit solutions for NS equations, scientists have developed numerous numerical methods
to address this problem, such as the finite element method (Donea & Huerta, 2003), finite difference
method (Godunov & Bohachevsky, 1959), finite volume method (Jasak, 1996), and spectral method
(Orszag, 1979). However, these numerical methods heavily rely on initial conditions, which are
often difficult to obtain in practical applications. Moreover, numerical methods face high computa-
tional costs, especially when dealing with complex and variable scenarios and large computational
domains. The complexity of modeling and the lengthy computation times render numerical meth-
ods impractical in such cases. In recent years, the development of deep learning technologies has
provided new possibilities for solving this problem. Based on whether latent physical quantities are
modeled, we can broadly categorize these approaches into the following methods.
Neural Operator methods. This category of methods primarily leverages the powerful nonlinear
modeling capabilities of neural networks to approximate the complex mapping between inputs and
2
