A Scalable Automatic Model Generation Tool for Cyber-Physical Network Topologies and Data Flows for Large-Scale
Synthetic Power Grid Models
XXX:17
Regarding the generation times for the cyber-physical topologies in this use case, the star topology
is noted to be the quickest to produce, attributed to its simpler generation algorithm. It’s important
to clarify that the recorded times for running the program are taken after all distances between
substations have been computed and the necessary CSV files are prepared. Initially, the program
calculates the distances between substations for a given case. Once these distances are established,
subsequent run times of the program are markedly reduced.
ACLs are shown in Table 5, where the total configurations per case are determined. There is
no difference between topologies because each case has the same number of BAs, UCCs, and
substations per topology. This gives the user an idea of the level of complexity when setting up
and configuring the cyber system for any given power system.
Fig. 8. 500 bus grid
Fig. 9. 2k bus grid
Fig. 10. 10k bus grid
5.3
Wide Area Network
The star, radial, and statistics-based WAN topologies for the 500-bus synthetic power network are
shown in Fig. 11, Fig. 12, and Fig. 13, respectively. In these figures, the yellow nodes show the
location of UCCs, the blue nodes show the transmission substation locations, the green nodes show
the generation substations and the single red node is the BA. Similarly, Fig. 15, Fig. 16, and Fig. 17
show the same for the 2000-bus synthetic power network on the footprint of Texas.
Of note is the significant modification of the original statistics-based algorithm in [24]. The
original code that generates the statistics-based topology provides the optimal cyber network for
any given power network. The cyber network generated from that algorithm does not contain
geographical information for the cyber nodes, whereas the power network includes geographical
Fig. 11. Star Topology
Fig. 12. Radial Topology
Fig. 13. Statistics-based Topology
Fig. 14. Cyber-physical network connection between UCCs and their respective substations for the 500-bus
model on the footprint of South Carolina. The green dots are generation substations, the blue dots are
transmission substations, the red dots are UCCs and the yellow dot is the BA.
