Figure 20: European roadmap for the QKD architecture deployment (from https://qsnp.eu/).
come on line, quantum connectivity between end users would be managed by the QKD control layer,
which would allow for the realization of full DI-QKD in principle. Conceivably, the network could employ
several types of QKD protocols, depending on the security profile of each user group, and the types of
available hardware in each section of the network.
7. Conclusion
DI-QKD represents a transformative advancement in QKD, addressing fundamental security chal-
lenges by using nonlocal correlations rather than relying on the trustworthiness of quantum devices. In
this review, we have highlighted both the fundamental theoretical aspects and the progress in implement-
ing experimental setups. Moreover, the growing exploration of semi-device-independent protocols such
as MDI-QKD, RDI-QKD, and 1SDI-QKD have been presented.
DI-QKD achieves its robust security through the violation of Bell inequalities, ensuring that any
eavesdropping attempts disturb the nonlocal correlations, thereby making such third parties detectable.
While the first successful implementations of DI-QKD marked a milestone by addressing all Bell test
loopholes, practical challenges related to scalability and technology readiness persist. Current experi-
mental realizations have achieved limited distances of a few hundred meters with low key rates, far short
of the scales required for widespread commercial deployment.
Despite the remaining challenges in practical deployment, DI-QKD is poised to redefine the future of
cryptographic security. The ongoing researches on DI-QKD protocols together with relaxed versions of
semi-device-independent frameworks are paving the way for this groundbreaking technology to transition
from the laboratory to real-world applications, ensuring unconditional security for the next generation of
quantum communication networks. A view as to how the rollout of DI technique might unfold is provided
in the european roadmap shown in Fig. 20.
Acknowledgments
We thank C. Lupo, H. Weinfurter, M. ˙Zukowski, G. Lima, E. G´omez, N. Gigena, R. Wolf, M. Zi-
man, T. V´ertsi, and A. Ac´ın for the fruitful discussions. This project has received funding from Quan-
tERA/2/2020, an ERA-Net co-fund in Quantum Technologies, under the eDICT project, the European
Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation program under the project ”Quantum Secure Networks
Partnership” (QSNP, grant agreement No 101114043), and INFN through the project ”QUANTUM”.
81
