3 
 
states from a single fixed-angle spectrum when all emission peaks are utilized. In this work, we revise and apply this 
multiple-energies-model to ARXPS measurements of the binary alloy tin telluride (SnTe). We derive the oxide depth 
profile of a SnO overlayer on a SnTe thin film from self-consistent fitting of all emission peaks at multiple angles. This 
approach demonstrates enhanced reliability of the peak fitting and chemical state depth profiling. It is, in principle, 
complementary to other ARXPS depth profiling models and represents a possible route towards complete 
deconvolution of the XPS spectrum. 
SnTe has recently been widely studied for its thermoelectric performance[21], its utility as topological insulator for 
spintronic and quantum computing applications[22], and its narrow bandgap for advanced optoelectronic devices[23]. 
From a practical standpoint, the presence and structure of native oxide layers and their effect on surface states and 
interface properties is rarely addressed. However, this work will focus exclusively on the proposed methodology. 
2. Experimental 
SnTe thin films of 50 nm nominal thickness were deposited onto Si wafers (with a 50 nm SiO2 overlayer; cleaned with 
a stream of nitrogen) by radio frequency magnetron sputtering of a SnTe composite target (3” diameter, 99.99% 
purity) at room temperature with a source power of 15 W. At the time of measurement, the samples were exposed to 
standard lab atmosphere for 1 month in a polystyrene sample container. 
The sample surface was imaged by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a LEO 1530 Gemini (Zeiss) operated at 
20 kV. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed using a JEM 2200FS (JEOL) operated at 200 kV. The 
cross-section lamella has been prepared using a Helios dual beam FIB (FEI/Thermo Fisher) operated at 30 kV beam 
energy with a subsequent ion polishing step at 5 kV. 
X-ray reflectometry (XRR) measurements were performed with a X’Pert Pro MPD PW3040-60 diffractometer 
(PANalytical) using Cu Kα radiation. 
XPS was performed in a VersaProbe III device (PHI) at 3×10-9 mbar using monochromatic Al Kα irradiation and a 
hemispherical electron analyzer (work function 4.39 eV) in constant analyzer energy mode at emission angles of 75°, 
60°, 45°, 30°, 15°, and 0° relative to the surface normal. The angle between source and analyzer was 45° and the x-ray 
focus spot on the sample had a diameter of about 100 µm. The spectra were recorded with a pass energy of 55 eV 
(224 eV for surveys) and analyzed in CasaXPS Version 2.3.22. To compensate for charging effects and the unknown 
work function of the sample, the spectra were shifted so that the Fermi cutoff in the valence band coincides with a 
binding energy of 0 eV.[24]  
Electron-excited Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) was performed in a PHI-660 Scanning Auger Microprobe (Perkin-
Elmer). A depth profile was measured from 80 sequences of scanning with a 10 keV primary electron beam and etching 
by 500 eV Ar+ ions for 90 s at 70° to the surface normal. The sample was rotated during ion etching to maximize depth 
resolution.[25] 
3. Results 
Figure 2a shows a schematic illustration of the surface of a SnTe thin film sample with a SnO overlayer. Throughout 
this document, the metallic SnTe will always be shown in green and the oxide SnO in blue. A top-view SEM image of 
the surface (Figure 2b) shows a granular topography indicating polycrystalline growth. Those grains of <50 nm are also 
seen in the TEM cross-section images at different levels of magnification (Figure 2c-e). The close-up TEM image (Figure 
2c) shows the oxide layer on top and the polycrystalline SnTe underneath. The stoichiometry of the SnO layer has been 
confirmed to be 1:1 by XPS and AES, as will be discussed. It can be seen that the thickness of the oxide layer cannot 
be reliably determined from the TEM images. The main reason for this is that each TEM image necessarily represents 
an averaging over the thickness of the lamella sample, thus, making thickness measurements especially ambiguous for 
rough samples (this is illustrated in Figure S2). A rather unclear and subjective evaluation of the TEM images yields an 
average thickness of 𝑑𝑇𝐸𝑀≈2.8 nm of the SnO overlayer. Roughness is known to influence ARXPS depth profiling due 
to possible shadow casting at low emission angles.[26] The steepest deviation observed from an otherwise mostly flat 
surface measured 18° (see Figure 2d,e). For the sake of simplicity, a possible influence of roughness (i.e. by shadow 
