where we denote the dimensionally regularized tree-level action S(D)
0
≡S0, and sD is
the BRST operator in D dimensions whose action is deﬁned in Eq. (2.14), cf. [20]. The
remaining terms in Eq. (3.3) are given by derivatives with respect to external ﬁelds
multiplied by equation of motion terms of the associated dynamical ﬁelds. The operator
bD plays an important role in the symmetry restoration process. Its action captures the
linearized impact of adding counterterms on the STIs. Its 4-dimensional counterpart b4
is nilpotent, b2
4 = 0, and its cohomology governs potential symmetry breakings in the
space of ghost number = 1 and dimension ≤4 operators (cf. [33] and also [17]). Trivial
elements in the cohomology are b4-exact terms which correspond to spurious breakings
that can be cancelled by local ﬁnite counterterms while non-exact closed forms amount
to gauge anomalies, which are assumed absent here.
Finally, thanks to the quantum action principle of DReg [10–12, 17], it is possible to
express a potential violation of Eq. (3.1), i.e. a non-vanishing value of Eq. (3.2), via a
symmetry-breaking operator insertion,
SD(ΓDReg) = ∆· ΓDReg,
(3.4)
where we generically denote ΓDReg as the dimensionally regularized but not necessarily
(sub-)renormalized eﬀective action. The breaking insertion ∆can be computed order-by-
order by applying the Slavnov-Taylor operator onto the action,
∆= SD(S0 + Sct),
(3.5)
where Sct = Ssct+Sfct denotes the (D-dimensional) counterterm action comprised of both
divergent UV counterterms and ﬁnite symmetry-restoring ones. The equality (3.4) holds
true with or without counterterms, provided the counterterms are included consistently
on the LHS and the RHS.
Explicitly at two-loop order we can expand the RHS of Eq. (3.5),
∆≤2L = b∆+ ∆1L
ct + SD(S1L
ct ) + ∆2L
ct ,
(3.6)
and the RHS of Eq. (3.4),
∆· Γ≤2L
DReg = b∆· Γ≤2L
DReg + ∆1L
ct · Γ≤2L
DReg + SD(S1L
ct ) + ∆2L
ct ,
(3.7)
with ∆nL
ct = bD(SnL
ct ). Note that the classical equations of motion of both χa and Ba are
at most linear and hence receive no loop corrections. The action of the derivatives with
respect to these ﬁelds in bD on the counterterm action is therefore trivial.
The purely evanescent breaking at tree-level b∆is the one found in Eq. (2.15), while the
updated breakings ∆1L
ct contain 4-dimensional and evanescent divergent parts as well as
ﬁnite pieces. The ﬁrst two terms in Eq. (3.6) enter in Eq. (3.7) and require the calculation
of actual two- and one-loop diagrams, respectively. The second to last term in Eq. (3.6) is
of two-loop order due to the non-linearity of SD (cf. Eq. (3.2)), and amounts to products
of one-loop counterterm insertions. Finally, the genuine two-loop counterterms needed
for renormalization are given by the last term in Eq. (3.6),
∆2L
ct = ∆2L
sct + ∆2L
fct = bD(S2L
sct) + bD(S2L
fct).
(3.8)
Hence, after the theory has been one-loop renormalized, the procedure to determine the
two-loop counterterms is as follows. First, the divergent two-loop counterterms S2L
sct are
7
