the inversion has a limited impact (< 1%) on the inferred opacity. None of these assumptions
alleviate the need for an opacity increase at the BCZ.
Theoretical opacity computations
In this section, we ﬁrst present in Supplementary Figure 10 and 11 in the Supplementary Infor-
mation the contributions to the mean Rosseland opacity of less abundant elements of the solar
mixture such as sulfur, or nickel but also of abundant elements such as hydrogen, helium or car-
bon which have lower contributions at the BCZ for both OPAS and SCO-RCG on the studied
seismic thermodynamical path. We compare these computations to those based on version 3.3
of the OP code67, that is cited as the reference opacity table of Standard Solar Models60 and
to the OPLIB opacities34. The comparisons are made for equal thermodynamical conditions of
the models, namely Model 1 for OPAS and Model 2 for SCO-RCG.
Looking at Supplementary Fig. 11, we observe that systematically higher opacities are found
with SCO-RCG with respect to both OP and OPLIB, with some elements such as sulfur or
carbon showing very signiﬁcant increases. For these ions, the treatment of the Stark effect can
probably be invoked to explain the large differences between the codes. Heavier elements such
as nickel show a behaviour very similar to iron, perhaps pointing at a similar origin of the dis-
crepancies between the opacity computations. Signiﬁcant differences are seen for hydrogen, but
not for helium, which could point at differences in the equation of state and plasma effects111.
Small modiﬁcations for nickel have also been found at high temperature for B-type stars112,
while large discrepancies are found at low temperatures. Differences seen for key elements
such as nickel and iron (see Fig. 4), would have a signiﬁcant impact on the oscillations of B-
type stars. This triggered studies on the required opacity modiﬁcations to explain the observed
modes114;115;49;46. We emphasize here that such opacity modiﬁcations in these stars can also re-
sult from the effects of radiative accelerations, in addition to the modiﬁcations of the opacities
37
