our observed value of
dln L
dln Nd reaches around -0.1 at 10 hr age while it is around -
0.2 at the same age [18]. The quantitative difference may reflect model-observation
difference in a few factors. For example, our values before 10 hr of age most reflect
daytime condition with solar heating while it is perpetual nocturnal in [18].
5 Impact on forcing estimates
Younger tracks are more likely to be detected because of larger ∆Nd and smaller
decrease in L. Based on the observed diel changes of cloud adjustments, this can bias
estimates of cloud adjustments toward smaller ∆CF and possibly more negative ∆L.
We assess the impact of age selection bias in track detection on the estimate of aerosol
effective radiative forcing through a simple calculation. We take the diel changes of
CF and L adjustments as their true temporal evolutions (Figures 2 and 3). In other
words, we assume each polluted cloud would have the same chance of experiencing
the full diel cycle. The diel mean of cloud adjustments is therefore the mean of the
diel variations in CF and L (Figure 3). We also calculate the simple mean of dln L
dln Nd
and dCF
dNd as the naive, but biased estimate of cloud adjustments without considering
the temporal evolutions and sampling bias. The naive estimate introduces biases of
26% and -13% for dCF
dNd and
dln L
dln Nd , respectively. In other words, the cooling effect
of CF adjustment is underestimated while warming impact of L adjustment may
be overestimated. The underestimate in CF adjustment translates to additional -0.1
to -0.4 Wm−2 of global aerosol effective radiative forcing [7, 42], or 13% to 50% of
the Twomey effect. Since the global mean forcing from L adjustment is small in our
estimate[7], the overall impact from its diel change remains small.
6 Discussion and conclusions
Our results highlight the substantial diel changes in cloud adjustments to aerosols and
the pronounced role of day-night differences in solar heating for the diel change of cloud
adjustments. This day-night contrast is an important feature of aerosol-cloud interac-
tions that has important implications for estimating total aerosol effective radiative
forcing. The exact underlying processes that are responsible for this diel change remain
to be explored, but likely include interactions of multiple processes such as changes
in cloud-top radiative cooling rate, entrainment and its interaction with cloud micro-
physics, surface heat and moisture flux, and precipitation [5, 18, 20, 35, 43]. Such diel
changes in cloud adjustments may last multiple days as suggested by case studies of
ship-tracks and modeling work [16, 20, 24, 44], whose cumulative impact may increase
the overall impact of CF adjustments.
Our method shows that ship and pollution tracks provide opportunities to under-
stand the temporal dynamics of aerosol-cloud interactions and constrain modeling
results despite being instantaneous measurements. While previous studies use tracks
with significant length and detectable heads to estimate segment age [16, 24, 27], our
method can determine the age of detected tracks without head or significant length,
9
