32 
 
Supplementary Figure 9. 
Fig. S13. KPFM measurement of device 1 at Vg = 0 V. a, Topography of the polar 
stackings in device 1. b, SNOM image of the same area of tetralayer graphene as in (a). 
Domains with distinct stackings are labeled by different symbols in color. Dashed lines 
depict the contours separating different stacking domains (also see Fig. 2 of the main 
text). The stacking assignments are complementarily supported by our Raman spectra 
in Fig. S3 and the KPFM result in (c). c, KPFM mapping of the same area as in (a) and 
(b) at Vg = 0 V. The measurement is carried out after two cycles of SNOM measurements 
(Figs. S3 & S4). Areas with larger voltages in KPFM mapping (brighter areas) 
correspond to stackings with lower work functions. The dashed lines with different 
colors label the boundary of different domains as the same in (b). The ABCA domains 
are the brightest, corresponding to lowest work function. For the two nearby polar 
stackings indicated by downward and upward triangles in (b) (i.e., region (I) and region 
(III) in Fig. 2 of the main text), the former (downward triangle in (b)) appears to be 
brighter than the former (upward triangle in (b)). This means the two stacking have 
downward and upward polarizations, respectively. They are thus determined to be 
ABAC and ABCB stacking orders, respectively, according to our definition in Fig. 1a 
of the main text. The scale bars in (a) to (c) are all 1 µm. 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 10. 
Fig. S14. Raman spectra of device 2. a, Optical image of the tetralayer graphene. The 
white box marks the scanning area of (b). b, SNOM image of the same tetralayer 
graphene shown in (a), which contains four different optical near-field contrasts at Vg 
= 0 V. The yellow dashed frame labels the scanning area of KPFM mapping shown in 
Fig. S10. c, Raman spectra of the four different stackings. Different symbols in (b) mark 
the positions where the Raman spectra in (c) are taken. The scale bar in (b) is 4 µm. 
 
 
