6 
 
a static electric field that creates an NLO response termed NLOstatic. Our studies reflect, that 
beyond this interface-sensitive response, there exists an interface-insensitive response known as 
NLOoscillating. The orientation of molecules at the interface fosters interference effects between 
NLO responses originating from different layers, resulting in a phase mismatch. 
In our study, we aimed to investigate the interface effects as a function of both ionic strength and 
phase mismatch. It is important to note that the specific variations in interface effects may depend 
on the shape, size, and composition of quantum dots. Our findings reveal that within a certain range 
of ionic strength (10−6M < x < 10−3M), the NLOstatic signal exhibits a maximum, allowing it to 
be distinguished from the usual four-wave mixing signal, NLOoscillating. 2DES provides control 
over phase information, can be employed to detect the NLOstatic signal. Depending on the amount 
of phase mismatch (∆kz) induced by the interface, the NLOstatic signal is expected to be spatially 
close to the NLOoscillating signal in the boxcar geometry for the rephasing pulse sequence. 
Our study demonstrates distinct changes in phase and intensity in the NLOstatic 2DES spectra 
with variations in ionic strength. We also anticipate that for four-wave mixing (FWM), the main 
contributing signal is NLOstatic, especially at low ionic strengths, as opposed to NLOoscillating. 
Therefore, our findings suggest that the search for the NLOstatic signal through 2DES experiments 
can provide explicit insights into the effects of the interface in this rapidly developing field. Thus 
combination of NLOstatic and NLOoscillating can give rise to from both interfaces to towards bulk 
information. 
 
Theoretical background 
Now, the NLO interface field took shape by the fundamental work of Eisenthal and co-workers,13,43,44 
who directly linked the chemical environment of the interface as the static electric field at the inter- 
face and interpreted the second harmonic generation (SHG) signal from interfaces as consisting of 
the components χ(2) and the interfacial potential dependent third order component χ(3), as rep- 
resented in equation 1). Which we can further interpret as equation 2) where Eoscillating represents 
