Even though we see that the change in the temperature of the MC plate while sweeping
the magnet doesn’t have any impact on the appearance or absence of BMR (SI-Fig. 3); during
the transient experiment, we observe a sharp drop in the Rxx to a steady state value as soon
as B|| is stopped sweeping and held at B||stop. Similarly, we found that the temperature of
the MC plate also decreased steadily during the ‘stop interval’ from the continuous sweep
of the magnetic field, which induced a higher temperature value, as shown in Figure. 3b
(bottom panel). This observation can raise a question of whether the continuous application
of a magnetic field changes the local temperature of the sample stage at the end of the
sample holder, which is situated at a substantial distance away from the MC plate stage of
the cryo-free fridge (SI-Fig. 27b). If that is the case, then the measured Rxx of the TBG
could also show a change in resistance depending on the effective temperature experienced
by the sample and the nature of R(T) of the sample for a given ν.
To check that, we loaded an independently calibrated Ruthenium oxide (RuO2; Model
no: RX-103A-BR) temperature sensor mounted on a chip carrier in the dilution fridge at the
sample stage, which can measure temperature as low as ∼50 mK, closer to our operational
base temperature of 70 mK. We subject the sensor to the exact condition of B sweep in
the forward and backward directions. We, surprisingly, get a BMR-like hysteresis for the
RRox as shown in Figure. 4a (top panel) for a ramp-rate of 100 mT/min. If converted to
the temperature following the available R vs. T calibration curve of the sensor, we also find
hysteresis in the TRox, in Figure. 4a (bottom panel), similar to the ‘upwards’ BMR presented
for TBG in Figure. 1d,f. The hysteresis in RRox (or TRox) is observed for a magnetic field
ramp-rate of as slow as 10 mT/min (see Figure. 4b-d). Following the observation of the
effect of ramp-rate on the observed hysteresis in the Rxx of TBG, we can compare the values
12
