otic quantum phases such as superconductivity and topological quantum states. Prior deep-learning studies
have yielded models which can predict the DOS from a given atomic structure [31, 32], but the inverse
process of generating materials matching a given DOS remains highly challenging. To effectively utilize
the DOS information as a condition for structure generation, we implemented and evaluated two distinct
guidance strategies for diffusion models: classifier-based guidance [33] and classifier-free guidance [34].
We find classifier-free guidance outperforms classifier-based guidance, offering a more robust mechanism
for aligning generated structures with the desired properties. Next, using the classifier-free guidance, we
demonstrate DOSMatGen’s capability for fine-grained control over atomic structure generation through
three constrained generation tasks that selectively impose distinct constraints on specific subsets of atoms
within a single structure. Finally, we demonstrate a post-processing workflow to yield stable, optimized
crystal structures which are ready for DFT validation. An overview of the DOSMatGen framework is
shown in Fig. 1.
Training DOSMatGen
Generation
DOS Features
CFG
Classiﬁer-free Guidance
P
P
P
S0
St
ST
t −1steps
T −t steps
Post-processing Workﬂow
DOSMatGen
Machine Learning 
Force Field
Formation Energy 
Predictor
0.5 
eV/atom
-1.8 
eV/atom
DFT
DOS
Diﬀerent starting 
material
Constrained to 
speciﬁc elements
Figure 1: Overview of DOSMatGen. The training process of the denoising neural network in DOSMatGen
employs classifier-free guidance (CFG). A projection layer P maps node-level density of states (DOS) fea-
tures into the same space as the node embeddings, which are then combined through element-wise addition.
During training, a structure S0 is progressively noisified to St at timestep t and passed into the network to
predict the noise added. During generation, DOSMatGen can condition one or more atoms on target DOS
features, ensuring the denoised structure aligns with the specified conditions. Additional constraints, such
as fixing element types or using structural templates as starting points, can be incorporated for finer control
over the generation process. Furthermore, DOSMatGen can be integrated as part of larger materials discov-
ery workflows, generating large sets of candidate structures that are subsequently relaxed using a machine
learning force field (MLFF) and evaluated with a formation energy predictor. Candidates below a specified
formation energy threshold can then be filtered for further analysis, including DFT validation.
2
METHODOLOGY
2.1
REPRESENTATION OF PERIODIC MATERIALS
A periodic material is usually represented by its unit cell—the smallest repeating arrangement of atoms
in Cartesian coordinates that, when translated in space, generates the complete crystal structure. Given a
structure S with N atoms in its unit cell, it can be fully described by the tuple S = (A, X, L), where
L = (l1, l2, l3) ∈R3×3 is a matrix of lattice vectors, X = (x1, . . . , xN) ∈RN×3 represents the Cartesian
coordinates of the N atoms within the unit cell, and A ∈{0, 1}N×Z is a matrix of one-hot encoded
representations of Z possible elements for each atom. Note that the unit cell can be translated arbitrary in
space by L. In this work, we use fractional coordinates, obtained by transforming Cartesian coordinates x
through the inverse lattice matrix: xf = L−1x. For notational clarity, we omit the subscript f when the
coordinate system is contextually clear.
2.2
JOINT DIFFUSION MODEL
Given a structure S = (A, X, L), DOSMatGen simultaneously diffuses the atom types A, the fractional
coordinate matrix X and the lattice L. Given a timestep t ∈[0, T], St = (At, Xt, Lt) denotes the interme-
diate noisy structure. In particular, the forward diffusion process deterministically adds noise to S0, while
the backward denoising process iteratively samples from the prior distribution ST to recover the original
structure S0. If the prior distribution p(ST ) is invariant and the Markov transition p(St−1|St) is equivari-
2
