large crystals had not yet been demonstrated at the level required for PIONEER. Over the last 2
years, we have been working with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics to develop next-generation
LYSO crystals, optimized for particle physics. In work recently published [30] we document our
findings using an array of ten rectangular-shaped crystals. We measured the energy resolution of
1.5% for 70 MeV positrons and 110 ps timing for events above 30 MeV. These performance charac-
teristics exceed the requirements for PIONEER. The next stage of R&D is devoted to the testing
of full-scale, tapered crystals. Three have been produced to date; each demonstrate excellent res-
olution using bench sources and an intrinsic longitudinal response uniformity of better than a few
percent. A beam test at PSI with a small tapered array is scheduled for August 2025.
5
Collaboration composition
The PIONEER collaboration consists of experts in high-precision experiments including rare pion
and kaon decays, a search for charged lepton violation, and the measurement of the anomalous
magnetic moment of the muon. In addition, we have collaborators from the high-energy collider and
neutrino communities. Critically, we emphasize that the collaboration is young and still developing
and warmly welcomes new members. European institutes are ideally positioned to contribute to the
project, as it will be located at the PSI laboratory in Switzerland.
6
Timeline
Fig 5 illustrates an optimistic schedule for PIONEER under the assumption that funding decisions
are positive and proceed expeditiously. Current efforts are focused on critical demonstrations of sub-
systems (e.g. ATAR, Calo, Traker, DAQ), which will be tested in the upcoming years. Calorimeter
test beam time and piE5 beam development tuning is planned for 2025 and 2026. Demonstrator
runs are expected at PSI in late 2026 and at TRIUMF in 2027. Positive outcomes will lead to
full-scale construction and a measurement program beginning in 2030.
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
PSI Shutdown / Upgrade
Active Tgt. Tests
Run I
Run II
Run III
Run IV
R&D 
Demonstrator runs
Major construction period
Install.
Phys
Phys
Phys
Figure 5: Timeline of the PIONEER project.
7
Construction and operational costs
Several costing exercises were performed for PIONEER and are available upon request. The overall
cost of the experiment is estimated to be 10 −15 Me. The calorimeter is the most expensive part
of the system. For the LYSO option, manufacturing the crystals dominates the costs while for the
LXe, procurement of LXe is notoriously volatile and the instrumentation will also be a significant
fraction of the cost. The active target is estimated around 1 −2Me with the digitisation system
being the most expensive component.
The Paul Scherrer Institute has a strong track record of hosting long-term, precision experiments
in pion and muon physics. They provide the beams without cost, and the support of beam lines,
8
