2
FIG. 1. Solution of the non-Hermitian Kondo model using NH-NRG. (a) Phase diagram in the (JR, JI) plane, showing the
numerically-exact boundary (black line) separating SC (blue) and LM (orange) phases. Red dot-dashed line shows the Bethe
ansatz result [25] which is valid for |J| ≲0.25 and agrees perfectly with NH-NRG in that regime (see inset). (b,c) RG flow of
the NH-NRG complex eigenvalues EN with iteration number N, showing the real and imaginary parts in the top and bottom
panels, for representative systems in the SC and LM phases. (d,e) Reversion of eigenvalue RG flow in the Argand plane for an
LM system (J = 0.1 −0.5i). N increases in the direction of the arrows towards the Hermitian Kondo fixed point value (green
point). Shown for different representative states in (d) and (e). NH-NRG calculations performed for Λ = 3 and Nk = 400.
In this Letter, we introduce the non-Hermitian numer-
ical renormalization group (NH-NRG) method, which is
fully non-perturbative, and can be applied to a wide
range of Kondo or Anderson-type impurity models and
their variants. With no restriction on coupling strength,
we uncover the full phase diagram of the NH Kondo
model (Fig. 1a), showing that at weak-to-moderate cou-
pling, the scenario of Ref. [25] exactly pertains. However,
for stronger dissipation (larger values of JI) we find re-
entrant Kondo behavior; whereas the LM phase is found
to terminate entirely beyond a critical value of JR. Unlike
the Bethe ansatz and other methods such as conformal
field theory that rely on linear dispersion [42, 44], NH-
NRG works with equal ease for any bath DOS. We apply
NH-NRG to a NH pseudogap Kondo model, showing that
the lower-critical dimension of the Hermitian model [45]
is shifted by finite JI, and an entirely new stable fixed
point appears that is fundamentally non-Hermitian.
Non-Hermitian NRG.– Here we generalize the stan-
dard NRG methodology to treat NH quantum impurity
problems. Although the basic algorithm proceeds along
similar lines to Wilson’s original formulation for Hermi-
tian systems [40, 41], incorporating NH physics involves
additional challenges. Below we describe the key points,
but full technical details and validation checks are given
in the End Matter and Supplemental Material [46].
In the standard NRG procedure for the Kondo model,
the first step is to logarithmically discretize the free
conduction electron bath and map it to a 1d Wilson
chain (WC). This is done by dividing up the density
of states ρ(ω) into intervals according to the discretiza-
tion points ±DΛ−n, where Λ > 1 is the NRG dis-
cretization parameter and n = 0, 1, 2, 3, .... The continu-
ous electronic density in each interval is replaced by a
single pole at the average position with the same to-
tal weight, yielding ρdisc(ω).
We then map ˆHbath →
ˆHWC = P∞
n=0
P
σ(ϵnf †
nσfnσ +tnf †
nσfn+1σ +tnf †
n+1σfnσ)
with the real parameters {ϵn} and {tn} chosen such
that the local density of states at orbital f0σ to which
the impurity couples is precisely ρdisc(ω).
Due to the
logarithmic discretization [40], the WC parameters de-
cay asymptotically as ∼DΛ−n/2.
We now define a
sequence of Hamiltonians ˆHN comprising the impurity
and the first N chain sites, satisfying the recursion rela-
tion ˆHN = ˆHN−1 + ˆTN where ˆTN = P
σ(ϵNf †
NσfNσ +
tN−1f †
N−1σfNσ + tN−1f †
NσfN−1σ). The sequence is ini-
tialized by ˆH0 = J ˆSi · ˆS0 [47] and the full (discretized)
model is obtained as N →∞. Starting from the impu-
rity, we build up the chain by successively adding WC
sites using this recursion. At each step N, the Hamilto-
nian ˆHN is diagonalized, and only the Nk lowest energy
states are retained to construct the Hamiltonian ˆHN+1
at the next step. In such a way, we focus on progres-
sively lower energy scales with each iteration. The higher
energy states can be discarded at each step due to the
energy-scale separation down the chain. The RG charac-
ter of the problem can be seen directly in the evolution
with N of the many-particle NRG energy levels of ˆHN.
This is done by specifying the NRG energies EN with
respect to the ground state energy of that iteration, and
then rescaling by a factor ΛN/2, so that the Nk retained
states at each step always span the same energy range.
Importantly, the NRG energy levels flow between fixed
points (e.g. from LM to SC). The calculation scales lin-
early in N, and the stable fixed point is reached after
a finite number of steps. NRG is thus able to capture
an exponentially-wide range of energy scales, from the
bandwidth D down to the Kondo temperature TK.
