signiﬁcant increase in iron opacity would amplify the effect of radiative accelerations for this
element. This, in turn, would strengthen iron’s contribution at the BCZ, but this impact would
be counteracted by the efﬁcient macroscopic mixing needed to reproduce the lithium deple-
tion. Therefore, it is unlikely that radiative accelerations play a major role in recovering the
missing opacity at the BCZ. To conﬁrm this, we tested their impact under conditions maximiz-
ing their effect—calibrated standard solar models without macroscopic mixing using AAG21
abundances. We found the impact to be around 0.5%, insufﬁcient to explain the observed mod-
iﬁcations. This conclusion, however, applies speciﬁcally to the solar case, as demonstrated in
Deal et al. (2018)101.
All evolutionary models undergo the seismic reconstruction phase individually, following a
similar procedure to Buldgen et al. (2020)51. This ensures complete consistency and provides
a better understanding of the result dispersion after seismic reconstruction. For completeness,
tests using various helioseismic datasets102 have been conducted, to quantify the uncertainties in
the ﬁnal opacity proﬁles stemming from helioseismic data. In Supplementary Fig. 2, we present
ﬁnal reconstructed Ledoux discriminant proﬁles for various test cases with different physics.
The proﬁle is uniquely determined from the inversion, except for the narrow region between 0.7
and 0.713 solar radii and the reconnection point around 0.1 solar radii, where some variations
are observed. Supplementary Fig. 3 illustrates the chemical composition proﬁles at the BCZ
for some models entering the opacity reconstruction procedure. Models in Supplementary Fig.
3 were chosen to illustrate the largest discrepancies in metallicity among the set.
This model set is used to test the model dependencies of our opacity reconstruction, while also
giving us a larger range of reconstructed proﬁles to study. These effects are discussed below
when illustrating the impact of model uncertainties on the reconstructed opacity proﬁles.
25
