5
FIG. 3.
Formation and evolution of frequency comb.
a Kerr optomechanical frequency comb of cavity-2, where the gray
points represent the absence of frequency comb generation. The colored points indicate the frequency comb generated from
optomechanical nonlinearity. The black dashed line marks the dividing line between different regions. b Illustration of the
setup, the blue arrow represents a fixed drive signal at ∆d = ωm to excite mechanical oscillator. The red arrow in the Floquet
cavity-2 represents the pump signal responsible for the generation of the frequency comb. c Formation and evolution of Floquet
frequency comb. Spectral responses are sorted into three types, and are marked in different colors as dots. The gray points
represent the absence of frequency comb generation. The purple dots represent the generation of Floquet frequency comb. The
red dot is the category of Kerr frequency comb. The black dash line is the dividing line between the different regions. d Several
examples of frequency comb corresponding to ∆p = −1 × ωm are shown as darked points in c.
quency comb teeth increases, but the pump power itself
does not affect the formation of the frequency comb.
Nonetheless, focusing on the Floquet mode of m = 1 in
Fig. 3c, corresponding to the blue sideband of cavity-2
(∆p = ωm), the generated power of Floquet cavity fre-
quency comb is approximately reduced by a factor of six
orders of magnitude compared to Kerr optomechanical
combs. Moreover, for the m = 1 mode, the width of the
local minimum is significantly broader and shifts toward
m = 0. This occurs because, at this point, the pump
not only serves as the probe of Floquet frequency comb,
but also drives the mechanical oscillator acting similarly
to the mechanism in Kerr optomechanical combs. The
interaction between the pump signal and the mechani-
cal oscillator results in a broader local minimum and the
shift of this mode.
Effect of modulation intensity
We investigate the impact of modulation strength on
the Floquet frequency comb by setting the pump tone
at m = −1, 0, +1, as shown in Fig. 4a, while varying
both the drive power and pump power. For m = −1,
the frequency comb is generated only when the Floquet
modulation is activated, Pd > Pde. The fluctuations in
the minimum power value are attributed to measurement
uncertainties. Notably, for m = 0, when the pump power
is sufficiently high, the frequency comb is generated be-
fore Pde. This is the result of the cooperative action of
the optomechanical frequency comb under the external
driving of two cavities. The results for m = 1 exhibit
similar behavior.
As at sufficiently high pump power,
cavity-2 can independently generate a frequency comb
via Kerr optomechanical interactions. Thus, we observe
a gradual power transition curve rather than a sharp one
for m = 1.
To minimize interference from the Kerr optomechani-
cal frequency comb in our analysis, we focus on the pump
at ∆p = −ωm. Fig. 4b shows an example of Floquet
frequency comb for m = −1, with Pd = 11 dBm and
Pp = 0 dBm. Time-domain signals and phase space tra-
jectories indicate that the output comb maintains excel-
lent coherence. The periodicity of the time-domain sig-
nal results from a 2 MHz offset between the demodula-
tion frequency and the strongest peak, demonstrating the
stability and coherence of the Floquet frequency comb in
this regime. For the m = −1 detection, the resulting fre-
quency comb intensity is not perfectly symmetric, which
is attributed to the non-zero ∆term and X0 (see Sup-
plementary Note V).
