10 
 
positive values are located in the Southern Ocean, particularly between 40˚S and 55˚S, and 
between 30˚N and 45˚N in the Northern Hemisphere. The subtropical North Atlantic and the region 
to the north of the Kuroshio Front both contribute to responses in the Northern Hemisphere (Figure 
S3 in Supporting Information). These results indicate a substantial heat gain in the mid-latitude 
ocean basins, compared to the rest of the global ocean (Frölicher et al., 2015; Shi et al., 2018; 
Zanna et al., 2019; Newsom et al., 2020), more efficiently mitigating the global surface warming.  
Regarding the long-term change, the decrease of regional OHUE is evident in the Southern 
Ocean from the ensemble mean of each model (Figure 3). It suggests that the Southern Ocean has 
become less efficient in taking up heat in recent decades. In the Northern Hemisphere, some 
models show an increase in regional OHUE (CESM2LE, IPSL-CM6A-LR, and MPI-ESM1-2-
LR), while some (such as CanESM5 and MIROC6) show no clear direction of change. The multi-
model mean results show a slight increase since 1980, followed by a plateau starting in the 1990s. 
This behavior may be linked to the anthropogenic aerosol effect on the Atlantic meridional 
overturning circulation (AMOC; e.g., Shi et al., 2018). In the tropics (i.e. 30˚S-30˚N), there is an 
upward trend based on models.  
OHUE estimated from observational datasets shows both similarities and differences compared 
to the simulated results, and these observational results even exhibit distinct spatial features. For 
instance, the increase of regional OHUE between the 2000 period and 1988 period in the tropical 
regions is evident in both IAP and Ishii datasets (Figures 3 and 4). Changes in the Southern Ocean 
are more consistent between these two datasets after the 1990s. However, the Ishii data appears to 
have a much smaller OHUE in the early periods compared to the IAP data, which may be attributed 
to sparse observations in the Southern Ocean (Swart et al., 2018; Shi et al., 2021). In the Northern 
Hemisphere mid-latitudes, neither dataset shows a clear long-term trend in OHUE. The results 
based on GF reflect the excess temperature changes and the associated OHUE, excluding the 
redistribution of heat due to changes in ocean circulation. Therefore, there is a substantial 
difference between the two datasets and model simulations when investigating the regional 
features. The excess OHUE derived using GF shows a notable contribution from the mid-latitudes. 
The broader distribution in GF, compared with the other datasets and models, is primarily due to 
its coarse resolution (10° in latitude). The enhanced OHUE in the Northern Hemisphere is more 
consistent with the MMM results (Figures 3 and 4). This increase mainly occurs in the North 
Atlantic (Figure S4 in Supporting Information). The dipole feature observed in the IAP and Ishii 
datasets (Figure S4) suggests that ocean circulation changes, such as the AMOC, also play a role 
in this ocean basin. 
 
