PAGIONO
An ionospheric activity index
Dr.Paul.Kinsler@physics.org
However, a limitation in the current approach to ROTI maps
lies in their consideration of an average ROTI value in each
map pixel. The typical discrete pixelization of the globe over a
hypothetical screen at F-region altitudes (e.g., 350 km) there-
fore covers an area much greater than the size of any indi-
vidual disturbance, so that the averaging greatly reduces the
sensitivity to geometry-dependent propagation disturbances,
and hence to the presence of irregularities in any given pixel.
Various approaches to improving the sensitivity to distur-
bances, and the detection of irregularities have been sug-
gested: for example, the GIX [10, 21], a probabilistic descrip-
tion [20] as well as others [22–28]. However, an index capa-
ble of summarising how the state of the ionosphere evolves
in space and time (e.g. in response to specific space weather
conditions) similarly to indices such as KP [29] or Dst [30, 31]
is difficult to obtain. This is because of the dispersive nature
of the ionosphere, the ever-changing temporal and spatial dif-
ferences in the ionosphere state, and the sparsity of the obser-
vations available.
We introduce here a method that estimates the spatial
variability of propagation disturbances by using the GNSS-
derived rate of change of TEC (dTEC) evaluated over the IGS
network. A statistical characterisation of dTEC values and a
best-fit to their probability density functions allow us to de-
rive an index that encapsulates the state of the ionosphere in a
given region and over a given interval of time. This indicates
whether or not irregularities may be present, and the magni-
tudes of the propagation disturbances associated with them.
Results obtained from case studies chosen to cover a range
of geomagnetic conditions indicate that whilst describing the
day-to-day ionospheric variability, the new scale can iden-
tify deeper and geo-effective modifications occurring in the
ionosphere in response to changing geomagnetic and space
weather conditions.
II.
MOTIVATION
Using GNSS signals as a means of characterising the iono-
sphere has been a field of interest for decades; typically using
deduced total electron concentrations (TEC) to map onto and
inform large physics-based models of the ionosphere; but here
we focus on the fluctuations in TEC as a useful indicator in it-
self.
Since inhomogeneities in the spatial distribution of the
ionospheric plasma density form due to instability processes
[1], they necessarily go on to affect the GNSS observables
on a range of temporal and spatial scales. Thus the pseudo-
ranges and carrier phases measured by a GNSS receiver can
show both short-time and long-term temporal fluctuations; as
resulting from signal propagation through the various scales
of ionospheric plasma irregularities [6, 7, 32–37].
To an end-user, the practical effect of these fluctuations in
GNSS observables is typically an increased positioning error,
or in more extreme cases, a loss of (usable) GNSS signals.
With an ability to forecast the prevalence of propagation dis-
turbances in a given region and over a given interval of time
– ideally as summarized in a simple index – this would al-
low systems and services to adopt suitable countermeasures
that limit the impact of degraded GNSS availability on their
operations [20, 38].
A.
Existing Indices
There are are a range of geomagnetic indices currently in
widespread use, but none of these have a direct relationship
to the ionospheric state. The most notable is KP, which is
based on combined magnetometer measurements from a spe-
cific set of ground locations; AP is a daily averaged version
of Kp; and then Dst is based on an estimate of the globally
symmetrical equatorial electrojet (“ring current”) in the mag-
netosphere. Whilst these indicate the presence of geomagnetic
disturbances capable of modifying the global state of the iono-
sphere, they are not sensitive to geoeffectiveness in the iono-
spheric response to active geomagnetic conditions. Moreover,
these indices are not easily related to ionospheric propagation
effects that can impact services and operations reliant upon
satellite telecommunications, such as GNSS.
Perhaps most similar in basis to our proposed index are
ROTI (the rate of TEC index) and other ROTI-like indica-
tors [21], which also characterise rates of change in TEC, and
therefore are actually indicators for the state of the ionosphere.
These are based on the variance of changes in TEC, and a typ-
ical ROTI is computed using a sliding window (of a specific
customary duration) over the time series of TEC data, where
the ROTI itself is based on the variance about the average
TEC within that window. This windowing average technique
is used to help remove unwanted trends from the data, such as
that due to geometry (e.g. elevation angle) of the satellite to
ground station raypath, or other slow background changes also
considered irrelevant to the disturbances of interest. However,
ROTI is generally computed for specific latitude and longitude
pixels, in order to create time-dependent maps of ionospheric
disturbances; and there is as yet no widely agreed mechanism
to merge these spatially localised results into a single regional
or global number, although various proposals exist (see e.g.
[9, 17, 26].
B.
LdT index
In contrast, the LdT index focusses on the statistical prop-
erties of temporal changes in TEC (“dTEC”) as an indicator
in its own right. By characterising a reference data set rep-
resenting the minimal or “quiet” behaviour of the ionosphere
– as characterised by GNSS signals – we can then appreciate
the conditions implied during more active ionospheric peri-
ods. Further, by analysing and normalising signal data from
all GNSS band pairs, as divided into both temporal and spatial
intervals, we can investigate how these affect the assessment
and reporting of the ionospheric state. For this purpose we
use “dTEC” as an abbreviation for the change in TEC per sec-
ond, as computed by tracking signals between each satellite-
ground station pair, and based on 30 second interval data.
A key point is that although it might be tempting to charac-
terise the dTEC distributions obtained via GNSS using mea-
sures such as average, variance, kurtosis, and higher order mo-
ments; we see in the data that the distributions contain power-
law tails that become visible at large dTEC values. In some
cases, the power exponent indicating the tail’s fall-off is low
enough so that some of these moments become infinite. So al-
though one can compute any moment from the sampled data,
a reliable relationship between that computation and that of
the underlying distribution is not always guaranteed.
Accordingly, instead of computing moments we instead
2
