3
that produces an output quantum state ρout = Φ(ρin) from
an input quantum state ρin, a standard classicality criterion is
the entanglement-breaking property [17, 18]. A channel Φ is
entanglement-breaking if it always produces a separable state
ρ(AB)
out
= (I ⊗Φ)(ρ(AB)
in
) when applied to a sub-system of a com-
posite system initially prepared in any entangled state ρ(AB)
in
.
Thus, the associated non-classicality criterion is:
Criterion A: Φ is not entanglement-breaking.
(5)
While it is clear that this is a signature of non-classicality,
one may wonder if other alternative criteria may be equally
meaningful. For example, other reasonable choices may be:
Criterion B: Φ cannot be simulated by LOCC,
(6)
Criterion C: Φ has nonzero two-way quantum capacity, (7)
where LOCC stands for local operations and classical com-
munication [13] and the two-way quantum capacity is the
asymptotic rate at which perfect quantum information trans-
mission can be achieved with many uses of Φ and two-way
classical communication [13].
Each one of the mentioned criteria, if satisfied, would im-
ply the quantum nature of gravity. Luckily, there is no need to
check all of them since it is enough to only consider Criterion
A. Indeed, it can be shown that Criteria A and B are equiva-
lent. This is a consequence of the fact that any entanglement-
breaking channel can be described as a classical measure-and-
prepare operation [17] and, conversely, any channel imple-
mented by only local operations and classical communication
(LOCC) is intrinsically unable to distribute any entanglement.
The non-classicality Criterion C is instead strictly stronger
than A, in the sense that C ⇒A, but A ⇏C [13]. This means
that using C to rule out classical gravity would be overkill
since the weaker condition A is sufficient for our scope.
What we discussed is valid for any channel and, therefore,
for any model of the gravitational interaction. An important
special case is when the quantum channel acts independently
on single frequency modes ω as a Gaussian phase-insensitive
thermal attenuator Φω = Eη,N, characterized by a transmis-
sivity η(ω) and an effective thermal occupation number N(ω)
[19, 20]. As we are going to show, this is indeed the case
for a linearized Newtonian force, but it may also be compati-
ble with many alternative phenomenological models of grav-
ity. For example, spontaneous-collapse models [40] or classi-
cal feedback-like models [7–11], are similar to the Newtonian
model with the addition of gravitational Gaussian noise acting
on the dynamics of massive particles such that, in our setup,
gravity would still induce a Gaussian channel. For Φ = Eη,N,
it can be shown [18, 21] that
A ⇔B ⇔C ⇔
η(ω)
1 −η(ω)N(ω) > 1.
(8)
The above inequality provides a sharp non-classicality cri-
terion for the gravity-induced thermal attenuator. If the ratio
is smaller than 1, the channel is equivalent to a fully classical
measure-and-prepare process. If the ratio is larger than 1, the
channel enables not only entanglement distribution (A) but,
in the limit of many uses, also the noiseless transmission of
quantum information (C).
Experimental protocols— Assuming we have an experimental
setup such that low-noise GIT is achieved, what is the actual
experiment that should be performed to falsify the hypothe-
sis of classical gravity? We propose three explicit protocols
ordered by increasing technical complexity and characterized
by different underlying assumptions.
The simplest protocol assumes that the gravity-induced
channel has the structure of a phase-insensitive thermal at-
tenuator with unknown transmissivity η(ω) and thermal noise
N(ω). As we discussed, within the RWA, this assumption
captures weak Newtonian gravity but also a large class of
phenomenological alternative models of gravity. Assuming
Φω = Eη,N, one can characterize the gravity-induced channel
in the same way in which an experimentalist would character-
ize an optical or microwave transmission line, i.e., injecting
one or more coherent input signals to estimate the transmis-
sivity η(ω) and the thermal background noise 1 −η(ω)N(ω).
From (8), if the ratio of the two estimated quantities is larger
than 1, classical gravity is falsified.
The second protocol is valid for a generic channel Φ and,
therefore, is free from any assumption on the gravitational
interaction and on the system dynamics. It is based on the
same benchmarking protocol used more than 25 years ago to
demonstrate the non-classicality of continuous-variable quan-
tum teleportation in a model-independent way [41, 42]. The
idea is to inject, at the frequency ω of maximum GIT, differ-
ent coherent states |αin⟩sampled from a Gaussian phase-space
distribution corresponding to a thermal ensemble with mean
photon number Nin much smaller than the number of photons
of the pump laser. For each input coherent state |αin⟩, one
can measure the Q-function Qout(α) = ⟨α|ρout|α⟩of the out-
put state by heterodyne detection and, in particular, the input-
output fidelity Fαin = Qout(αin). Averaging over different input
coherent states, one can estimate the average input-output fi-
delity F = Fαin. The optimal average fidelity achievable by
any classical strategy is Fclassical = (Nin + 1)/(2Nin + 1)[43]
which, for Nin ≫1, is approximately 1/2 (see also [32] for
a new different proof). Thus, measuring F > Fclassical would
imply the non-classicality of the effective channel (Criteria A
and B) and, as a consequence, of the gravitational interaction.
Finally,
the third protocol is technically more diffi-
cult but provides a stronger type of non-classicality, i.e.,
gravitationally-induced entanglement distribution. This can
be achieved by sending through the GIT channel a mode of
a two-mode-squeezed (i.e. entangled) optical field with mean
excitation number Nin much smaller than the pump photon
number. If nonzero entanglement is detected at the output,
classical gravity is ruled out. Note that sufficient conditions
for nonzero entanglement can be obtained by measuring en-
tanglement witnesses, i.e., the second moments of collective
modes, independently of the underlying quantum state (Gaus-
sianity is not required).
So, this third protocol is model-
independent like the second one.
Explicit solution for a quadratic Hamiltonian interaction —
We now assume an explicit model in which the gravitational
