c).
All three maps show a decrease in peak width close to the crack.
This is verified by the
2D histogram of the peak widths versus crack distance, which show a trend up to 300 µm from
the crack, see Figs. 6(d-f). According to the Scherrer equation (Williamson & Hall, 1953), this
indicates an increased crystallite size close to the crack. This change in crystallite size could be
caused by recrystallization, however previous measurements showed no evidence of recrystallization
in the vicinity of the crack (Wang et al., 2024; Wildeis et al., 2022). Instead, it is likely caused by
dynamic recovery which reduces local microstrain and dislocation density and thereby decreases
peak width (Wang et al., 2024; Miao et al., 2017). Furthermore, this confirms that at least some
diffraction information originated from the vicinity of the crack.
The strain along the scattering vector εq was determined using the differential Bragg equation (Hart,
1969):
εq = −∆θ
tan θ0
,
(3)
where θ0 is the average peak position (corresponding to a0), and ∆θ = θmeasured −θ0 represents the
peak shift at each scan point.
Figure 7: Heatmap of correlation coefficients of peak width maps, which we used to identify the
following highly correlated peaks: 211, 310, and 321.
To improve the contribution from the crack vicinity, we combined the strain information from several
different diffraction peaks. To this end, we have calculated the pair-wise correlation coefficient
between peak width maps of different peaks. The corresponding heatmap is shown in Fig. 7. Here,
we have selected three peaks with the triple (i.e., 211, 310 and 321) of largest correlation coefficients
(r = 0.51 −0.57), which are – not coincidentally– the peaks with highest multiplicity.
The projection of the two-dimensional strain tensor εij in terms of the sample surface coordi-
nate system (see Fig. 2(a), z direction pointing into the sample) can be calculated according to
εq = P
ij qiqjεij (Ramirez-Rico et al., 2016) with the direction of the scattering vector and its
8
