4.
Outlook
One obvious direction for further research is to obtain a better understanding of the physics of
the GLSM in the ζ ≪0-phase. The phase suffers from two independent challenging issues: the
existence of a Coulomb branch at infinity that makes the GLSM non-regular and the fact that,
having a continuous non-abelian unbroken symmetry and a cubic superpotential, the phase is a
strongly coupled interacting gauge theory. As there could be potential effects that relate these two
phenomena in our model, it may not be a good example for an in-depth study of these effects. A
more practicable approach seems to be to first study simpler models where only one of these effects
occurs. A source of such examples are the GLSMs studied by Hori and Tong [9], GLSM realisations
of the models studied by Hosono and Takagi, in particular in low dimensions, or the non-compact
example recently discussed in [33].
Furthermore, D-brane transport and the non-abelian duality need to be understood for non-regular
GLSMs. This would, for instance, make it possible to determine the integral bases and monodromy
matrices computed in §3.5 and §3.6 directly in the GLSM and to establish connections with the
underlying mathematical structures such as Seidel-Thomas twists. While an exhaustive discussion
of D-branes in the ζ ≪0-phase or the associated categorical equivalences for this GLSM is left
to future work, we would like to point out some peculiarities which are specific to this model and
appear to be connected to the Coulomb branch at ζ →−∞.
The first comment concerns the evaluation of the hemisphere partition function in the ζ ≪0-
phase. In strongly coupled phases the hemisphere partition function will in general be divergent.
To achieve absolute convergence one has to make a suitable choice for an integration contour. On
top of this, one also needs to apply a grade-restriction rule associated to the unbroken continuous
gauge symmetry in this phase [56, 70]. In examples like the Rødland and Hosono-Takagi models
it is possible, provided one has a suitable brane, to make a na¨ıve choice of contour, analogous to
calculations for the sphere partition function [71]: take the contour for real σi and close it in the
negative complex plane. The result will not be convergent. However, the divergent sums can be
regulated to yield an expansion in terms of solutions of the Picard-Fuchs equation associated to the
phase. For the present example, the situation is more complicated. Due to the Coulomb branch at
any theta angle, one has to be more careful with the choice of integration contour. One must make
sure that the contour does not intersect the extra Coulomb branch. We can na¨ıvely evaluate the
hemisphere partition function in the strongly coupled phase by closing the contour at infinity. Due
to the fact that our gauge group has rank 3, we obtain a triple sum, where two sums are divergent.
We have not been able to regulate the expression. To understand this better, it also seems useful
to first study a simpler non-regular model.
The existence of the Coulomb branch at infinity also raises questions about the formulation equiv-
alences of D-brane categories associated to the two phases. In the non-Calabi-Yau case, the grade
restriction rule determines two windows, a big one and a small one [45, 72–74]. The small window
accounts for equivalences of branes localised on the Higgs branches in the respective phases, while
the large window also captures branes localised on the Coulomb branch vacua. In the mathematical
formulation, the existence of the massive Coulomb vacua is reflected in the necessity to supplement
the categorical equivalences between the geometries given by the Higgs vacua by additional excep-
tional collections. The situation in our example is similar but the additional Coulomb vacua are
35
