8
1
1
topo inv.
0
1
2
t/
0.0
0.2
0.4
SOI/
(a)
0
1
2
t/
(b)
0
1
2
t/
(c)
FIG. 6.
Scatter plot of PMMs in the t versus ΦSOI parameter
space, using the same data as for Fig. 5. The Zeeman energy
∆Z of the states is not shown. Pink (blue) points indicate true
(false) PMMs, and silver crosses indicates states that do not
satisfy the TR condition defined in Eq. (8) after the optimiza-
tion. The threshold values are ∆Eth/∆= 10−4, ∆Qth = 0.01
in all panels, whereas (a) Mth = 0.01 and Eex,th/∆= 0.1,
(b) Mth = 0.2 and Eex,th/∆= 0.1, (c) Mth = 0.01 and
Eex,th/∆= 10−3. Zero-energy states at small hopping ampli-
tudes t have a small excitation gap and therefore, these states
satisfy the TR condition only if Eex,th is small enough. Zero-
energy states at large t have a higher MP and therefore they
only satisfy the TR condition if Mth is large enough.
States at small t have a small excitation gap Eex, see
Fig. 7(a), therefore they are not classified as PMMs if
Eex,th is set too high. As Mth increases, states at larger
t satisfy the TR condition. These states at higher t tend
to have larger excitation gaps Eex. In addition, we find
that the area of the TR in the µN versus µS parameter
space tends to be larger for larger t, see Fig. 7(b). A
larger TR in the µN versus µS parameter space means
that less fine-tuning of the chemical potential is required
and it is easier to manipulate the states when doing, e.g.,
braiding [48, 52, 57]. Therefore, true PMMs in systems
with large hopping amplitudes t seem ideal candidates for
stable MBS-like states. However, as we have discussed in
Sec III, the larger t, the more one has to fine-tune the
SOI angle ΦSOI to enable PMMs, which becomes even
more complicated if there is some interdependence be-
tween parameters. Furthermore, states at large t gener-
ally have a lower MP and therefore they are only classified
as PMMs if the threshold values are relaxed sufficiently,
which leads to a lower ratio of true PMMs, see Fig. 5(j).
As such, the two main concerns for PMMs – stability
and a low chance for false PMMs – are contradictory and
one cannot guarantee that stable PMMs are connected
to topological states in the long chain limit.
V.
CONCLUSION
We have studied false PMMs in chains consisting of
alternating normal and superconducting QDs. In partic-
ular, based on a system without any superconductivity,
we explained why false PMMs with certain characteris-
tics appear in different regions of parameter space and
we have found good agreement between this analytic un-
derstanding and numerical results. This emphasizes that
false PMMs can occur in short chains, without any rela-
0.5
1.0
t/
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
SOI/
(a)
0.5
1.0
t/
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
SOI/
(b)
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
max Eex/
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
area TR/
2
1e
5
FIG. 7.
(a): Largest excitation gap Eex in the TR and
(b): area of the TR in the µN versus µS parameter space for
PMMs that are found using the numerical optimization algo-
rithm described in Ref. [72] with ∆Z/∆= 0.8 fixed. In both
panels, the points circled in black are the true PMMs, the
one without a black circle are the false PMMs. Although the
area of the TR is highly dependent on the threshold values,
comparing its size at fixed threshold values is an indication of
the stability of the PMM, on the feasibility of braiding, and
on the required amount of tine-tuning of the chemical poten-
tials. Ideally, a PMM has a large excitation gap and large
area of the TR, which is the case for large hopping ampli-
tudes t. The TR threshold values here are ∆Eth/∆= 10−4,
Mth = 0.1, ∆Qth = 0.01, and Eex,th/∆= 0.05.
tion to MBSs that appear due to topological supercon-
ductivity in long chains.
Additionally, we demonstrated that the SOI angle
ΦSOI has the potential to distinguish regions of parame-
ter space where the number of true false PMMs is signif-
icantly larger than false PMMs and that the ratio of true
to false PMMs depends on the threshold values that are
used to define PMMs. The stricter the threshold values
are set, the more probable it is that a state that ful-
fills the TR conditions is a true PMMs. However, the
stricter the threshold values are, the fewer states overall
are classified as PMMs, thus requiring more fine-tuning
of parameters to reach the TR.
We have demonstrated that the most stable PMMs oc-
cur at large hopping amplitudes, as these states tend to
have larger excitation gaps, require less fine-tuning of the
chemical potential, and allow for more flexibility during
braiding. However, states at large hopping amplitudes
require more fine-tuning of the SOI angle and the local-
ization is generally worse than for states at smaller hop-
ping amplitudes. Therefore, the threshold values must be
set rather loose to allow for stable PMMs. However, we
have also shown that the ratio of false PMMs increases as
the threshold values are relaxed. If instead, one were to
set stricter threshold values, then the ratio of true PMMs
would increase, but we find that such states only occur
at smaller hopping amplitudes, where the excitation gaps
tend to be smaller and more fine-tuning of the chemical
potential is required to stay in the TR. Therefore, the re-
gions of parameter space where stable PMMs occur and
the regions with a low chance of false PMMs do not have
a significant overlap, requiring a tradeoff. Furthermore,
we have so far assumed that the hopping amplitude t
and the SOI angle ΦSOI are independent parameters of
our model. In reality, however, it is to be expected that
