Phonon mediated spin polarization in a one-dimensional 
Aubry-Andre-Harper chain 
Moumita Mondal1,*[0009-0008-7599-8799] and Santanu K. Maiti1,**[0000-0003-3979-8606] 
1 Physics and Applied Mathematics Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, 203 Barrackpore Trunk 
Road, Kolkata-700 108, India 
*mondalmoumita2k19@gmail.com,    **santanu.maiti@isical.ac.in 
Abstract. A comparative study of electronic transport and spin polarization be-
tween clean and Aubry-André-Harper chains in the presence of electron-
electron (e-e) and electron-phonon (e-ph) interactions is presented. The entire 
system is simulated within a tight-binding framework based on the Hubbard-
Holstein model. Transmission probability and spin polarization are evaluated 
using the Green’s function method under the Hartree-Fock mean-field approxi-
mation through a self-consistent procedure. The transmission profile is found to 
be consistent with the band structure, which is also discussed. An overall en-
hancement of spin polarization induced by e-ph interaction is reported for the 
first time, to the best of our knowledge. Our analysis may be useful for studying 
controlled spin-selective electron transmission in the presence of e-ph coupling.  
Keywords: Spin Selective Transmission, Spin Polarization, AAH Chain, Elec-
tron-Electron Interaction, Electron-Phonon Coupling, Hartree-Fock Mean-Field 
Theory, NEGF Technique 
1 
Introduction 
A detailed understanding of electronic transport in low-dimensional systems has 
become essential for the fabrication of various nanoscale devices. This is the key 
reason that has captured researchers’ attention toward exploring the current-carrying 
behavior of low-scale conductors [1,2]. As we know, transport in such systems is 
highly sensitive to electronic localization, scattering, the presence of disorder, the size 
of the conductor, and other factors. Moreover, as the quantum properties of materials 
become significant in this regime, particle-particle interactions [3-9] must also be 
taken into account to develop a comprehensive understanding. The motion of an elec-
tron near the Fermi surface is greatly influenced by its interactions with other elec-
trons and with quantized lattice vibrations, known as phonons. 
  In this article, we consider a one-dimensional (1D) Aubry-André-Harper (AAH) 
chain [10-13] subject to electron-electron (e-e) and electron-phonon (e-ph) interac-
tions, connected to source and drain leads. The interactions are incorporated following 
the Hubbard and Holstein prescriptions [8,9], where each lattice site is locally coupled 
to a dispersionless longitudinal optical phonon, and two electrons on the same site 
interact via a screened Coulomb repulsive force. All these phonons, having the same 
