Conclusion and future prospects
171
the NNLO K-factors for hadronic observables [374] which will open the possibility for a larger
inclusion of exact N3LO partonic matrix elements and reduce or correct the current estimate of
the incomplete higher order uncertainties.
On the other hand, in this thesis, we have not discussed the effect of fitting methodology on PDF
uncertainties. Here, a more extensive use of common closure or future tests [375] would be
beneficial to trim the number of available PDF sets to the ones offering more reliable predictions
for future observables. A consistent validation of the current PDF methodologies based on an
orthogonal technique, such as Gaussian Kernels, would be very interesting [376]. This study
could indeed confirm or reject the current size of the PDF uncertainties.
Regarding the topic of intrinsic charm, a competitive analysis from a different PDF fitting group
would be highly beneficial to corroborate our finding. From our side, to further elucidate the
origin of the proton intrinsic charm, a more comprehensive study of the relationship between
non-perturbative models and the PDF extracted from high energy data might be needed in
the future. For example, the investigation of higher twist effects neglected in the current
factorization approach could be a first step in this direction. Eventually, the detection of
non-vanishing intrinsic charm asymmetry effect at the HL-LHC or EIC could be a cornerstone
measurement on this long-standing topic.
Turning to the analysis of helicity dependent PDFs, the EIC, expected to start its operations
in the 2030s, is designed to revolutionize this state of affairs. The advanced detector design
will allow us to resolve the small-x region down to x ≈10−5 reducing the uncertainties on
the g1 measurements and possibly also on the gluon polarization. This should solve the long-
standing proton spin puzzle allowing us to determine quantitatively the proton orbital angular
momentum. These forthcoming measurements will involve inclusive DIS on nuclear targets but
also semi-inclusive structure functions, which are then sensitive to light hadron fragmentation
functions (FF). With these prospects in mind, our study is a first step towards a simultaneous
global QCD fit of polarized and unpolarized, proton and nuclear PDFs together with hadronic
FFs which will allow us to fully take into account all the theoretical and methodological
correlations originating from the same underlying law. In spite of the fact that the goal seems
quite challenging, we believe the tools used and developed in this thesis to be flexible and
user-friendly enough to be extended for such scope.
