Geometrical Reconstruction of Spinfoam Critical Points with A Cosmological
Constant
Qiaoyin Pan1, ∗
1Department of Physics, Florida Atlantic University, 777 Glades Road, Boca Raton, FL 33431, USA
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
In this work, we present a geometrical reconstruction of the critical points of the spinfoam am-
plitude for a 4D Lorentzian model with a non-zero cosmological constant.
By establishing the
correspondence between the moduli space of SL(2, C) flat connections on the graph-complement
3-manifold S3\Γ5 and the geometry of a constantly curved 4-simplex, we demonstrate how the
critical points encode discrete curved geometries. The analysis extends to 4-complexes dual to col-
ored graphs, aligning with the improved spinfoam model recently introduced in [1]. Central to this
reconstruction are translating the geometry of constantly curved 4-simplices into Fock-Goncharov
coordinates and spinors, which translate the geometry data into holonomies and symplectic struc-
tures, thereby defining the critical points of the spinfoam amplitude. This framework provides an
algorithmic foundation for computing quantum gravity corrections and opens avenues for applica-
tions in quantum cosmology and black hole physics, where the cosmological constant plays a pivotal
role.
Contents
I. Introduction
1
II. Flat connection on 3-manifold and curved 4-simplex geometry
2
III. From flat connection to curved geometry
5
IV. Review of the spinfoam model with Λ ̸= 0 and the critical points
7
V. Geometrical reconstruction of spinfoam critical points
12
A. Fock-Gontrarov coordinates on one 4-holed sphere
12
B. Coordinate reconstruction on S3\Γ5
15
C. Compatability test
17
VI. Conclusion and discussion
18
Acknowledgments
18
A. Symplectic coordinates on ∂(S3\Γ5)
18
B. Calculate the Fock-Goncharov coordinates with spinors and holonomies
20
C. Geometry encoded Fock-Goncharov coordinates on ideal tetrahedra and ideal octahedra
21
References
22
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the study of covariant loop quantum gravity (LQG), also called the spinfoam model [2, 3], the semi-classical
regime (ℏ→0) is one of the focuses of attention as it is where consistency with general relativity is tested and
quantum corrections are extracted. A well-defined spinfoam model on the triangulated spacetime should reproduce,
at the semi-classical regime, the Regge action of this triangulation, which is the discretized Einstein gravity. This
∗Electronic address: qpan@fau.edu
arXiv:2504.06428v1  [gr-qc]  8 Apr 2025
