I.
ABSTRACT
Light-matter interactions in crystals are powerful tools that seamlessly allow both func-
tionalities of sizeable bandgap modulation and non-invasive spectroscopy. While we often
assume that the border between the two regimes of modulation and detection is sharp and
well-defined, there are experiments where the boundaries fade. The study of these transition
regions allows us to identify the real potentials and inherent limitations of the most com-
monly used optical spectroscopy techniques. Here, we measure and explain the co-existence
between bandgap modulation and non-invasive spectroscopy in the case of resonant per-
turbative nonlinear optics in an atomically thin direct gap semiconductor. We report a
clear deviation from the typical quadratic power scaling of second-harmonic generation near
an exciton resonance, and we explain this unusual result based on all-optical modulation
driven by the intensity-dependent optical Stark and Bloch-Siegert shifts in the ±K valleys of
the Brillouin zone. Our experimental results are corroborated by analytical and numerical
analysis based on the semiconductor Bloch equations, from which we extract the resonant
transition dipole moments and dephasing times of the used sample. These findings redefine
the meaning of perturbative nonlinear optics by revealing how coherent light-matter interac-
tions can modify the band structure of a crystal, even in the weak-field regime. Furthermore,
our results strengthen the understanding of ultrafast all-optical control of electronic states in
two-dimensional materials, with potential applications in valleytronics, Floquet engineering,
and light-wave electronics.
II.
MAIN TEXT
A.
Introduction
An essential criterion of modern science and of our comprehension of nature is that
any observation of a physical event perturbs the event itself. While this idea was initially
postulated almost one hundred years ago in the framework of quantum mechanics [1, 2],
the principle remains valid even if we perform classical experiments to study the intrinsic
properties of a material. For this reason, understanding to which extent our experimental
tools can really probe the equilibrium state of a sample without perturbing it has both
fundamental and technological relevance. Light-matter interactions are, in this context, the
2
