9 The use of ∆SCF via the maximum overlap
method (MOM); comparison with
time-dependent DFT calculations
We used ∆SCF with high confidence, as numerous studies have showed that ∆SCF
can predict excitation energies with accuracy comparable to, and occasionally sur-
passing, that of time-dependent DFT (TD-DFT) when employing the maximum
overlap method (MOM) to optimise the excited states[25–27]. In Table 2, we compare
the calculated excitation energies for the Ar 2p →4s transition between MOM and
TD-DFT in two different exchange–correlation functionals. It can be seen that while
∆SCF/MOM somewhat overestimates the excitation energies, TD-DFT severely
underestimates them.
We attribute the discrepancy between the accuracies of ∆SCF/MOM and TD-DFT
compared to experimental results to the fact that the orbitals in TD-DFT calcula-
tions are unrelaxed. As such, any TD-DFT excited states involving the unrelaxed
unoccupied 4s orbital of the ground-state DFT calculation would not be able to pick
up the qualitative distortion due to the mixing with the C60 cage in the excited
state as demonstrated by ∆SCF via the MOM. Moreover, using ∆SCF via the MOM
allows us to visualise the orbitals involved in the transition, therefore gaining a clearer
qualitative understanding of the targeted excited states, which would not be possible
with TD-DFT.
Table 2 Calculated excitation energies for the Ar
2p →4s transition. All energy values are in eV and
correspond to singlet excited states with MS = 0
and ⟨ˆS2⟩≈0. This was ensured in ∆SCF via the
approximate spin purification equation [28, 29]
E⟨ˆ
S2⟩≈0 ≈2E⟨ˆ
S2⟩≈1 −E⟨ˆ
S2⟩≈2, where the MOM
was used to converge into Kohn–Sham states with
MS = 0 and ⟨ˆS2⟩≈1 and ⟨ˆS2⟩≈2 corresponding
to the Ar 2p →4s transition. The experimentally
measured energy for the Ar 2p3/2 →4s transition
is approximately 245.3 eV (see Figures 2 and S1).
∆SCF/MOM
TDDFT
PBE/6-31++G**
248.91
230.63
B3LYP/6-31++G**
250.07
236.93
Quantitative evaluation of delocalisation time represents a significant challenge
requiring the use of electron quantum dynamics methods such as the wave-packet
propagation (WPP) approach[30, 31]. An important requirement for WPP methods is
a high-level quantitative description of the excited state wavefunction, which plays a
role of the initial condition for the Cauchy problem. This remains a largely unsolved,
non-trivial task for DFT methods[30], which becomes even more complicated for larger
13
