3
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
Signal (mV)
X Position (mm)
(b)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90 100
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
Signal-to-noise ratio
Concentration (%)
(c)
FIG. 3: Measurement contrast decreases with
concentration. (a) 40 × 40 mm magnetic image scans for
a selection of concentrations. Each scan took 8 minutes.
(b) X line profile for 80% concentration. (c) Contrast of
each concentration using the maximum and minimum of
the Gaussian derivative fits.
magnet is attached to the side of the end of the fiber. An
optically detected magnetic resonance spectrum (ODMR)
is used to determine where best to place the magnet to
provide close to a [100] alignment, so the four peaks for the
ms = 0 to ms = −1 transition overlap and the four peaks
for the ms = 0 to ms = +1 transition overlap (Fig. 2). A
[100] alignment was chosen to provide approximately a 2.3
times improvement in sensitivity along the [100] axis, con-
sidering a 4 times increase in contrast but also considering
the projection of the magnetic field along the NV symme-
try axes giving a 0.58 times decrease in measured field. The
magnet was then secured in place using glue.
The completed sensor setup was attached to a 3D print-
ing stage to scan the sensor head in a controlled XY plane
and to accurately adjust the height of sample scans. A step
size of 1.0 mm was used for the X and Y axis movement.
III.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
The original MagTrace™(Endomagnetics Ltd) suspen-
sion comes in a 2 ml vial containing approximately
55 ±4 mg of iron in the form of iron oxide and 64 mg of car-
boxydextran. These are combined to form carboxydextran-
coated superparamagnetic iron oxide.
This gives an ap-
proximate concentration of 28 mg/ml of iron, in the form
of maghemite (the gamma phase of iron oxide γ −Fe2O3)
in the suspension. By measuring out specific volumes of
this suspension and mixing with water to dilute it, vary-
ing concentrations of this suspension were made to test the
sensitivity of the magnetometer to changes in iron oxide
concentration.
To determine the minimum concentration of iron oxide
suspension the sensor could detect and at what distance,
twenty 200 µl vials were filled with increasing concentra-
tions of iron oxide suspension. The concentrations started
at 0% and increased by 5% up to 100%. The concentra-
tions were made using a mix of MagTrace™(Endomag-
netics Ltd) suspension and water, measured out using an
electronic pipette. A 3D printed jig was made to hold the
samples, with a hole the same diameter as the vials in the
centre, secured onto the 3D printing stage. This allowed
the swapping out of vials while keeping their position in
the scan constant. The sensor head was scanned over the
same area each time to keep measurements consistent. The
scanned area was 40 × 40 mm with a separation distance of
0.5 mm between the top of the vials and the sensor tip. The
magnetic image for each concentration shows the change
in lock-in amplifier signal output, as a function of position,
caused by the proximity of the magnetic material shifting
the magnetic resonance frequency of the NV centers in the
diamond (Fig. 3a). For each point in the scan, a measure-
ment was made with a 0.5 s acquisition time at a sampling
rate of 13.39 kSa/s. The standard deviation of each ac-
quisition was also recorded and used as the error of each
pixel.
To confirm the detection of the varied concentrations,
line profiles were taken both along the X and Y axis, across
the spots seen in the image (Fig. 3b). Due to the dipole
shape of the images, only the horizontal line profile was
used to calculated the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the
measurement.
This was because the vertical line profile
passed through the local minimum of the dipole and pro-
vided no signal change.
The line profiles showed a derivative Gaussian profile and
a derivative Gaussian function was used to fit the data. The
SNR was calculated for the individual line profiles by us-
ing the maximum value of the curve fit minus the minimum
