Figure 3.
Analytical basic state solution profiles for RHsurf = 0.6, bsurf = 0.05 and r = 1 × 10−5. The
unsaturated part of the solution is given by the dashed lines, and the saturated part is given by the solid lines.
The dotted red line marks the LCL. The numerical condensation profile (Cnum) for a smooth approximation
of H is also shown.
3.1.
Parameter Sensitivity of the Basic State Conditional Instability
In this section, we analyse the sensitivity of the conditional instability of basic state
environments to the climate parameters, by analysing buoyancy profiles and several
diagnostics. We first illustrate the parameter dependence of the conditional instability
by computing buoyancy profiles of both the basic state and a lifted surface parcel for
different parameter values in Figure 4.
The top left panel of Figure 4 shows how an increase in surface temperature
affects the conditional instability in the basic state environment. By comparing
the (cooler) blue and (warmer) red profiles, we find that increasing the surface
temperature (by ∼10K, as in Wing et al. (2018)) causes the LFC to increase,
the CIN to increase and the pCAPE to decrease. We find that the changes in the
conditional instability associated with increasing the surface temperature behave
monotonically, at least for the range of parameters considered in our study. The
reduction in conditional instability (characterised by a reduction in the net CAPE)
with increasing surface temperature is due to the increased curvature of both the
parcel and basic state buoyancy profiles, as a result of the presence of more moisture
in the system associated with warmer surface temperatures.
The effect of surface relative humidity on the conditional instability is shown
in the top right panel of Figure 4. We find that changing the surface relative humidity
from 20% to 99% causes a significant decrease in the LFC and CIN, relative to the
small increase in pCAPE. Note that in the limit RHsurf →0, the LFC →0 if the
environment is dry unstable (as it would be for the basic state with dry adiabatic
BCs at the top boundary), indicating that the dependence of the conditional
instability (LFC, CIN and pCAPE) on the surface relative humidity does not behave
monotonically.
14
