the Fourier transform can be extended to a unitary operator
F ∈B(L2(Rs, Cn)), i.e., F−1 = F∗. Since F agrees with
the Fourier transform on the dense subspace of absolutely
integrable functions, we will refer to Ff as the Fourier
transform of f, and we will write ˆf = Ff.
A key property of the Fourier transform that we will
exploit in this paper is that translation-invariant operators
are transformed into multiplication operators. The Fourier
transform of a densely deﬁned operator A on L2(Rs, Cn) is
the densely deﬁned operator ˆ
A = FAF∗on L2(Rs, Cn),
such that
ˆ
A ˆf ∈L2(Rs, Cn) is the Fourier transform of
Af ∈L2(Rs, Cn). For each ¯x ∈Rs, the translation operator
T¯x ∈B(L2(Rs, Cn)) is given by (T¯xf)(x) = f(x + ¯x).
A densely deﬁned operator A is translation-invariant if
T¯x : D(A) →D(A) and T¯xA = AT¯x for all ¯x ∈Rs.
The Fourier transform of a translation-invariant operator is a
multiplication operator [12, Section 3.6], i.e., there exists a
function ˆA : Rs →Cn×n such that ( ˆ
A ˆf)(ω) = ˆA(ω) ˆf(ω).
The function ˆA is called the symbol of the operator ˆ
A. It is
well-known that the operators ˆ
A and, thus, A are bounded
if and only if the symbol ˆA is bounded.
Throughout this paper, we will consider functions that
depend on a temporal variable t and a spatial (frequency)
variable x (ω). We will denote the dependence on the spatial
(frequency) variable with a subscript, e.g., we will write
fx instead of f(x). In particular, we will often consider
functions of the form f : T →L2(Rs, Cm), where T is
a temporal domain and Rs is a spatial (frequency) domain.
We interpret such functions as mapping the temporal variable
t ∈T to a spatial (frequency) proﬁle f(t) ∈L2(Rs, Cm).
We will denote the dependence on the spatial (frequency)
variable with a subscript, i.e., we will write fx(t) = f(t)(x),
so that the function fx : T →Cn is the temporal trajectory
at a given point in space x ∈Rs. Finally, we will write ˆf to
denote the spatial Fourier transform of f, i.e., the function
ˆf : T →L2(Rs, Cm) such that ˆf(t) ∈L2(Rs, Cm) is the
Fourier transform of f(t) ∈L2(Rs, Cm) for all t ∈T.
B. LTI relaxation systems
Consider the linear time-invariant (LTI) system
Σ :



d
dtz(t) = Az(t) + Bu(t),
y(t) = Cx(t),
(9)
with input space Rm, state space Rn, and output space Rp.
The impulse response of the system Σ is the matrix-valued
map g : R+ →Rp×m given by g(t) = CeAtB. Assuming
that the system Σ is initially at rest, i.e., z(−∞) = 0, its
output is given by the convolution
y(t) =
Z t
−∞
g(t −τ)u(τ) dτ
(10)
The system Σ is of relaxation type [6] if m = p and its
impulse response g is devoid of any oscillatory behaviour,
expressed as g being completely monotone [13], i.e.,
(−1)k dk
dtk g(t) ≥0
(11)
for all t ∈R+ and k ∈Z+. By Bernstein’s theorem, g is
completely monotone if and only if it is a conic combination
of decaying exponentials, i.e., g(t) = Pn
i=1 Gie−pit, where
Gi ≥0 and pi ≥0 for all i ∈{1, . . . , n}. Relaxation
systems are passive and reciprocal with only one type of
energy storage. They admit a unique storage function that
can be determined from the input-output behaviour of the
system. Furthermore, every relaxation system has a state
space realization that is internally of relaxation type [14],
i.e., B = C∗and A ≤0.
For an exponentially stable system Σ, relaxation can be
characterized via the Hankel operator, i.e., the bounded linear
operator H : L2(R+, Rm) →L2(R+, Rp) given by
(Hv)(t) =
Z
R+
g(t + τ)v(τ) dτ
(12)
The Hankel operator H maps past inputs to future outputs
in the sense that the input u(t) = v(−t) for all t ≤0 and
u(t) = 0 for all t > 0, results in the output y(t) = (Hv)(t)
for all t ≥0. In [3], it is shown that the Hankel operator
of a relaxation system is self-adjoint and nonnegative, hence
cyclically monotone. This implies that H is the functional
derivative of a quadratic (memory) functional, which serves
as an intrinsic energy storage for the system.
Finally, we note that the results in this section are also
valid for LTI systems with complex input, state and output
spaces, which will be considered throughout this paper.
IV. LTSI SYSTEMS AND RELAXATION
In this section, we will deﬁne and characterize the notion
of relaxation for a class of linear time-and-space-invariant
(LTSI) systems. The deﬁnition of relaxation for LTSI systems
will be a natural generalization of the deﬁnition for LTI
systems, namely, it will be expressed as complete monotonic-
ity of the (operator-valued) impulse response. The spatial
invariance of the LTSI system will allow us to view it as a
family of LTI systems via the Fourier transform. This will
allow us to characterize relaxation of the LTSI system as
relaxation of the corresponding family of LTI systems.
Consider the LTSI system Σ of the form
Σ :



d
dtz(t) = Az(t) + Bu(t),
y(t) = Cz(t),
(13)
with (inﬁnite-dimensional) input space U = L2(Rs, Cm),
state space Z = L2(Rs, Cn), output space Y = L2(Rs, Cp),
and translation-invariant linear operators A : D(A) →Z,
B ∈B(U, Z) and C ∈B(Z, Y), where we assume that
the domain D(A) ⊂Z is dense. The system is time-
invariant because the operators A, B and C are constant,
and space-invariant because they are translation-invariant.
The operator A is typically unbounded and the notion of
solution requires some care, see, e.g. [15]. Without going
into details, we assume that A is the inﬁnitesimal generator
of a C0-semigroup t 7→exp(At) ∈B(Z). The notation is
motivated by the fact that the latter is a generalization of the
exponential function.
