B
Condensable algebras
We review the deﬁnition of a condensable algebra in a braided fusion category D.
See e.g. [29] for more.
Condensable algebras are special instances of symmetric special Frobenius al-
gebras. Recall that a symmetric special Frobenius algebra is a tuple (A,µ,u,∆,uo)
where A ∈ob(D) is an object in D, and µ ∶A ⊗A →A, u ∶
1D →A, ∆∶A →A ⊗A,
uo ∶A →
1D are morphisms in D satisfying an array of conditions. We refer the
reader to [25, Appendix A] for a complete list of such identities.
What distinguishes a condensable algebra (A,µ,u,∆,uo) from a symmetric spe-
cial Frobenius algebra are the following additional conditions. First, one requires
that A is connected, meaning that Hom(1D,A) = C. Second, one requires it to be
normalized, so that uo ○u = dim(A)id
1D. Lastly, one requires it to be (braided-
)commutative. By deﬁnition, the braided fusion category D comes equipped with
a braiding, a collection of isomorphisms bX,Y ∶X ⊗Y →Y ⊗X satisfying some
consistency conditions (see e.g. [30, Chapter 8]). The algebra is called (braided-
)commutative if its multiplication morphism µ ∶A ⊗A →A satisﬁes
µ = µ ○bA,A.
(B.1)
Note that while the ﬁrst two conditions can be considered more generally in a
fusion category C, the third condition only makes sense in a braided fusion category.
Thus, a connected normalized commutative symmetric special Frobenius algebra
(A,µ,u,∆,uo) is referred to as a condensable algebra.
In the particular case where D = Z(C) is the Drinfeld center of some fusion
category C, a condensable algebra A satisfying the condition
∣dim(A)∣2 = dim(Z(C))
(B.2)
is known as Lagrangian algebra, and speciﬁes a gapped boundary for Z(C).
In physics, a condensable algebra speciﬁes the anyons in the 3d TFT which
can end in a two-dimensional boundary. However, in a two-dimensional theory,
to gauge a subsymmetry of a fusion category requires merely a special symmetric
Frobenius algebra, not a condensable algebra.
C
Exact sequence of tensor categories
An exact sequence of tensor categories consists of [12] a diagram of tensor cate-
gories
K
ıÐ→C
πÐ→D,
(C.1)
such that π is a dominant and normal tensor functor, and that the tensor functor
ı is a full embedding whose essential image is K ≅Kerπ ⊂C for Kerπ the kernel
51
