Methods
Solar evolutionary models and macroscopic transport of chemical elements
The starting point of the reconstruction procedure is provided by calibrated solar evolutionary
models computed with the Li`ege stellar evolution code (CLES)63. The calibration procedure
uses four free parameters, namely the initial hydrogen mass fraction, X0, the initial metallicity,
Z0, the mixing-length parameter of convection, αMLT, and an envelope overshooting parameter,
αOv, optimized to reproduce the present-day solar luminosity, L⊙, the solar radius, R⊙, the sur-
face heavy element abundance (Z/X)S as well as the position of the base of the solar convective
zone, rCZ. The properties of the set of calibrated evolutionary models are listed in Table 1.
The illustrations (Supplementary Figures) of all the tests carried out in the method section are
presented in the Supplementary Information.
Our method was applied to an extensive set of reference models, varying ingredients at mi-
croscopic and macroscopic scales. Such an approach is required to analyze the effect of the
solar calibration procedure, and of other factors such as abundances, transport of chemicals,
etc., to determine whether the trends we have seen for Models 1 and 2 will not be erased by a
speciﬁc combination of physical ingredients. We examined 10 solar seismic models from 10 in-
dividual calibrations. Regarding microscopic physics, we relied on using the AGSS09, AAG21,
MB22 and the GN93 abundances. Other variations included the equation of state (FreeEOS64,
SAHA-S65;66), radiative opacity tables (OP67, OPLIB34, OPAS33, OPAL68), and nuclear reac-
tion rates69;70. Microscopic diffusion is taken into account in all calibrations following Thoul
et al. (1994)71, including the screening coefﬁcients of Paquette et al. (1986)72 and the effects
of partial ionization. Regarding macrophysics, we tested various formulations of the empiri-
cal coefﬁcients of Profﬁtt & Michaud (1991)73, including the recent recalibrations presented in
Eggenberger et al. (2022)32 to reproduce the combined effect of hydrodynamic and magneto-
16
