7
|β⟩are eigenstates, the decoherence cannot emerge from
the dynamics due to the system Hamiltonian [54]. In the
case of qubits, one possible way to satisfy condition 35 is
by encoding information in two eigenstates that undergo
an anticrossing at a specific applied field, thereby realiz-
ing clock-transition conditions [29]. At this anticrossing,
the transition frequency between the two levels becomes
first-order insensitive to small fluctuations in the mag-
netic field, and both levels exhibit equal magnetization:
X
k
Γk
z ⟨β| Sz
k |β⟩=
X
k
Γk
z ⟨α| Sz
k |α⟩
(36)
This condition can imply 35, for instance, through sym-
metry arguments, but not necessarily. The most favor-
able condition is when the clock transition occurs at zero
applied field, as in this case time-reversal symmetry en-
forces ⟨α| Sz
k |α⟩= ⟨β| Sz
k |β⟩= 0 ∀k.
For qudits, the challenge lies in the relevance of multi-
ple transition frequencies, making it extremely difficult
to satisfy condition 36 for all of them—except at zero
applied field. This would require a non-Kramers nano-
magnet (with an even number of electrons) that possesses
sufficiently low symmetry, ensuring the presence of d low-
lying nonmagnetic singlet eigenstates. These states must
exhibit well-spaced energy gaps of similar magnitude to
remain within an addressable energy window compatible
with available magnetic pulses.
Additionally, effective
pulse operations require sizeable magnetic-dipole matrix
elements between multiple pairs of states.
Finally, no
energy gap should be so small that second-order deco-
herence contributions become significant.
Meeting all these constraints in a single physical system is
highly challenging, particularly because the zero-field re-
quirement precludes any external control over the Hamil-
tonian.
Therefore, rather than aiming for a perfectly
optimal control of decoherence, we will explore whether
suboptimal but still viable conditions can be achieved in
realistic systems and experimental setups, and whether
for such systems the effect of second-order terms in de-
coherence is actually minor. We stress that we do not
require Markovian dynamics [55] because we only need
the applicability of the Schrieffer-Wolff transformation
for the eigenstates of interest, extending the range of ap-
plicability of our method.
C.
Consequences of neglecting the second order
perturbed terms
In section IV B, we stated that the term ˜R in equa-
tion 31 can be neglected. In supplemental material VI A,
we demonstrate that for MNMs the second-order per-
turbed terms can be neglected by estimating all the in-
teractions acting on a generic spin in the bath. The re-
sults show that first-order interactions (Equation 9) are
usually much larger than second-order ones (Equation
10), unless the terms (⟨β| Sµ
k |β⟩−⟨α| Sµ
k |α⟩)Γk
ηµ in 31
are small. In this case (see supplemental material VI A)
[Hα, Hβ] ≈
X
k,µ,η
(⟨β| Sµ
k |β⟩−⟨α| Sµ
k |α⟩)Γk
ηµOk
η+
+ [HB, ∆HSB2].
(37)
Yet, even when it is the leading term in 37, the second-
order contribution is usually small, with little impact on
coherence times.
V.
NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we illustrate the impact on the coher-
ence factor when the ideal condition expressed in Equa-
tion 34 is not met, using two representative case studies.
Additionally, we present an example of a realistic molec-
ular spin qudit.
For this purpose, we define the following parameter
∆=
X
Wk
η

X
i∈Wk
µ
Γi
ηµ(⟨β| Sµ
i |β⟩−⟨α| Sµ
i |α⟩)

(38)
that measures how far we are from the ideal condition
expressed in equation 23. Note that, in the following, we
will study central systems made of electronic spins only.
In addition, we suppose diagonal gyromagnetic ratio ten-
sors. It follows that, considering equation 35, equation
38 takes the following simplified form
∆=
X
k,η
Γk
ηη(⟨β| Sη
k |β⟩−⟨α| Sη
k |α⟩)

(39)
All the numerical values of ∆reported in this work will
be expressed in Bohr magneton units. In all the systems
we considered, a Hanh echo pulse sequence has been con-
sidered to suppress the trivial effect of the free induction
decay, modeled as explained in section II B. Besides, the
randomly generated spin baths are composed of 1000 nu-
clear spins (I = 1/2) distributed into a spherical volume
of radius 20 ˚A, with the only constraint of setting the
minimum distance between each pair of spins (belonging
to the system or the bath) to a typical value of 3 ˚A.
A.
Single giant spin-S system
As a first example, we report the case of the simplest
molecular spin qudit, namely a system that contains a
single spin S > 1/2.
Specifically, we consider a giant
electronic spin with S = 10, which provides a large set
of states for potential logical encoding. Note that there
are no real representatives of single ions with an elec-
tronic spin S = 10. However, there are many examples
of molecular clusters composed of many strongly inter-
acting metal ions, whose spins are locked at low temper-
atures into an effective “giant spin”. In these cases, such
