Hadronic molecules and multiquark states
3
Heavy quark spin symmetry is a consequence of spin dependent interactions scaling as qtyp/MQ, where MQ denotes the mass of the
heavy quark and the typical momentum inside a hadron may be estimated by the non-perturbative QCD scale, qtyp ∼ΛQCD. In the strict
heavy quark limit (MQ →∞), spin multiplets appear formed from the heavy quark spin being coupled differently to the same light quark
cloud. In other words, in this limit a light quark cloud of some jℓ(this quantum number should also contain some possible orbital angular
momentum among heavy quarks in the system) coupled to some heavy quark spin S h will generate a whole set of states with total angular
momentum
|jℓ−S h| ≤J ≤jℓ+ S h .
In systems with more than one heavy quark the multiplets get even larger, since the properties of the emerging hadrons in leading order of
the expansion do not depend on the value of the total spin S h the spins of the different heavy quarks in the system get coupled to. Since
the symmetry is exact in the heavy quark limit it is realised in the hadron spectrum regardless the assumed structure of it. However, the
symmetry violations turn out to be structure dependent [15] are expected to become an important diagnostic to deduce the structure of exotic
hadrons from the spectra.
Theoretical approaches to multiquark states range from phenomenological models, either on the quark level or of meson exchange type,
over effective field theories, again on the quark level or employing chiral perturbation theory on the hadron level, to lattice QCD, each of
which are described in other sections of this encyclopedia. In what follows some account will be given on their application to multiquark
states.
1 Hadroquarkonia
For tetraquarks the assumed structure of a hadroquarkonium is shown in Fig. 1(a). The underlying idea is that the multiquark consists of a
compact, color neutral Q ¯Q core, like the J/ψ, the ψ(2S ) or the ηc surrounded by a (typically excited) light quark cloud [16]. Since a Q ¯Q
state does not contain light quarks, the interaction of the cloud with the compact doubly heavy core is suppressed (e.g. at leading order
chiral perturbation theory the interaction of pions with quarkonia vanishes), however, the polarisabilities might still be sufficiently large to
allow for some binding of a light quark cloud to e.g. J/ψ or excitations thereof. The same mechanism might also provide sufficient binding,
to generate states of pairs of J/ψs [17]. We come back to this scenario in Sec. 5.
The proposal for the existence of a hadrocharmonium structure was triggered by the observation of ψ(4230) also known as Y(4230)
(at the time called Y(4260)), since this state shows up as a clear peak in the J/ψππ spectrum while at the same time being absent in the
spectra for D ¯D, D ¯D∗and D∗¯D∗. Such a pattern emerges naturally within the hadrocharmonium picture, since the observed decay is merely
a fall apart mode of the building blocks, while a transition to the open charm channels requires a break up of the compact quarkonium as
well as some re-arrangement of the light quark cloud. Note that recently the Y(4230) was also observed as a clear peak in the reaction
e+e−→¯DπD∗with an even higher rate than in J/ψππ [18, 19], questioning somewhat the logic put forward above [20].
The Y(4230) is also observed in the hcππ channel. In contrast to the J/ψ that has a spin 1, the hc has spin 0. Thus, if the Y(4230) were
to contain a pure J/ψ core, heavy quark spin symmetry would prevent it from decaying into a final state with a spin 0 quarkonium. To
overcome this discrepancy with experiment, in Ref. [21] it was suggested that the Y(4230) is not a pure state but, together with the next
heavier state, the ψ(4360) also known as Y(4360), emerges from a spin symmetry violating mixing of two states with hc and ψ(2S ) cores,
respectively. Here it is assumed that the suppression of the spin symmetry violation which is shown to appear already at order ΛQCD/mc,
is overcome by the close proximity of the mixing states leading to a small energy denominator in the mixing amplitude. More concretely,
starting from the unmixed basis
Ψ3 = (1−−)c¯c ⊗(0++)q¯q
and
Ψ1 = (1+−)c¯c ⊗(0−+)q¯q ,
(1)
where the heavy cores are assumed to be ψ(2S ), with a mass of 3686 MeV, and hc(1P), with a mass of 3525 MeV, one gets for the physical
states
Y(4230) = cos(θ)Ψ3 −sin(θ)Ψ1
and
Y(4360) = sin(θ)Ψ3 + cos(θ)Ψ1 .
(2)
A fit to data revealed a mixing angle of the order of 40 degrees accompanied by near degenerate unmixed states with masses of approximately
4.30 and 4.32 GeV for Ψ3 and Ψ1, respectively. The apparent close proximity of the mixed states must emerge somewhat accidental from
the interplay of the core states that show a mass difference of the order of 160 MeV with the light quark clouds.
What testable predictions emerge from this scenario? If spin symmetry were exact and a given exotic were a hadroquarkonium, it
would imply that replacing the core of such a state by its spin partner(s) while keeping the light quark cloud the same, must lead to another
hadroquarkonium state, whose mass can be estimated from the mass differences between the different seed states. While one can expect
some spin symmetry violation in systems with charm, predictions derived from spin symmetry, allowing for the above-mentioned mixing,
should capture the relevant patterns emerging from the assumed structure. This idea was exploited quantitatively in Ref. [15]—the spin
partner states here are found by the replacements
ψ(2S ) →ηc(2S )
and
hc(1P) →{χc0(1P), χc1(1P), χc2(1P)} .
(3)
The emerging spectrum is shown in Fig. 2. As a solid prediction of the hadrocharmonium scenario, a relatively light exotic ηc state is
predicted at 4.1 GeV that should not decay to D ¯D∗but instead to ηcππ. Moreover, at about 4.3 GeV there should be a spin exotic state with
