spent near the barrier is much shorter. In Ref.,41 we estimated the mean DTT for the folding
of chignolin from accelerated simulations using either MetaD, MetaD + SR, and MetaD +
ISR. All three methods exhibit similar errors, less than an order of magnitude, with speedups
of up to 60, 300, and 950 for MetaD, MetaD + SR, and MetaD + ISR, respectively. In this
case, MetaD + ISR is the most advantageous, providing the highest acceleration with similar
accuracy as the other methods.
6
Looking forward
Standard and informed resetting showed promising results for enhanced sampling of molecu-
lar simulations, either as a standalone method or in combination with MetaD. In this section,
we would like to discuss and suggest future developments that would broaden its capabilities.
First, resetting can be combined with other enhanced sampling methods besides MetaD.
If the COV under the inﬂuence of the enhanced sampling method is greater than unity,
there is a ﬁnite resetting rate that will lower the MFPT. As we explained in Section 4.2,
we anticipate enhanced sampling methods that rely on the deposition of external bias, such
as Gaussian accelerated MD,11 Adiabatic free energy dynamics,9,10 or OPES,12,13 to beneﬁt
from resetting similarly to MetaD. It would be interesting to see how other approaches, such
as replica exchange or transition path sampling, would beneﬁt from future combinations.
Apart from acceleration, resetting provides inference of kinetic properties, such as the
MFPT and the mean DTT. However, new methods need to be developed for the inference of
thermodynamic properties, such as free energy diﬀerences or free energy surfaces. Inference
methods for thermodynamic properties would be a welcomed addition to the toolset of the
method, making it more versatile and attractive to use. As a starting point, Poisson resetting
is proven to lead to a non-equilibrium steady state, with a known relation to the propagator
without resetting.43
Another promising direction for future development is informed resetting. In Ref.,41 we
considered simple step-functions as resetting protocols. This approach did not exploit the
whole potential of incorporating information, as the resetting rate can be any function of
all degrees of freedom of the system. Together with the framework (see Equations 7-11) to
estimate the MFPT under any adaptive resetting protocol given some sampled trajectories
without resetting (Section 3.2), we envision automatic optimization of the resetting protocols,
which can be updated on-the-ﬂy with additional sampling. Very recently, we represented the
resetting protocol by neural network and optimized it to minimize the MFPT using Equation
11 as a loss function.76 A few other examples of learning how to reset have emerged recently
in a diﬀerent context,99 and we anticipate this to be an exciting forefront of the ﬁeld.
7
Conclusions
To conclude, resetting is an easy-to-use method that can be employed either as a stan-
dalone tool or in combination with any other enhanced sampling technique. It accelerates
the sampling of slow ﬁrst-passage events while providing accurate estimations of the ﬁrst-
passage kinetics. Standard resetting requires minimal prior knowledge of the studied system.
18
