132
The Path to aN3LO Parton Distributions
corrections lead to a suppression of the gluon-gluon luminosity of 2 −3 % for mX ∼100 GeV.
This effect is somewhat compensated by an increase in uncertainty of about 1 % upon inclusion
of MHOUs. Indeed, the NNLO and aN3LO gluon-gluon luminosities for mX ∼100 GeV differ by
about 2.5σ without MHOU, but become almost compatible within uncertainties when MHOUs
are included.
All in all, these results show that aN3LO corrections are generally small, except for the gluon
PDF, and that at aN3LO the perturbative expansion has all but converged, with NNLO and
aN3LO PDFs very close to each other, especially upon inclusion of MHOUs. They also show
that MHOUs generally improve the accuracy of PDFs, though at aN3LO they have a very small
impact. The phenomenological consequences of this state of affairs will be further discussed in
Section 4.4.
4.3.3. PDF uncertainties
We now take a closer look at PDF uncertainties. In Fig. 4.20 we display one sigma uncertainties
for the NNPDF4.0 NLO, NNLO, and aN3LO PDFs with and without MHOUs at Q = 100 GeV. All
uncertainties are normalized to the central value of the NNPDF4.0 aN3LO PDF set with MHOUs.
The NLO uncertainty is generally the largest of all in the absence of MHOUs, and for quark
distributions the smallest once MHOUs are included. All other uncertainties, at NNLO and
aN3LO, with and without MHOUs, are quite similar to each other, especially for quark PDFs. The
fact that upon inclusion of an extra source of uncertainty, namely the MHOU, PDF uncertainties
are reduced (at NLO) or unchanged (at NNLO and aN3LO) may look counter-intuitive. However,
as already pointed out in Refs. [150, 228, 6], this can be understood to be a consequence of the
increased compatibility of the data due to inclusion of MHOUs and of higher-order perturbative
corrections.
The impact of MHOUs on NLO and NNLO PDFs was extensively assessed in Ref. [6] and
summarized in Section 2.3.3. In a similar vein, here we focus on the impact of MHOUs on
aN3LO PDFs. To this purpose, in Fig. 4.21 we compare the NNPDF4.0 aN3LO PDFs with and
without MHOUs. Again, aN3LO PDFs (and relative luminosities) with and without MHOU are
very compatible with each other. This evidence reinforces the expectation that perturbative
corrections beyond N3LO will not alter PDFs significantly, at least with current data and
methodology.
In analogy with Ref. [6], we also compare the ϕ estimator [318], which measures the standard
deviation over the PDF replica sample in units of the data uncertainty
ϕ =
q
⟨χ2exp [T[f], D]⟩−χ2exp [⟨T[f]⟩, D],
(4.29)
and T[f] and D denotes the theory predictions and the dataset set included in the fit and the
average is taken over the PDF replicas, and solely the experimental covariance matrix is used in
χ2
exp. ϕ provides an estimate of the consistency of the data: consistent data are combined by
