Machine Learning Approach to Study of Low Energy Alpha-Deuteron
Elastic Scattering using Phase Function Method
Arushi Sharma1, Ayushi Awasthi1, Jyoti Sharma1, Ishwar Kant1, M. R. Ganesh Kumar2, and O.
S. K. S. Sastri1
1Department of Physics and Astronomical Sciences, Central University of Himachal Pradesh,
Dharamshala, 176215, Himachal Pradesh, Bharat (India)
2Applied Materials India Private Limited, Bengaluru, 560066, Bharat (India)
Abstract
The present study focuses on the analysis of elastic scattering in the alpha-deuteron system for low-energy
data up to 14 MeV. This system holds particular significance due to its direct connection to the 6Li production
reaction, which is an important process in nuclear astrophysics and light nuclei synthesis. The primary objective
of this investigation is to explore the low-lying excited states of positive parity with isospin T=0, which are
crucial for accurately describing the resonance behavior and underlying nuclear dynamics of the system.
Central idea: To obtain the interaction potential using the inverse scattering method, we have employed the
Physics-Informed Machine Learning (PIML) approach. In this framework, the machine learning algorithm is
guided by the underlying physical laws, enabling the accurate extraction of the inverse scattering potential from
the elastic scattering data.
Methodology: As a reference potential, a combination of three smoothly joined Morse functions has been
utilized, characterized by ten model parameters. These parameters are optimized in an iterative fashion using
a Genetic Algorithm to ensure the best fit to the phase shifts extracted from the experimental scattering data.
The process of optimization is guided by the computed scattering phase shifts by solving the phase equation
using 5th order Rk-method for the reference potential in each iteration
Results: Our approach yields inverse potentials for both single and multi channel scattering. Using the Scat-
tering Phase Shifts obtained from these inverse potentials, we calculate the partial cross-section to determine
the resonance energies and deacy width. The obtain values of resonance energies and decay width for 3D1, 3D2
and 3D3 states of α −d are in correspondence with the eperimental results.
Conclusion: It can be concluded that our machine learning-based approach for constructing the inverse
potential offers a novel and complementary technique to existing direct methods.
1
Introduction
The α −d reaction has been one of the most studied processes in recent decades, providing crucial information on
the excited states of 6Li [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Recently, α −d elastic scattering has been investigated using two potential
models to determine the abundance of 6Li in ancient halo stars, contributing to our understanding of primordial
nucleosynthesis and stellar evolution [6]. The radiative capture of α+d →6 Li+γ is the only process that produces
6Li in the big bang model [7]. Direct measurements of this radiative capture process at astrophysically relevant en-
ergies of (E ≤300 keV ) are virtually impossible because of the extremely low cross section. Consequently, indirect
methods remain the only viable approach to obtain insight into the formation of 6Li. The interaction potentials
required for such calculations are derived by fitting the α−d elastic scattering phase shifts for the S, P, and D wave
1
arXiv:2504.06879v1  [nucl-th]  9 Apr 2025
