The Gaussian steering measure G is monogamous and then satisfies a Coffman-Kundu-Wootters type
monogamy inequality [445], in direct analogy with entanglement [447]. For an m-mode Gaussian state
with covariance matrix σA1,··· ,Am, the following inequalities hold for each party Aj composed of a single
mode (nj = 1, 1 ≤j ≤m):
G(A1,··· ,Ak−1,Ak+1,...,Am)→Ak(σA1,··· ,Am)
−P
j̸=k GAj→Ak(σA1,··· ,Am) ≥0,
GAk→(A1,··· ,Ak−1,Ak+1,...,Am)(σA1,··· ,Am)
−P
j̸=k GAk→Aj(σA1,··· ,Am) ≥0.
(180)
For the tripartite case, this becomes
G(AB)→C(σABC) −GA→C(σABC) −GB→C(σABC) ≥0,
(181)
GC→(AB)(σABC) −GC→A(σABC) −GC→B(σABC) ≥0.
In analogy with the case of entanglement, residual Gaussian steering (RGS) can be defined by calculating
the residuals from (181) and minimization over all mode permutations. Therefore, in the case of a pure
three-mode Gaussian state, the RGS can be defined as
GA:B:C(σpure
ABC) = min
⟨i,j,k⟩{G(jk)→i −Gj→i −Gk→i}.
(182)
This quantity is a monotone under Gaussian local operations and classical communication, such that a
nonzero value of the RGS certifies genuine tripartite steering [448]. Therefore, it can be regarded as a
meaningful quantitative indicator of genuine tripartite steering for pure three-mode Gaussian states under
Gaussian measurements. Returning to the key rate of the QSS protocol (176), the mode-invariant QSS
key rate bound KA:B:C
full
that takes into account eavesdropping and potential dishonesty of the players can
be obtained by minimizing the right-hand side of (176) over permutations of A,B,and C. It was found
that it admits the exact linear upper and lower bounds as a function of the RGS (182):
GA:B:C(σpure
ABC)
2
−ln e
2 ≤KA:B:C
full
(σpure
ABC) ≤GA:B:C(σpure
ABC) −ln e
2.
(183)
Thus, partial DI QSS yields a direct operational interpretation for the RGS in terms of the guaranteed
key rate of the protocol.
EPR steering is a necessary requirement for non-zero key rates in all of the protocols mentioned above.
Therefore, it is essential to have a procedure for generating EPR steering between two or more distant
parties. Xiang et al. [449] designed a protocol that allows the distribution of one-way Gaussian steering.
This can be subsequently employed for 1SDI-QKD and also for three-user scenarios to distribute richer
steerability properties, including one-to-multimode steering and collective steering, which can be utilized
for 1SDI quantum secret sharing. Since all of their protocols can be implemented with squeezed states,
beam splitters, and displacements, they can be readily realized experimentally. A related experiment was
done by Wang et.al. [450] which experimentally demonstrate the deterministic distribution of Gaussian
entanglement and steering with separable ancillary states both in two-user and multi-user scenarios by
preparing independent squeezed states and applying classical displacements on them, which makes initial
states fully separable.
In a later development in 2023, Lv et al.
[451] demonstrated that a 2-qubit
entangled state can consistently produce steering through sequential and independent pairs of observers,
given that the initial pair shares either a pure entangled state or a specific category of mixed entangled
states.
Experiments: One-sided Device Independent QKD. 1SDI-QKD is rigorously based upon the loophole-free
observation of EPR-steering (also known as quantum steering) [431, 432]. As EPR-steering is below Bell
nonlocality in the hierarchy of correlations, 1SDI-QKD provides a security paradigm that is less robust
than that of full-DI QKD. However, it is much easier to close the detection loophole for EPR-steering than
in Bell non-locality. As such 1SDI-QKD can be realized with much lower detection efficiencies. In fact,
EPR-steering can be observed for arbitrarily large losses in the DV context, provided that a sufficiently
large number of measurements can be realized on a bipartite state with sufficient entanglement [192, 452].
1SDI-QKD has also been implemented in continuous variable systems, with the advantage that gaussian
states and measurements can be used [453, 454].
6. Towards future a DI-QKD network: Requirements, Challenges and Solutions
DI-QKD has the appeal that it can help resolve security risks associated to implementation issues,
as it aims to provide information theoretic security with minimum physical assumptions and unchar-
acterized hardware, thus reducing or eliminating many of the side-channels and security concerns in
70
