Entropy 2025, 27, 395
2 of 14
We shall stick to strictly deterministic evolutions of cellular automata here, as in
earlier work [7], and will not discuss anew arguments for and against attempts to reinstall
determinism at a fundamental level of natural science. Similarly, we refer the reader to the
literature concerning the measurement problem of quantum theory, which in an ontological
theory does not exist [4], and the violation of Bell’s inequality, which does not necessarily
rule out such a theory [4,8–11].
These considerations invoke, in one way or another, a superdeterministic picture of the
universe. This is most clearly visible in ’t Hooft’s explanation of the non-classical correla-
tions, experimentally observed as violations of Bell’s inequality, by vacuum correlations
established in the past of such an experiment [4]. However, the notion of vacuum correla-
tions has a precise meaning only in quantum many-body or field theory and, therefore, it
seems plausible but not convincing to invoke this for the understanding of such an essential
effect from an ontological perspective. There is no ontological model yet that produces
deterministically such quantum fluctuations. However, as far as deterministic ontological
models, such as the Cogwheel Model (Appendix A.1), have a quantum mechanical limit
or become quantum mechanical “by mistake” (cf. below); however, they do also open
an avenue to understand quantum fluctuations and correlations. Clearly, this remains to
be explored and is not our aim here. – An interesting probabilistic approach is presented
by Wetterich that bridges between classical determinism (such as underlying classical
statistical mechanics) and quantum mechanics (possibly arising by evolution from certain
probabilistic initial conditions for otherwise deterministic dynamics) [12].
Instead, we shall discuss interesting features of ontological states realized in classical
Ising models which evolve deterministically through permutations.
We remark that there are no superposition states created by any dynamics based on
permutations. Superpositions do not exist in a set of ontological states; yet, they are
conveniently introduced in our mathematical language, the quantum superpositions of
ontological (micro) states, which do not exist ‘out there’ as states the universe could
be in. On the other hand, classical states are ontological (macro) states, or probabilistic
superpositions thereof, appropriate for nature’s phenomena at vastly different scales [4].
– The question of practical as well as foundational interest, whether there is a consistent
notion of quantum-classical hybrids (cf. [13]), has been asked in the present context with a
negative answer [14].
We do not aim to replace quantum theory as the physicist’s perfect toolbox. However,
a better understanding of its peculiarities is desirable, just as it is desirable to recover the
structural elements of its mathematical language. Our approach should be seen as an
attempt in this direction, based on the assumption of a deterministic ontology and realized
in terms of classical two-state Ising spins or bits. This is distinctly different technically and
conceptually, but similar in spirit to other more or less evolved, though critically discussed
approaches to “interpret” quantum theory. – For example, Bohmian mechanics [15–17],
stochastic electrodynamics [18–20], prequantum classical statistical field theory [21], or
quantum Bayesianism (QBism) [22] all study the emergence, rewriting, or generalization
of quantum theory from various perspectives. However, none of the latter interpretations
really go outside of quantum theory. They are occupied with not getting into conflict with
its perfectly working theoretical “machinery” while trying to add elements helping its
understanding. – Thus, Bohmian mechanics adds to the continuum theory of Schrödinger’s
equation for the wave function apparently classical trajectories of point particles, which are
guided by the wave function. An ontology that would complete this interpretation and
allow us to understand the where-from and what-for of the wave function is missing. On
the other hand, QBism does not seem to address at all the “stuff” we perceive “out there”
and describe in physics. It rather tries to make comprehensible a central aspect of quantum
