Evidence for Intrinsic charm in the proton
83
for intrinsic charm at the 2.5σ level in the region 0.3 <∼x <∼0.6. This is increased to about 3σ
by the inclusion of either the EMC or the LHCb data, and above if they are both included. The
similarity of the impact of the EMC and LHCb measurements is especially remarkable in view of
the fact that they involve very different physical processes and energies.
Rc
j computational settings.
Here we provide full details on our computation of Z+charm
production and on the inclusion of the LHCb data for this process in the determination of the
charm PDF shown in Fig. 3.11. We follow the settings described in [254]. Z+jet events at NLO
QCD theory are generated for √s = 13 TeV using the Zj package of the POWHEG-BOX [255].
The parton-level events produced by POWHEG are then interfaced to PYTHIA8 [256] with the
Monash 2013 tune [259] for showering, hadronization, and simulation of the underlying event
and multiple parton interactions. Long-lived hadrons, including charmed hadrons, are assumed
stable and not decayed.
Selection criteria on these particle-level events are imposed to match the LHCb acceptance. Z
bosons are reconstructed in the dimuon final state by requiring 60 GeV ≤mµµ ≤120 GeV, and
only events where these muons satisfy pµ
T ≥20 GeV and 2.0 ≤ηµ ≤4.5 are retained. Stable
visible hadrons within the LHCb acceptance of 2.0 ≤η ≤4.5 are clustered with the anti-kT
algorithm with radius parameter of R = 0.5 [260]. Only events with a hardest jet satisfying
20 GeV ≤pjet
T
≤100 GeV and 2.2 ≤ηjet ≤4.2 are retained. Charm jets are defined as jets
containing a charmed hadron, specifically jets satisfying ∆R(j, c−hadron) ≤0.5 for a charmed
hadron with pT (c−hadron) ≥5 GeV. Jets and muons are required to be separated in rapidity
and azimuthal angle, so we require ∆R(j, µ) ≥0.5. The resulting events are then binned in the
Z bosom rapidity yZ = yµµ.
The physical observable measured by LHCb is the ratio of the fraction of Z+jet events with and
without a charm tag, given by Eq. (3.5), where the denominator of Eq. (3.5) includes all jets,
even those containing heavy hadrons. The charm tagging efficiency is already accounted for at
the level of the experimental measurement, so it is not required in the theory simulations.
Predictions for Eq. (3.5) are produced using our default PDF determination (NNPDF4.0 NNLO),
as well as the corresponding PDF set with perturbative charm Section 3.1.2. We have explicitly
checked that our results are essentially independent of the value of the charm mass. We have
evaluated MHOUs and PDF uncertainties using the output of the POWHEG+PYTHIA8 calculations.
We have checked that MHOUs, evaluated with the standard seven-point prescription, essentially
cancel in the ratio Eq. (3.5). Note that this is not the case for PDF uncertainties, because the
dominant partonic sub-channels in the numerator and denominator are not the same.
3.2.5. Parton luminosities
The impact of intrinsic charm on hadron collider observables can be assessed by studying
parton luminosities. Indeed, the cross-section for hadronic processes at leading order is typically
proportional to an individual parton luminosity or linear combination of parton luminosities.
