GRAPHICAL FUNCTIONS WITH SPIN
22
−
completion
−→
completion
−→
Figure 7. The completions of primitive three-point and four-point graphs.
= −
= −
Figure 8. Spin identities for a double line and for a triangle.
The benefit of completion is that the number of completed graphs is significantly smaller than the
number of primitive graphs. Moreover (and mostly), it solves the calculation of the Feynman period for
all decompletions if it is possible to calculate one decompletion.
In Yukawa-ϕ4 theory, completed graphs have two types of vertices: a three-valent Yukawa vertex and
a four-valent ϕ4 vertex. Decompletion at a Yukawa vertex gives a minus sign (reminiscent of the minus
sign in (105)), while decompletion at a ϕ4 vertex gives a plus sign, see Figure 7.
The completion of a primitive three-point graph may be identical to the completion of a primitive
four-point graph. However, the contribution to the four-point beta function is one loop order lower than
the contribution to the three-point beta function because the number of loops in the completed graphs
goes down by three upon decompleting at a ϕ4 vertex while it goes down by two upon decompleting at a
Yukawa vertex. So, the primitive contributions to the two beta functions (Yukawa and ϕ4) are connected
over different loop orders via completion.
We denote the completion of a graph G by G,
(106)
G
completion
−→
G,
and obtain for the amplitude of a primitive graph G
(107)
AG(x) = PG
ϵ + O(1),
where PG is the Feynman period of any (and hence all) of the decompletions of G.
Note that, although the completed graph G looks like vacuum graph, it is an equivalence class of
primitive graphs. The calculation of PG always implies to choose a vertex ∞first. In fact, we choose
three vertices 0, 1, ∞and calculate the Feynman period of G \ ∞with external vertices 0 and 1 = ˆz1, see
Section 4.
To calculate PG with graphical functions, we choose a fourth external vertex z corresponding to the
vector ˆz2 = z2/∥z1∥and calculate the graphical function of the graph. Thereafter, we integrate over z,
see Section 10. We use the powerful theory of completed graphical functions, see [17, 2] in the scalar
case. In the presence of spin, the theory of completed graphical functions is significantly more intricate
than the theory of completed periods. In the theory of completed graphical functions it is important to
keep fermions as spin 1/2 particles and not to evaluate the traces over γ matrices in the first step. An
early evaluation of the γ traces transforms the Feynman integral into a large sum of Feynman integrals
with spin 1 propagators. Because spin 1 propagators do not behave well under inversion (in contrast to
spin 0 and spin 1/2, see (104) and (105)), most of the terms in the sum are much more complicated than
the original Feynman integral.
It can be proved that a completed graph G has finite period PG if and only if any edge cut of total
weight ≤4 separates off a vertex (G is internally weight 5 connected), see Figures 11, 12. Physically, this
means that G has no non-trivial three-point or four-point insertions.
