11 
solution and within the field of the protein. From another perspective, this approach 
approximates the free energy of the unfolded state as the sum of independent 
contributions from each amino acid. Physically, these contributions may arise from 
the conformational entropy of both the side chain and main chain, as well as their 
interactions with the solvent. Under this approximation, all terms disappear except 
for the contributions of the wild-type and mutated amino acids, significantly 
simplifying the calculation. 
 
 
Input encoding 
We encode the mutation in the sequence as a twenty-elements array, one element 
for each of the natural amino acids, and we encode their occurrence (O) as -1 for the 
wild-type amino acid and +1 for the substitution. 
 
The modified expression to calculate Î”Î”G is then expressed as a linear combination 
of the original-method score (S) for the wild-type and the mutated protein: 
 
ğ›¥ğ›¥ğº= ğ‘0(ğ‘†(ğ‘š) âˆ’ğ‘†(ğ‘¤)) + âˆ‘
ğ‘ğ‘–ğ‘‚ğ‘–
20
ğ‘–=1
   
 
 
[7] 
 
the first term represents the original method's (scaled) output and the second term 
represents the pseudo-Î”Î”G of solvation for the amino acids involved in the mutation 
(the data-driven MBC). 
The first term ğ‘†(ğ‘¥) thus corresponds to the Î”Î”G predicted by the original method, 
while the second term depends on amino acid-related parameters. 
It should also be observed that equation [7], being antisymmetric by definition, 
preserves the antisymmetry in the prediction of the original methods, if present. 
The 21 coefficients for the linear model above can be easily derived via a simple 
linear regression with respect to the training set. 
 
Similarly, the MBC(Rose) correction is computed as a two-parameter linear 
combination of the original-method score (S) and Rose-scale delta  
 
ğ›¥ğ›¥ğº= ğ‘0(ğ‘†(ğ‘š) âˆ’ğ‘†(ğ‘¤)) + ğ‘1(ğ‘…(ğ‘š) âˆ’ğ‘…(ğ‘¤))  
 
[8] 
 
where ğ‘…(ğ‘š) âˆ§ğ‘…(ğ‘¤) are the values of the Rose scale for the mutated- and wild-type 
amino acid respectively. 
 
Measures of performance 
To evaluate the performance of the methods in the regression task, we compared 
the predicted (p) and experimental (e) values of the variation of unfolding free energy 
change upon mutation (Î”Î”G). The standard scoring values calculated in our 
