are used to account for phase-space related effects. The tail parameters are fixed from
simulation. For each q2 bin, the values of the peak position and width from simulation
are corrected based on results of fits to the B0
s →J/ψϕ data sample.
In the low- and central-q2 regions, the m(K+K−e+e−) distribution of the combinatorial
background is described by an exponential function. In the high-q2 region, the exponential
background shape is modified at small m(K+K−e+e−) values to account for the limited
phase space due to the large dielectron mass. The phase-space turn-on is modelled
assuming that the background is exponentially distributed in q2 with a shape derived at
large m(K+K−e+e−) values. The angular distribution of the combinatorial background
is modelled by sums of Chebyshev polynomial functions, with each sum describing one of
the cos θK, cos θe and Φ distributions. The parameters of the polynomials are constrained
from same-sign K+K−e±e± or K±K±e+e−candidates.
The shape of the background from doubly semileptonic decays is taken from simulation.
The simulation samples include cases where the B0
s directly produces a D−
s meson and
cases where the B0
s produces an excited D−
s meson that subsequently decays to the ground
state. This component is described by a nonparametric kernel-density estimate.
The shapes of the backgrounds from B0
s →J/ψϕ and B0
s →ψ(2S)ϕ decays with too
little or too much bremsstrahlung energy recovered, which leak into other q2 regions, are
taken from simulation. The mass distribution of the B0
s →J/ψϕ background in the central-
q2 region is parametrised by the tail of a Gaussian function. In the high-q2 region, the
backgrounds are described using kernel-density estimates. The yields of these backgrounds
are each constrained from their respective simulated samples, normalised to the yield of
B0
s →J/ψϕ decays in data in the range 6 < q2 < 11 GeV2/c4.
The background from misidentified decays is taken from control samples in data, where
one or both electrons fail the particle-identification requirements used in the analysis.
The control samples are weighted following the procedure in Refs. [15,16] to determine
the shape and level of the misidentified background in the dataset. This component is
described by a nonparametric kernel-density estimate.
7
Validation
The analysis procedure is validated using pseudoexperiments and the SM-like simulated
samples. The pseudoexperiments are generated with values of the observables from
Ref. [20] for the signal. Fits to datasets much larger than that used in this analysis
yield unbiased results with appropriate uncertainty estimates. Fits to pseudoexperiments
generated with representative yields (from Ref. [18]) are observed to have incorrect coverage
in some of the q2 bins and a non-negligible failure rate. This behaviour is associated with
boundaries in the allowed parameter space: FL ≤1, A6 ≤(1 −FL) and (S2
3 + A2
9) ≤1.
The stability of the fit is improved by fitting for ⟨A′
6⟩instead of ⟨A6⟩. To obtain correct
coverage, the Feldman–Cousins procedure is used to determine confidence intervals on the
observables [42].
The analysis procedure is also validated using B0
s →J/ψϕ and B0
s →ψ(2S)ϕ decays
in data with the same final states as the signal.
The B0
s →J/ψϕ and B0
s →ψ(2S)ϕ
decays are selected following the same candidate selection procedure as B0
s →ϕe+e−
candidates but with 6 < q2 < 11 GeV2/c4 and 11 < q2 < 15 GeV2/c4, respectively. To
simplify the modelling of background in the fits to the B0
s →J/ψϕ and B0
s →ψ(2S)ϕ
8
