Swinging small quantum systems out of available values of control parameters
2
the optimal control theory to prepare desired strongly interacting ground states of small
quantum systems treating interaction strength as a control parameter that is experimentally
bounded to some range of weak interactions. Meanwhile, we employ this technique to speed
up the processes of these quantum state preparations and to estimate the minimal time to
reach the target state, i.e., the quantum speed limit [8]. We select cubic spline functions
as the ramp protocol to avoid rapid oscillations and employ the Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-
Shanno approach to enhance the fidelity which is the optimization function. The optimized
ramp protocol is exceptionally efficient and demonstrates no resistance against the impact
of control errors.
Optimal control theory is the state-of-the-art tool [9, 10] with its application
across diverse physical systems, including nuclear magnetic resonance [11] and ultracold
atoms [12, 13]. It typically employs two principal classes of optimization algorithms: (i)
local optimization strategies like Krotov [14, 15], GRAPE [11], CRAB [16], GROUP [17], or
GOAT [18]; and (ii) global optimization strategies, exemplified by differential evolution [19,
20] or covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy (CMA-ES) [21].
The method
proposed by us in this work belongs to the first class since it relies on local derivatives.
Although analytic solutions are available for quantum systems with low-dimensional Hilbert
space [22, 23, 24, 25], the high-dimensional quantum systems require the invocation of
numerical optimization techniques.
The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2 we describe the theoretical framework
and the method that forms the basis of our investigation. Then in Sec. 3 we introduce a
two-qubit toy model to illustrate the optimization method which is employed in Sec. 4 to
discuss a more realistic model of three interacting fermions. Finally, in Sec. 5 we extend
the discussion to a larger system of three-component fermionic mixture. In this way, we can
demonstrate how the method can be generalized to cases when the optimization is required
only for a selected subsystem. Section 6 concludes our work.
2. The framework and the method
In our work, we assume that the system is described by the time-dependent Hamiltonian of
the form
H(g(t)) = H0 + g(t)Hc,
(1)
where H0 and Hc are noncommuting time-independent parts (the drift and the control
Hamiltonian, respectively) and a whole time-dependence comes from the external control
field g(t), e.g., interaction strength. We assume that the intensity of this field can be quite
well controlled experimentally. Of course, this description also includes time-independent
scenarios with particularly chosen intensities of the field, g(t) = g. In these cases, at least in
principle, one can solve eigenproblem for a corresponding Hamiltonian
H(g)|Ψi(g)⟩= Ei(g)|Ψi(g)⟩
(2)
and eigenstates obtained for different intensities g are connected by adiabatic varying of
the field. This is particularly true for the ground states |Ψ0(g)⟩which remain isolated for
