2
I. INTRODUCTION AND HISTORICAL OVERVIEW
The Nonlinear Schr¨odinger Equation (NLSE) is one
of the most broadly applicable nonlinear models in
physics (Fibich, 2015). Its relevance extends across nu-
merous fields, such as condensed matter and ultracold
atoms (Dalfovo et al., 1999; Pethick and Smith, 2008),
plasma physics (Zakharov et al., 1972), nonlinear op-
tics (Ablowitz and Clarkson, 1991; Hasegawa and Tap-
pert, 1973a; Kivshar and Agrawal, 2003), laser physics
(Lugiato and Lefever, 1987), fluid mechanics (Whitham,
2011), turbulence (Zakharov et al., 2012), phase tran-
sitions (Cross and Hohenberg, 1993), biophysics (Davy-
dov, 1985), and even astrophysics (Shukla and Eliasson,
2007). In all of these areas, the NLSE serves as a “uni-
versal” framework, capturing the nonlinear processes in
order to understand the complex behavior that arises in
these diverse physical systems.
In particular, in the context of optics, the NLSE de-
scribes the evolution of the complex envelope of an op-
tical field traveling through a Kerr nonlinear medium.
This equation describes different configurations such as
the propagation through optical fibers (Hasegawa and
Tappert, 1973a) (where pulses propagate along a single
spatial axis and evolve in time), and the transverse evo-
lution during propagation through bulk nonlinear media
(Carusotto, 2014).
In each case, the governing equation is virtually the
same as the one used for describing the temporal evolu-
tion of quantum gases such as dilute Bose–Einstein con-
densates (BECs), leading to the name of “quantum fluids
of light” (Gross, 1963; Pitaevskii, 1961). This one-to-one
correspondence means that optical experiments can serve
as highly controllable platforms for studying phenomena
usually associated with ultracold atomic quantum gases
or superfluid helium, such as vortex formation, super-
fluidity, quantum turbulence, and quantum many-body
physics. On the other hand, quantum gases could serve as
an inspiration to imagine new nonlinear or quantum op-
tics experiments, leading to novel photonic applications.
In this way, paraxial fluids of light not only broaden the
application spectrum of the NLSE but also establish a
strong connection between nonlinear optics, quantum op-
tics and BEC physics, allowing to share ideas and tech-
niques between the fields.
A. Early developments: NLSE in nonlinear optics
The importance of the NLSE in optics has been rec-
ognized since the early development of laser physics and
the advent of nonlinear optics. (Chiao et al., 1964) and
(Talanov, 1965, 1970) independently derived an envelope
equation describing how an optical beam could self-focus
in a Kerr medium (with a cubic nonlinearity). While the
term “nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation” was not explicitly
used at the time, the equation obtained by (Chiao et al.,
1964) is mathematically what we recognize today as the
(2D+1) focusing NLSE in the paraxial limit and is the
main topic of this review.
In the years immediately following, (Hasegawa and
Tappert, 1973a,b) in the context of optical solitons in
fibers, (Wagner et al., 1968) for paraxial propagation
and (Shabat and Zakharov, 1972) for integrable systems,
adopted and popularized the NLSE terminology.
By
the early 1980s, references to the “nonlinear Schr¨odinger
equation” in nonlinear optics became standard, espe-
cially after that (Mollenauer et al., 1980) observed ex-
perimentally solitons in optical fibers.
Two distinct regimes of the NLSE phenomenology were
rapidly recognized: the focusing (attractive nonlinear-
ity) and defocusing (repulsive nonlinearity) cases.
In
the focusing regime, nonlinearity counteracts dispersion
or diffraction, enabling the formation of localized, sta-
ble structures known as bright solitons. In the defocus-
ing regime, they work together to support dark solitons,
characterized by intensity dips in a continuous back-
ground.
The dimensionality of the system further di-
vides the NLSE phenomenology into two major cate-
gories, each tied to distinct experimental setups, theoret-
ical considerations, and scientific communities. In a one-
dimensional configuration (often referred to as 1D+1),
such as in optical fibers, the NLSE governs the evolu-
tion of the wave envelope along the propagation direc-
tion z playing the role of time, while the physical time t
is analogous to a spatial coordinate. Temporal dispersion
introduced an effective mass (due to the group velocity
dispersion) and interacts with nonlinearity. This (1D+1)
framework has been extensively studied due to its direct
relevance to optical communication systems (Sulem and
Sulem, 2007). In contrast, a two-dimensional (in space)
plus one propagation direction (2D+1) applies to parax-
ial beams propagation in bulk media. Here, the NLSE
describes how the wave envelope evolves in the trans-
verse plane (x, y) as it travels along z as shown in Fig.
1. Instead of dispersion, diffraction serves as the primary
linear effect at the origin of the effective mass, balanced
by focusing or defocusing nonlinearities.
These distinctions (focusing versus defocusing,
and
(1D+1) versus (2D+1)) have significant implications for
both fundamental research and practical applications.
On the one hand, the (1D+1) configuration has been
primarily associated with soliton dynamics, particularly
in optical fibers, and has paved the way for soliton-based
optical communication technologies. On the other hand,
the paraxial geometry has been closely linked to clas-
sical hydrodynamics (Mattar and Teichmann, 1981) and
to quantum gases and quantum hydrodynamics (Pomeau
and Rica, 1993), leading to the term “quantum fluids
of light” (Carusotto and Ciuti, 2013). This connection
has triggered the development of a broad research field
dedicated to exploring fundamental phenomena such as
