13
while the phase branch links to that at k →k−
rot. Mean-
while, the branch that connects to k →k+
rot, which is
also gapless at as = ac, experiences a gap opening for
decreasing as < ac, see Fig. 4 (II.b). This branch corre-
sponds to the Higgs mode [106, 119]. As its gap starts to
open, the Higgs branch mixes with the gapless branches
in the vicinity of the phase transition. This mixing re-
sults in both a strong damping of the Higgs mode [106]
and a discontinuity of the speeds of sound of the Gold-
stone branches at the transition [95].
The discontinu-
ity of the speeds of sound also underlies a discontinuity
of the system’s compressibility and indicates the transi-
tion’s second-order character. At the density where ac is
maximal, the discontinuity vanishes, indicating a higher-
order transition at this point.
Similar features of the supersolid excitation spectrum
survive in finite harmonically trapped systems despite
the discrete nature of their spectrum and the fact that
quasimomentum is no longer a good quantum num-
ber.
Two phononic branches could be identified theo-
retically and experimentally, yet the modes’ characters
mix [120, 122, 123]. An amplitude mode could also be
pinpointed in Bogoliubov calculations. Remarkably, this
mode is stable in the direct vicinity of the transition due
to the discreteness of the spectrum. Yet, further away, it
also hybridizes with other modes analogously to infinite
systems [106]. A recent theoretical work [124] suggests
that in finite toroidal traps, Higgs and Goldstone modes
decouple due to the absence of coupling between modes
of different quasimomenta, which corresponds to distinct
circulation numbers in the finite system.
2.
Pancake geometries
For supersolids with bidimensional crystals (D = 2),
such as those formed in pancake geometries and reviewed
in IV C 2, the excitation spectrum is both richer and
changes with the crystal structure. In infinite pancakes,
three Goldstone modes are present: Two of them are
longitudinal modes where motion occurs along the exci-
tation propagation direction. These two modes are sim-
ilar to those of D = 1 supersolids, and are associated
with crystal and phase excitations, respectively. The re-
maining Goldstone mode is a shear mode where crystal
motion occurs transversely to the wave propagation di-
rection [108, 115]. All three Goldstone branches exhibit
linear dispersion for q →0 with distinct speeds of sound
cν, ν = 1, 2, 3.
For all crystal configurations – triangular, stripe, hon-
eycomb – of D = 2 supersolids, the longitudinal crys-
tal branch (first-sound branch), has higher energy and
sound speed than the two other branches [108, 115]. This
first sound speed weakly increases with decreasing as.
Just below the uniform-to-supersolid transition, i.e. at
as ≲ac, the shear mode has lower energy and sound
speed than the longitudinal phase mode (second sound).
The further behavior of shear and phase branches de-
pends on the crystal configuration. For triangular super-
solids, the shear sound speed increases with decreasing
as while the second sound speed decreases, similarly to
D = 1 supersolids [115]. At low as, the second sound be-
comes the lowest branch until it fully softens, indicating
the transition to an insulating crystal, see Fig. 4 (III.a).
Conversely, for honeycomb supersolids, both shear sound
and second sound speeds decrease with decreasing as, so
that the shear branch remains the lowest one [108, 125],
see Fig. 4 (III.b). The softening of this shear mode with
decreasing as underlie a transition to the stripe state
where shear excitations have no energy cost. As discussed
in IV C 2, the honeycomb to stripe is of first order and the
shear instability occurs at a lower as than the transition
itself, underlying the system’s bistability.
The spectrum of D = 2 supersolids in finite pancake
traps has also been explored, focusing on the triangular
case [87]. Here a trap of moderate aspect ratio ω⊥/ω∥=
2 is considered for which the MF instability is driven
by an angular roton, see III B 2 c. The softening of the
angular roton gives rise to a zero-energy Goldstone mode
corresponding to the breaking of the rotation symmetry
and to a Higgs mode. As for D = 1 supersolids, the Higgs
mode hybridizes with other modes as as is lowered and
the Higgs gap opens.
3.
Further remarks
For both D = 1 and D = 2 supersolids, hydrodynamic
theories have been developed, describing the system’s be-
havior based on broken symmetries and conservation re-
lations [115, 117, 121, 126–130]. These theories permit to
relate the different speeds of sound to the superfluid frac-
tion, compressibility, and elasticity. Through these rela-
tions, a non-vanishing second sound (i.e. phase sound)
speed implies a finite superfluid fraction and thus the su-
perfluid character of the supersolid.
Furthermore, key
parameters such as compressibility and superfluid frac-
tion can be extracted by measuring all sound speeds, of-
fering a promising experimental approach to gain insights
onto the supersolid’s superfluid character and dynamical
behavior [117, 130, 131].
Beyond their elementary excitations, other intriguing
excitations of superfluids – and supersolids – are those
arising as a response to rotational perturbations. Being
irrotational, these systems are expected to accommodate
vortices, i.e. localized defects with a phase winding of
2π × p, p ∈Z.
This phase winding implies that each
particle carries p quanta of angular momentum. Vortices
have been both predicted and observed in D = 2 su-
persolids under rotational perturbations [132–135]. This
provides additional proof of their superfluid behavior and
opens new avenues for exploring their dynamics.
