δabpµ ×
−igT b
Rij(γµPR)αβ ×
ρµ
b
×
Rkδ
Figure 2:
The ﬁrst two combinations correspond to (tree-level) × (two-loop) and
(two-loop) × (tree-level) for the Green functions Γcb(p)ρbµ and ΓGbµψjβψiα.
The third
combination corresponds to (one-loop) × (one-loop) for the Green functions Γψkδψiα(p1)
and ΓψjβcaRkδ.
Turning to the LHS of Eq. (3.18) each 1PI Green function contains tree-level, one-loop
and two-loop contributions and so the product contains terms ranging from tree-level to
four-loop order. In the non-Abelian case, all these combinations are typically non-zero,
and the appropriate combinations need to be selected in order to evaluate the identity
at the two-loop level.
The ﬁrst two combinations shown in Fig. 2 correspond to the
ﬁrst term in Eq. (3.18), where either Green function is evaluated at tree-level or two-
loop level. The ﬁrst such term involves an ordinary two-loop vertex correction and has
Abelian counterparts. The second term however only arises in the non-Abelian case and
corresponds to higher order corrections to the external source operators, here to ρbµ,
corresponding to the BRST transformation of the gauge ﬁeld. The third combination of
Fig. 2 comes from the one loop diagrams generated by the products of eﬀective action
terms for the fermions and fermion sources. It is in general not suﬃcient in this case to
evaluate merely the ﬁnite part, let alone the poles, but even terms up to ǫ have to be
kept as they become ﬁnite terms upon hitting poles of the other Green function. They
are likewise ruled out in the Abelian calculation.
The non-Abelian diﬀerences we have discussed here by means of the example of
Eq. (3.18) illustrate the manifold ingredients of the full two-loop renormalization and
exemplify the higher complexity of quantum action principle checks. Still, we have car-
ried out such consistency checks in all sectors, i.e. for all breaking Green functions. The
check for the speciﬁc cases of Eq. (3.16) and Eq. (3.18) has been done including the ﬁnite
parts, the checks in all other sectors on the level of UV poles.
The number of these
checks is thus much higher than in the Abelian case, and include features such as two-
loop diagrams of external sources or products of one-loop counterterm contributions for
all sectors.
3.3
Implementation in FeynArts
For any systematic multi-loop calculation it is crucial that the computation takes place
in a uniﬁed, automated setup. A particular complication in the present case stems from
exotic objects like the fermionic, ghost-number-one ∆vertex and the BRST operators
coupled to external sources, as well as their interplay.
In Abelian calculations these
issues presented no serious obstructions. In the non-Abelian one-loop calculation of Ref.
[20] some of these subtleties could be circumvented since for example the contributions of
external sources amounted to but a few diagrams and could be handled manually, which is
no longer feasible at two-loop. It is therefore desirable to create a working implementation
which addresses these specialties, and is capable of automatically handling the two-loop
12
