in the Excel sheet, popana.xlsx, uploaded as part of the data repository.
It can be seen that, for all occupied (restricted) molecular orbitals in the ground
state, and for all occupied α molecular orbitals except the distorted 4s one in the
excited state, Mulliken’s Ar-contributions are sensible. However, for the unoccupied
4s molecular orbital in the ground state and the occupied distorted 4s in the excited
state, Mulliken’s Ar-contributions are strongly negative, which means we cannot use
this scheme to say anything meaningful about the molecular orbitals of interest to us.
We must therefore seek a more sensible alternative decomposition scheme. The main
issue that these schemes must deal with is the balanced treatment of the cross terms
that are ignored in Mulliken’s scheme. One attempt is that by Stout and Politzer[20]
(see also Section 3.9.6 of the Multiwfn manual), but this turns out to be even worse
than Mulliken’s, as seen in the even more negative Ar-contributions in both the
ground and excited 4s molecular orbitals.
Other attempts include the use of Becke’s weighting function[21] (see also Section
3.9.8 of the Multiwfn manual) and Hirshfeld’s atomic charge[22] (see also Section 3.9.1
of the Multiwfn manual). However, both of these methods rely on a numerical real-
space integration scheme for the electron density and give very small Ar-contributions
for both the ground and excited 4s molecular orbitals, which is clearly inconsistent
with the fact that the coefficients for these molecular orbitals contain relatively much
larger values for the basis functions centred on the Ar atom compared to those for
the basis functions centred on the C atoms of the cage.
Fortunately, there exists an alternative by Ros and Schuit[23], C-squared population
analysis (SCPA), that makes use of the coefficients directly (rather than via numerical
real-space integrations) and that also ensures that the atom contributions are never
negative (see also Section 3.9.5 of the Multiwfn manual). The Ar-contributions to the
ground and excited 4s molecular orbitals in the SCPA scheme now appear sensible.
The ground unoccupied 4s molecular orbital has ∼92.17% contribution from the argon
atom, which means that there is only ∼7.83% of mixing with all the carbon atoms on
the cage. On the other hand, the excited occupied and distorted 4s molecular orbital
only has ∼13.38 % contribution from the argon atom, indicating that there is now
significant mixing with the cage.
8 Orbital symmetry considerations
In the main paper, we note that we used QSYM2[24] to extract the symmetry com-
ponents of the excited state. The following approach was adopted when assessing the
symmetry decompositions.
By applying the projection operator
ˆPΓ = dΓ
|G|
X
ˆg∈G
χΓ(ˆg)∗ˆg
(1)
11
