7
gree of directional persistence is necessary to form loops
wide enough to be threadable. On the other hand, while
a large stiffness does produce configurations that could
be threadable, it also suppresses configurational entropy,
and hence it is not optimally conducive to linking.
The generality and robustness of the nonmonotonicity
of Plink(βκb) is indicated by the fact that it does not
depend on whether the number of self-assembled rings is
allowed to fluctuate or is set equal to 3 or more rings by
a posteriori selection, see Appendix B and Fig. S1.
This behavior has not been previously reported or ob-
served in polymer systems at large. The result signifi-
cantly advanced the understanding of how bending rigid-
ity influences the topological entanglement of polymer
systems. Previous studies have been limited to single,
isolated polymers, where the only possible form of topo-
logical entanglement is intra-chain (i.e., knotting), which
is also unimodal with respect to bending rigidity [90]. In-
terestingly, we found an analogous knotting property for
rings that are not isolated but are part of self-assembled
melts, as shown in Appendix B. The shared unimodality
of both linking and knotting probabilities reveals a previ-
ously unrecognized connection and common microscopic
basis between the intra- and inter-ring entanglements in
spite of their otherwise very distinct nature.
We expect that the unimodality of Plink, here estab-
lished for a maximally dense system of ring melts, ought
to manifest more broadly, e.g., at partial space-filling and
in various realizations of supramolecular self-assemblies
or topologically-unrestricted ring polymers. The applica-
tive potential of the result to boost the inherently low
yield of molecular interlockings in supramolecular self-
assemblies [64, 67]. Our results indicate that a judicious
design of the bending rigidity of the circular elements
could afford considerable latitude for tuning and max-
imizing the concatenation probability. For instance, in
the case of Olympic gels assembled from individually cir-
cularizable linear DNAs [83], two such control parameters
would be the ionic strength/valency of the solution and
the DNA length, which can influence the effective rigid-
ity by modulating the DNA persistence length and the
number of Kuhn lengths, respectively.
III.
APPLICATION TO QUANTUM
ANNEALERS
Compared to conventional sampling methods, such as
Monte Carlo of molecular dynamics with real-space poly-
mer representations, the QUBO formulation can offer
significant speedups with both classical and quantum
optimizers.
This advantage was demonstrated in ref.
[33], which examined the computational cost of sam-
pling space-filling ring melts with minimum curvature
as a function of the system size (total ring length), N.
For ad hoc optimized real-space sampling, the computa-
tional cost scaled as N 5.4, while QUBO-based sampling
improved the scaling to N 3.7 with classical annealers and
to N 3.2 with hybrid classical-quantum ones.
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
nc
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
W(nc)
               Reference, ground truth
Classical-quantum hybrid sampling
Q1
Q2
Q3
mean
FIG. 3.
Validation of the density of states recon-
structed from classical-quantum hybrid sampling of a
ring melt filling a 3×3×2 lattice. The reconstruction (or-
ange histograms) was computed from samples obtained with
the D-wave hybrid sampler, using a sampling depth d = 50 for
each of the 4 intervals of length 4 (m = 2) spanning the entire
range of curvature values, 12 ≤nc ≤18. The ground truth
normalized density of states was obtained by exhaustive enu-
meration of all possible states. The box plots represent the
probability distribution of 500 independent reconstructions
obtained via unbiased sampling of the exhaustively enumer-
ated set, using the same intervals and depth d as with the
hybrid sampler. Q1, Q2 and Q3 mark the first, second (me-
dian), and third quartiles, respectively. The whiskers extend
to the furthest data points within 1.5 IQR of the box edges,
where IQR is the interquartile range (Q1 to Q3).
The implications are twofold.
On the one hand,
QUBO-based sampling of soft matter can already be ad-
vantageous on classical machines, for which computing
power is widely available. On the other hand, as the size
and power of quantum machines continue to advance, in-
tegrating quantum annealers and QUBO-based models
could become a relevant and performative tool for phys-
ical systems where real-space MC schemes are hindered
by the rapid growth of autocorrelation times with system
size.
Towards these prospective applications, we used the
D-Wave implementation of quantum annealers to assess
their potential for reconstructing the density of states
without biases arising from fair-sampling issues [43, 46,
47].
For such proof of concept demonstration, we consid-
ered ring melts in a 3 × 3 × 2 cuboid. This system size
was chosen because it is sufficiently large to feature hun-
dreds of distinct states across a certain curvature range,
12 ≤nc ≤18. At the same time, the entire conforma-
tional ensemble can be explored with exhaustive enumer-
ation methods, which we leveraged to establish the exact
density of states and the statistical confidence intervals
of its reconstructions at a given sampling depth.
For the reconstruction, we used m = 2 slack variables
