15
topologies depending on the configuration of four moments
with a total multiplicity of 16, as shown in Fig. 8(c)153. MFM
allows us to image the orientations of all the moments in a
large area. The white and black spots in the MFM image in-
dicate the south and north poles of the ferromagnetic islands,
thereby confirming the single-domain nature of the islands.
The data demonstrates that the possible vertex configurations
[Fig. 8(c)] can be directly experimentally observed in the ac-
tual system as is shown in Fig. 8(e).
We note that other lattice types have also been investi-
gated extensively by MFM. For example, the Kagome lat-
tice features three-moment coordination at each vertex and
exhibits a richer phase diagram associated with effective mag-
netic charges intrinsic to the three-moment vertices164,165. Re-
cently, new ASI geometries designed to give rise to new phe-
nomena, have been studied using MFM. For these more spe-
cialized works, we refer the reader to the literature, e.g., Refs.
[13, 15, 17, and 166].
2.
Lorentz Microscopy
Lorentz transmission electron microscopy (TEM) provides
the ability to image the magnetic induction with very high
spatial resolution, down to 1 nm. This is suitable for map-
ping the structure of magnetic induction of sub-micrometer-
or nanometer-scale magnets in ASI arrays164,167–169. Besides,
TEM is also capable of characterizing crystal structure and
chemical composition at the same time, thereby allowing for a
comprehensive understanding of magnetic materials. As com-
pared to the standard TEM, Lorentz TEM has two ways to
operate: 1) the objective lens is switched off to create a low-
field sample environment and a mini objective lens is used for
imaging, or 2) a dedicated Lorentz TEM is designed to have
a special objective lens to create the field-free environment in
the vicinity of magnetic samples170.
The Lorentz TEM technique allows to obtain both quali-
tative and quantitative information of magnetic states. From
the classical perspective, when electron beams pass through a
perpendicular magnetic induction in a uniform thin magnetic
film (typically film thickness < 200 nm), the electrons are de-
flected by the Lorentz force (Fig. 9). The Lorentz force FL
that a moving electron with charge e experiences is given by
FL = evB⊥,
(30)
where v is the velocity of the electron; B⊥is the component
of magnetic induction perpendicular to the velocity vector of
the electron. The magnitude of Lorentz deflection angle θL of
the electron beam is given by170,171
θL = eλ
h B⊥t,
(31)
where λ is the electron wavelength, h is Planck’s constant and
t is the thickness of the film. Typical Lorentz deflection angles
are in the range of tens to hundreds of microradians, which is
two or three orders smaller than the Bragg deflection angle for
FIG. 9. (a) Schematic of Fresnel imaging mode in TEM, showing
the bright and dark contrast formed at the domain walls under an
out-of-focus condition. (b) The measured in-focus and under-focus
TEM images of a pinwheel artificial spin ice, wherein mainly darker
contrast is visible in each nanomagnet. Adapted from Ref. [168]
(c) Through-focus Lorentz TEM images of dimer Kagome artifi-
cial spin ice, including over-focus(+∆z), in-focus (z = 0) and under-
focus (−∆z). (d) Retrieved magnetic induction map by the means of
transport-of-intensity equation showing the local spin state of each
nanomanget and stray field between nanomangets, forming a flux
closure state.
Adapted from Ref. [177].
(e) Field-induced mag-
netization reversal in an artificial quasi-crystal showing dendritic
avalanches. Adapted from Ref. [178]. (f) Ferromagnet-like mag-
netization switches driven by an varying external magnetic field in a
pinwheel artificial spin ice. Adapted from Ref. [179].
electron diffraction from crystal structures (in the range of a
few milliradians)172.
Under an out-of-focus condition, the deflected electrons
from a thin film with multiple domains converge or diverge
on the image plane to yield brighter and darker contrast
at the positions of domain walls, as sketched in Fig. 9(a).
Since in the majority of studied ASIs, each nanomagnet has
a single-domain state, the darker contrast is more visible at
the edge of each nanomagnet in an out-of-focus Lorentz TEM
image117,164,168,169,173,174 [see Fig. 9(b)]. The disappearance
of brighter contrast is attributed to the influence of electro-
static phase arising from the boundaries of the patterned nano-
magnet. This classical Lorentz deflection model offers a good
understanding of magnetic imaging using the so-called Fres-
nel mode in conventional TEM (CTEM)175,176. The magnetic
contrast in the Fresnel image is invisible at an in-focus con-
dition, and the locations of darker and brighter contrast are
reserved in under-focus and over-focus images, as seen in
Fig. 9(c). The Fresnel mode can be considered a qualitative
observation mode. Nevertheless, the quantitative information
on the magnetic induction can be obtained through phase re-
trieval theory, as discussed in the following:
Aharonov and Bohm in 1959 found that the phase of an
electron wave was shifted upon traversing a space with elec-
tromagnetic potential based on a quantum perspective180. The
total phase shift (ϕt) is composed of electrostatic (ϕe) and
magnetic (ϕm) phase shifts. The electrostatic shift is a result
of the mean inner potential and inhomogeneity (such as non-
uniform thickness, defects, nanomagnet boundaries, etc.) of
materials. The total magnetic phase can be described by172
