A&A proofs: manuscript no. main
it impacts our understanding of the formation and evolution of
compact objects, and our predictions for compact object merg-
ers, which are now routinely observed by gravitational wave de-
tectors like LIGO/VIRGO (Abbott et al. 2023, and references
therein).
In recent decades, extensive observing programs utilizing
various ground-based and space telescopes have gathered multi-
wavelength and multi-epoch spectroscopic data of hot stars in
the Galaxy (GAL; Z⊙, Fe-group = 0.014; Magg et al. 2022) and in
the low-metallicity environments of the Large Magellanic Cloud
(LMC; ZLMC, Fe-group = 1/2 Z⊙, Fe-group; Vink et al. 2023) and
Small Magellanic Cloud (SMC; ZSMC, Fe-group = 1/7 Z⊙, Fe-group;
Vink et al. 2023). These data have been analyzed in several liter-
ature studies using state-of-the-art stellar atmosphere codes, pro-
viding stellar and wind parameters. By leveraging these compre-
hensive datasets, we aim to develop an updated mass-loss pre-
scription, broadly applicable to hot stars with UV-driven winds
and across a wide range of metallicities.
Section 2 of this paper describes the sample of hot stars used
in this study and outlines the selection criteria applied. The re-
sulting mass-loss prescription is presented in Sect. 3. A detailed
comparison to commonly used mass-loss recipes and the impli-
cations of adopting our updated mass-loss prescription in stellar
evolution models are discussed in Sect. 4. Finally, a summary of
our findings is provided in Sect. 5.
2. Method
2.1. Parametrizing stellar mass-loss rates
Castor, Abbott, & Klein (1975, hereafter CAK) established the
first theoretical framework for radiatively driven stellar winds.
In their zero-sound speed approximation, they can express the
mass-loss rate as
˙M ∝α (1 −α)(1−α)/α k1/αΓ1/α
e
(1 −Γe)−(1−α)/α ,
(1)
with Γe = κeL/(4πcGM) being the electron scattering, or clas-
sical Eddington parameter. The quantities k and α are so-called
(line-)force multiplier parameters which have inherent temper-
ature and metallicity dependencies (see, e.g., table 3 in Puls
et al. 2000). For most stars, the radiative force arising from line
opacities is crucial to overcome gravity and launch the stellar
wind, meaning that the line opacity cannot be ignored in a de-
scription of radiation-driven mass loss. While the parametric
CAK description already simplifies the inherent complexity of
the radiative force, the further dependencies of the force mul-
tiplier parameters prevent any straightforward analytic descrip-
tion1. Moreover, the validity of the CAK description is limited
and for example, does not incorporate WR stars. Formally, the
full complexity of the line force can be encapsulated in a Γrad
quantity including the full flux-weighted opacity, but while Γe
can be reasonably determined and is often approximately con-
stant in the relevant part of the stellar atmosphere, Γrad instead is
a radially strongly varying function and thus not handy for any
empirically calibrated prescription.
Given these considerations, we choose a Γe-dependence for
our ˙M-description. For stars that are not close to the Eddington
limit (Γe ≪1), the mass-loss rate’s dependence on the Eddington
factor can be further simplified to
˙M ∝Γn
e .
(2)
1 The famous “cooking recipe” in Kudritzki et al. (1989) requires nu-
merical iteration and thus is hardly used in current evolution modeling.
Within this approximation, the information on the metallicity
dependence included in the full line opacities or the force mul-
tiplier parameters is lost. To remedy this shortcoming, we use
the well-established fact that hot star winds are driven by UV-
radiation pressure on metal ions, in particular the line-rich ions
of iron and the iron-group elements. Consequently, the mass-loss
rate is expected to depend on the abundances of the iron group
elements Sc, Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni (ZFe-group), meaning
that ˙M gets weaker as the metallicity decreases.
As an approach for developing an empirical description, use-
ful for implementation in stellar evolution calculations, we as-
sume that the mass-loss rates of hot stars can be expressed by a
power-law description depending only on Γe and ZFe-group
˙M ∝Γn
e Zm
Fe-group.
(3)
The metallicity exponent, m, is constrained by empirical and the-
oretical efforts to be between m ≈0.5 – 1.6 (see also Sect. 4.1).
In many empirical studies of massive stars, mass-loss rates
are often presented only as a function of luminosity, whereas
stellar mass and surface H abundance are not considered. This
simplification is only valid when comparing stars within specific
evolutionary subgroups (e.g., main-sequence stars, supergiants)
that have similar luminosity-to-mass ratios and surface hydrogen
abundances. However, such relations can deviate by several or-
ders of magnitude when applied to stars in different evolutionary
states.
2.2. Sample selection
Over the past decades, numerous studies have focused on the
spectral analysis of hot, massive stars and the determination of
their mass-loss rates. While we cannot rule out systematic biases,
e.g., due to additional physics not covered in the current genera-
tion of atmosphere models, we assume within this work that the
current spectroscopic analysis methods derive accurate measure-
ments of the mass-loss rates within a reasonable uncertainty aris-
ing from approximations and assumptions made within the 1D
stellar atmosphere codes. Recently, Sander et al. (2024) demon-
strated that the derived stellar parameters for the same star using
different non-local thermodynamic equilibrium (non-LTE) stel-
lar atmosphere codes are in good agreement. Therefore, to min-
imize systematic biases, we include in our sample only spectro-
scopic studies that use established non-LTE stellar atmosphere
codes. Despite this, these studies cannot be used indiscriminately
when aiming to derive a robust empirical mass-loss relation. To
mitigate systematic differences, our selected sample adheres to
the following criteria:
1. A star must be sufficiently hot (Teff ≳12 kK) to be properly
in the regime of radiation-driven winds.
2. The distance to a star must be well-determined to ensure ac-
curate luminosity estimates. This means that we require for
bright Galactic targets that their distance is known via clus-
ter associations, and for fainter Galactic targets their previous
distance estimates have to agree with Gaia parallaxes.
3. The analysis of a star must employ a non-LTE stellar atmo-
sphere code that includes iron line blanketing (PoWR, CM-
FGEN, and Fastwind).
4. Stars are excluded if their wind-line variability differs from
the natural variability expected in OB stars, yielding differ-
ences in the mass-loss rates larger than 50% (Massa et al.
2024).
5. Stars suspected to belong to binary or multiple systems but
analyzed as single stars are excluded.
Article number, page 2 of 18
