7 
 
Figure 1. Time evolution of ocean heat uptake efficiency (OHUE) and associated variables from 
observations and CMIP6 large-ensemble simulations. (a) Time evolution of OHUE over a 20-year sliding 
window. The x-axis shows the centered year of the 20-year window. The results represent the ensemble 
mean from each model. (b) Distributions of OHUE from 1978-1997 (centered at 1988) and 1990-2009 
(centered at 2000). The number in parentheses refers to the CMIP6 model (see Table S1 in Supporting 
Information). For the observations (Obs), the distribution is from 72 members from GF, circles represent 
IAP data, and triangles represent Ishii data. (c,d) Time evolution of global ocean heat content (OHC) and 
global mean surface temperature (GMST), respectively. The dashed gray curve is the GMST from 
HadCRUT5. (e) Ocean heat uptake rate, calculated as the 20-year trend of OHC. (f) 20-year running mean 
of GMST. As is panel (a), the x-axis in (e,f) indicates the centered year. 
 
The ocean heat content (OHC) and global mean surface temperature (GMST) anomalies have 
steadily increased since 1980, with temporary dips caused by the volcanic eruptions of El Chichón 
(1982) and Pinatubo (1991) (Figures 1c,d). The ocean heat uptake rate (∂OHC/∂t; Figure 1e), 
compared with the nearly linear increase in the 20-year running mean of the GMST anomaly (∆T; 
Figure 1f), plays a dominant role in driving the recent variation in OHUE. Therefore, we next 
focus on the variations in the ocean heat uptake rate in response to different external forcings, such 
as volcanic eruptions, greenhouse gas (GHG), and anthropogenic aerosol (AER) emissions. 
3.2 Contributions from Individual Forcings 
The historical OHC can be represented as a linear combination of responses to GHG, AER, and 
natural forcings (Sohail et al., 2023). While the mean surface air temperature is influenced by 
various forcings, our focus here is solely on partitioning the ocean heat uptake rate (∆N) into 
components driven by these forcings to quantify their respective contributions to the overall OHUE 
change. In Eq. 2, the subscripts HIST, GHG, AER, and NAT refer to results from all-forcing, 
greenhouse gas-only, aerosol-only, and natural-external-only forcing experiments, respectively. 
The denominator is the ∆T anomaly from the historical all-forcing run (Figure 1f). 
       (2) 
The main goal of this section is to identify which external forcing leads to the temporal features 
in historical OHUE. Although the GHG-induced global OHC continues to increase, its ratio to the 
∆T (i.e., OHUE) is gradually decreasing over time (Figure 2a). The aerosols give rise to negative 
OHUE associated with its cooling effect in the ocean (Boland et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2023), which 
offsets some of the ocean warming from GHGs (Figure 2b). Both the GHG- and AER-induced 
changes are quite linear, without exhibiting the observed variation. The NAT-only experiment 
shows a distinct drop between 1985 and 1990, followed by an increase thereafter (Figure 2c), 
closely matching the observed temporal feature. The linear combination of these components 
imprints the natural forcing effects resulting from the compensation between GHG- and aerosol-
