Entropy 2024, 26, 612
62 of 84
The upper diagram in Figure 43 corresponds to the Λe = 0 case, similar to the lower
diagram in Figure 32 but with tracks (green curves) showing how different types of orbits
move as Λe changes from a negative value (lower left diagram) to a positive one (lower
right diagram). These four different quasiperiodic (or stable) orbits are shown in Figure 44
and change as Λe changes. Orbit (a) is located in the centre of the annulus region, whereas
orbits (b), (c), and (d) produce a set of points on the Poincaré plot that follow the contours
of the triangular shaped region. The stable and quasistable orbits remain so as Λe becomes
more negative, but Λe > 0 stable orbits can become chaotic. The transition point depends
on the initial conditions of the orbit or its speciﬁc location in the phase space. These
results support the intuitive higher-dimensional understanding of a negative cosmological
constant as a parameter that provides stronger gravitational binding, leading to an increase
in the integrability of the dynamics and thus an increase in the stability of trajectories.
Remarkably, as Λe →Λnegcrit, the chaotic regions nearly vanish. Since the area of the
chaotic regions in the Poincaré section were found to be roughly proportional to

Λe
Λnegcrit
,
for the range of possible energies that could be numerically investigated, it has been
conjectured that this holds for arbitrarily large values of H. Conversely, the area of the
chaotic regions in the Poincaré section increases as Λe becomes increasingly positive, as
shown in the lower right panel of Figure 43. This occurs within the regions corresponding to
the pretzel orbits and in the regions between annulus and pretzel orbits. This phenomenon
has likewise been conjectured to occur at all energies [117].
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 44. Four representative periodic and quasi-periodic orbits, labelled (a) a stable (nearly circular)
orbit located in the centre of the annulus region, denoted by a ‘◦’ symbol (upper left); (b) an annulus
orbit located around the outside edge of the triangular annulus region, denoted by a ‘△’ symbol
(upper right); (c) a quasi-periodic pretzel orbit located halfway between the centre of the annulus
region and the ﬁrst large outer annulus regions, denoted by a ‘□’ symbol (lower left); and (d) a
banana-shaped AB3 orbit located in the centre of that region, denoted by the ‘+’ symbol (lower right).
