amplitude of all surviving branches multiplied by a small ﬁxed number ε > 0 (related to but
distinct from the parameter ǫ used previously).
In stochastic process notation, where Φt = φt(B) is a random variable, equation (24) can
be written as:
ξt = ε E

Φt
 Φt > 0

.
(25)
This threshold choice restores homogeneity (though not additivity) to our model dynamics:
Multiplying the multiverse’s state vector ψt by any non-zero constant c ∈C does not aﬀect
the dynamics, since both φt(b) and ξt are multiplied by |c|2. For our purposes, the constant
c can even depend on time t. Arguably, the threshold choice in (24) (or equivalently in (25))
represents one of the simplest plausible models for ξt that achieves this homogeneity.
The goal of this section is to show that once the process deﬁned by the branching model
(6) with threshold rule (24) reaches its steady state, we obtain the Born rule result from
Theorem 1 with exponent
β =
1
1 −ε .
(26)
Our results so far were derived in the limit ǫ →0, which now becomes ε →0, and we obtain
β = 1 in this limit as desired. Thus, combining our previous results with this endogenous
threshold approach guarantees the Born rule in the limit of large t and small ε.
The formal derivation of the claim just made will be done for the continuous-time version
of the model that was introduced in Section 4.2. This is because of mathematical tractabil-
ity rather than conceptual necessity.9 We consider the continuous-time process as a good
approximation of its discrete-time counterpart.
We emphasize again that the threshold rule in (24) (or (25)) should not be interpreted
as a fundamental law of nature. It is intended as an emergent approximation that captures
9The continuous-time approach also elegantly resolves the simultaneity issue present in equations (6) and
(24), where φt(b) and ξt must be determined jointly. In the discrete-time case, a natural alternative would
be to deﬁne ξt =
ε
|S+
t−1|
P
b∈S+
t−1 φt−1(s) in terms of the state of the process in the previous period, though
this slightly modiﬁes the quantitative meaning of ε.
32
