emission levels. As a result, the lapse rate contribution to the forcing decreases with latitude in
this region (Fig. 7, panel b) while the specific humidity contribution increases before levelling off.
The fact that the OLR is smaller than in the control run in this region (the blue curve is positive) is
therefore driven first by the specific humidity effects in the first half of the region, then by lapse rate
effects in the second half. Going further poleward, the two effects essentially cancel out, resulting
in a vanishing radiative forcing up to very high latitudes.
For the interactive-SST experiments, Figure 8 (panel a) shows that the specific humidity changes
are smaller than in the fixed-SST case equatorward of 20◦(in this region, the emission level remains
the same) — the superrotating state is actually moister except in the region where the OLR value
is larger. Lapse rate changes are essentially smaller everywhere (Fig. 9, panel a). This explains the
structure of the radiative feedback curves (Fig. 7, panel c), whose sign is opposite to the radiative
forcing everywhere for the lapse rate component (green curve), and opposite in the tropics but same
sign in the mid-latitudes for the specific humidity component (red curve; in other words specific
humidity acts as a positive feedback everywhere). As a result, the specific humidity effect on the net
radiative budget changes (Fig. 7, panel a) vanishes in the tropics while the lapse rate component
remains relatively small everywhere. The total radiative budget changes are dominated by the
Planck response in the deep tropics (with a minor contribution from the lapse rate), and become
dominated by the imperfect cancellation between the Planck and specific humidity responses at
higher latitudes.
Overall, the TOA radiative budget changes are consistent with changes in physical quantities in
the atmosphere, such as specific humidity and temperature, but result from cancellations between
the effects associated with these variables. In the following section, we suggest an alternative
decomposition of the radiative budget changes, which offers a clearer interpretation.
c. Radiative budget changes and their relation to relative humidity
Given the strong correlation between the effects of specific humidity and lapse rate changes on
the TOA budget (see Section 4b), it is natural to try to interpret these changes using the alternative
decomposition introduced by Held and Shell (2012) and Ingram (2012) (see also Jeevanjee et al.
(2021)), which uses relative humidity instead of specific humidity as a state variable. This means
that for the two other terms, namely the Planck and lapse rate components, it is relative humidity
20
