12 
 
The X-ray beam-induced degradation of the MAPbBr3 single crystal under different atmosphere 
has shown that N2 can provide protections, while the crystal exhibit minimal sensitivity to O2 
exposure [28]. Therefore, the synchrotron X-ray beam-induced instability in our work, conducted 
under ambient conditions, is unlikely to be significantly affected by the environmental atmosphere. 
Besides, prolonged X-ray exposure in an ultrahigh vacuum could break Pb-Br bonds [28], which 
may account for the fluctuations observed in Stage III of our GI-XRD results in Figures 3c and 3d. 
In addition, the rate of CL intensity changes in the MAPbBr3 single crystal decreases as the e-beam 
energy increases [24], which aligns with the observed trend in the rate of increase in the peak 
intensity ratio between PbBr2 and MAPbBr3 in our GI-XRD results. Since CL intensity is closely 
correlated with defect formation, and the emergence of a new PbBr2 phase in GI-XRD results is 
attributed to MA vacancy formation, this suggests that, despite the fundamental differences 
between e-beam and X-ray beam, both radiations could induce similar effects on the 
decomposition process of the MAPbBr3 single crystal.  
 
4. Conclusions 
In this study, we have investigated e-beam and X-ray beam radiation-induced instabilities of two 
typical OIHP single crystals, FAPbBr3 and MAPbBr3, using SEM imaging, EDS analysis, and 
synchrotron X-ray. We have verified the volatilization of organic components experimentally and 
shown the similar effects of e-beam and X-ray beam on both OIHP single crystals. Such in-situ 
characterizations provide direct experimental evidence of radiation-induced cracking and 
composition evolutions in these single crystals. Under the e-beam radiation, cracks initiate and 
propagate on the crystal surface, forming 3-point star-style patterns in FAPbBr3 and bricklayer-
style patterns in MAPbBr3. Under the X-ray beam radiation, the GI-XRD peak intensities for the 
original structures decrease and a new PbBr2 phase is formed. By exploring the effect of beam 
radiations on mechanical performance, we offer deep insights into the stability issues and viability 
concerns of OIHP single crystals. The volatilization of organic components in OIHP single crystals 
leads to volume strain in an unstable intermediate structure, and the energy released from volume 
strain is converted into the energy for crack nucleation and growth. The differences in size and 
bonding of FA+ and MA+ result in distinct crack patterns and crack growth processes in the two 
crystals. This study highlights the intrinsic instability of OIHP single crystals under high-energy 
stimuli and underscores the importance of developing radiation-resistant strategies for their 
practical applications. 
 
5. Materials and methods 
The detailed synthesis methods of FAPbBr3, MAPbBr3, and CsPbBr3 single crystals are provided 
in Supplementary material. Experiments were conducted on the (100) plane of FAPbBr3 single 
crystal, (100) plane of MAPbBr3 single crystal, and (101) plane of CsPbBr3 single crystal. In-situ 
SEM imaging and EDS analysis were performed using the Hitachi FE-SEM SU 7000 in the low 
