6
W. Shen, Y. Ge, Z. Han, Y. Zhao and Y. Yang
Î³
x
x
z
Î”z
y
x z
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2. Geometry of vortex packets and wall-coherent superstructures. (a) Alignment of sub-level hairpin
vortices along the streamwise direction, exhibiting increasing heights at a growth angle of ğ›¾. (b) Top view of
the vortex packet, illustrating the spanwise meandering features. (c) Vortex surface visualization ğœ™ğ‘£= 0.1
of a typical wall-coherent superstructure.
ensuring a smooth transition of hairpin vortex heights across different vortex packet levels.
In this configuration, the hairpin vortices collectively form an inclined hairpin ramp from
upstream to downstream, with a growth angle reaching up to ğ›¾â‰ˆ12â—¦, consistent with
experimental observations (Adrian et al. 2000). The circulation of each hairpin vortex is
given by
Î“( ğ‘—)
ğ‘–
= ğ¶Î“ğ‘¢ğœâ„ğ‘–,
(2.10)
where ğ¶Î“ = 2 is the circulation coefficient and ğ‘¢ğœ= ğœˆReğœ/ğ›¿represents the friction velocity.
A key advantage of constructing wall turbulence based on vortex building blocks is
the flexibility to phenomenologically adjust the spatial arrangement of hairpin vortices
to incorporate theoretical results and experimental/numerical observations. Considering
the meandering features of large-scale structures in turbulent boundary layers (Hutchins
& Marusic 2007), we introduce the spanwise meandering of hairpin vortex packets (see
figure 2(b)). Each hairpin vortex within a level-ğ‘–packet undergoes a random spanwise
displacement
Î”ğ‘§ğ‘–= ğœğ‘šğœ‰â„ğ‘–,
ğœ‰âˆ¼ğ’°(âˆ’1, 1),
(2.11)
where ğœğ‘š= 0.5 is a constant, and ğœ‰is a uniform random variable in the range (âˆ’1, 1),
in agreement with experimental (Hutchins & Marusic 2007) and numerical (Adrian & Liu
2002; Hwang & Lee 2022) observations.
In addition to these self-similar wall-attached eddies, we incorporate wall-coherent
superstructures within the largest vortex packets, also referred to as very large-scale motions
(VLSMs) (Kim & Adrian 1999; Chandran et al. 2020), to account for the dynamics of the
outer layer. Building on the concept that vortex packets align in the streamwise direction to
form extended structures, we model these superstructures by combining two of the largest
packets. Their height is set to match the boundary layer height, â„ğ‘†ğ‘†= ğ›¿, ensuring consistency
with the overall flow organization, as illustrated in figure 2(c). Furthermore, the circulation
of each hairpin vortex within VLSMs is prescribed as Î“ğ‘†ğ‘†= 0.1 Â¯ğ‘ˆâ„ğ‘†ğ‘†, where the velocity
scale is chosen as the bulk velocity Â¯ğ‘ˆrather than the friction velocity ğ‘¢ğœused for self-similar
wall-attached vortex packets. These superstructures span the entire boundary layer height
