4
D.
Validation
To validate the QUBO-based reconstruction of W(E),
we applied it to an exactly solvable physical system. To
this end, we considered the Ising model on the L × L
square lattice with uniform nearest-neighbour spin inter-
actions and periodic boundary conditions. For even L,
the density of states can be calculated exactly with the
recursive enumeration method of ref.
[54]. Because the
energy of the system is solely determined by the number
of parallel neighboring spins, 2nq, we used nq as the nat-
ural variable for profiling W, and mapped the admissible
configurations on the QUBO model detailed in Appendix
A.
The admissible range of nq is bound by 0 and L2, corre-
sponding respectively to the antiferromagnetic and ferro-
magnetic states. W(nq) is unimodal and symmetric with
respect to the midpoint nq = L2/2. W is minimum at
the boundaries, where the ferromagnetic and antiferro-
magnetic states account for two configurations each, and
is maximum at the midpoint.
For a stringent validation, we considered the 12 × 12
Ising system (L = 12), where the ”dynamic range” of
W spans across more than 40 orders of magnitude, mak-
ing it impossible to recover the entire profile of W(nq)
with simple sampling schemes. For the reconstruction,
we used m = 1, 2, and 3 slack variables, corresponding
to nq intervals of width 2, 4, and 8, respectively, and sam-
pled the ground state manifold using a parallel tempering
scheme (see Supporting Information S2). We leveraged
the unbiassed nature of classical parallel tempering-based
optimizations to decouple the validation of the recon-
struction method from potential external biases. These
include those that can arise from, e.g. fair-sampling issues
in quantum optimizers[43, 46, 47],and out-of-equilibrium
effects in classical annealers[42].
As illustrated in Appendix A, the reconstructed pro-
files are practically indistinguishable from the exact one
at all ms, and the observed agreement is remarkably con-
sistent throughout the broad range spanned by W, de-
spite its wide dynamic range. Furthermore, the reported
data demonstrate that the block analysis provides a reli-
able and unbiased estimate of the statistical uncertainty
of the reconstructed W.
II.
APPLICATION: ADDING BENDING
RIGIDITY TO RING POLYMER MELTS
We now apply the approach to characterize the topo-
logical entanglement in equilibrated melts of semiflexible,
topologically unrestricted ring polymers. The canonical
sampling of such a system is challenging for conventional
approaches based on real-space representations, such as
molecular dynamics or Monte Carlo simulations. Con-
sequently, no results are available for how knotting and
linking probabilities change with the rings’ bending rigid-
ity.
These questions are relevant across diverse contexts,
from biology and physical chemistry to material sci-
ence and soft matter physics.
For instance, polymer
ring melts are key reference systems for understanding
the unique features of the multiscale genome organi-
zation [55–57], and how topoisomerase enzymes influ-
ence it [58, 59].
Additionally, modern interpretations
of density-induced phase transitions in liquids are re-
lated to entanglements of closed paths along the chemical
bonds of the system [60, 61]. Dense systems of circular
molecules are also crucial for prospective realization of
topological meta-materials, including Olympic gels and
self-assembled molecular chainmails [62–69]. Finally, in
soft matter contexts, melts of rings polymers are at the
heart of ongoing endeavors to understand anomalous re-
laxation dynamics and response to shear flow [70], aging
of active topological glasses [71], and how it is affected
by both chain density and topology [71–74].
The computational challenges in tackling these systems
arise from their high packing density[75]. The latter dra-
matically hinders the physical relaxation of the chains,
making it computationally prohibitive to obtain uncor-
related equilibrated samples using molecular dynamics
simulations. An analogous slowing down affects Monte
Carlo simulations, too.
By employing non-local (non-
physical) moves, Monte Carlo methods can often speed
up the sampling compared to molecular dynamics. How-
ever, the acceptance rate of such non-local moves drops
significantly with increasing system density, again due to
steric clashes. The problem is exacerbated when going
from fully flexible to semi-rigid and finally to rigid rings.
These challenges affect continuum and lattice polymer
models alike.
A.
QUBO-based reconstruction of the density of
states
Prompted by these considerations, we addressed the
entanglement of canonically equilibrated self-assembled
melts of lattice ring polymers for arbitrary values of their
bending rigidity κb. We adopted the QUBO-based for-
mulation of lattice polymers introduced in refs. [29, 33],
which enables the sampling of self-assembled ring melts
on regular and irregular lattices, and considered the strin-
gent case of ring melts that fill cubic lattices of N sites.
As detailed in Appendix B, the QUBO Hamiltonian
for such systems can be formulated in terms of two types
of Ising-like binary variables attached respectively to in-
dividual lattice edges and pairs of incident edges meeting
at π/2 angles. The two sets of variables are introduced
to keep track of (i) the lattice edges that are occupied by
the bonds of the self-assembled rings and (ii) the number
of corner turns of the rings, nc.
Note that on hypercubic lattices, as in the considered
case, nc is proportional to the total curvature of the ring
melt up to a π/2 factor. It is thus the parameter of choice
for the density of states, W(nc), required to compute the
