Multilevel Quantum Rabi Models
11
Figure 5. Density of the energy levels for 600 systems with n = m = 5 and coupling
matrices sampled from a random distribution, normalised so that the primary coupling
is always λ1 (see the main text for further details). The ‘count’ gives the density of
energy levels within discrete bins (1000 × 1250 in total) covering the range of energies
and couplings. Energy levels of a simple QRM with coupling λ = λ1 are indicated
with white dotted lines for comparison.
Figure 5 shows that with appropriate scaling, the overall spectral structure of a
traditional QRM with coupling λ1 is largely preserved within the spectrum of a multilevel
system across many realisations of the random coupling matrices (the spectrum of the
standard 2-level QRM with λ1 = λ is shown with dashed lines for comparison). The
highest count densities in the heatmap correspond to states exhibiting either the largest
light-matter interaction (for which ⟨ˆD⟩≈1), which align with the 2-level QRM energy
levels, or very weak couplings (i.e. the ‘darkest’ states). In the latter case, the energy
eigenergies only increase extremely slowly as a function λ1, leading to almost perfectly
quadratic curves in Fig. 5 due to the additional factor of (λ1/ω)2 added to each of the
energies.
Thus far we have seen that the behaviour of the most strongly coupled levels of a
randomly coupled system can almost be mapped onto those of a standard 2-level QRM.
However, when ε ̸= 0, the mapping is imperfect and samples of even the most strongly
coupled (⟨D⟩≃1) states give rise to energy levels that are distributed over a finite
range in Fig. 5. To see this more clearly, Fig. 6 shows the distribution of the two lowest
energy levels for λ1/ω = 2.5.
The behaviour of the two lowest lying energy levels (which have opposite parity)
in the extreme coupling limit (λ1/ω →+∞) is well known in the standard QRM:
E/ω + (λ1/ω)2 →0.5 [3, 6]. For the randomly coupled system with finite detunings,
different samples lead to a distribution of the two lowest energy levels with finite
