17
has been developed to record spatiotemporal LTEM images of
magnon dynamics driven by a 5.26 GHz frequency RF exci-
tation in a patterned permalloy strip192, with temporal reso-
lution down to around 10 ps. The real-space observation of
nanoscale spin-wave dynamics uncovers the correlation be-
tween the oscillation of topological domain walls and the gen-
eration of spin waves.
It also reveals the behavior of the
spin-wave propagation, interference and reflection within the
domain interior. However, UEM primarily probes reversible
magnetization processes. Due to the low electron count per
pulse, stroboscopic imaging requires repeated measurements
and the integration of numerous pulses to achieve sufficient
contrast. This technique is well-suited for studying spin-wave
dynamics in ASIs within the tens of ps to tens of ns time range
(see Sec. II).
Electrostatic subframing systems offer another avenue
for time-resolved imaging by deflecting the electron beam
across different regions of the detector in rapid succession.
This technique can theoretically achieve sub-microsecond
resolution193, making it ideal for investigating irreversible
magnetization reversal and domain wall dynamics in nano-
magnets and magnetic bars of ASI.
B.
Magnetization dynamics
1.
Brillouin light scattering
In contrast to Raman spectroscopy, which probes higher-
energy optical phonons and molecular vibrations in the THz
range, Brillouin light spectroscopy (BLS) detects low-energy
excitations, such as spin waves (magnons) and acoustic
phonons, typically in the GHz range.
BLS has become a
standard method for studying magnons in various magnetic
materials. The process, governed by energy and momentum
conservation, involves either the creation (Stokes process) or
annihilation (Anti-Stokes process) of magnons upon inelastic
scattering of an incoming photon with energy ¯hωin and mo-
mentum ¯hkin. The resulting energy ¯hωout and momentum shift
¯hkout of the inelastically scattered photons provides informa-
tion about the probed spin wave (¯hωsw, ¯hksw):
¯hωout = ¯hνin ± ¯hωsw,
(35)
¯hkout = ¯hkin ± ¯hksw.
(36)
To analyze the small frequency shift of spin waves (typi-
cally in the GHz range), a tandem Fabry-Pérot interferometer
(TFPI) is used. The TFPI consists of two highly reflective,
parallel etalons. A spectrum is recorded by varying the sepa-
ration between the two mirrors of each etalons. The two in-
terferometers are arranged at an angle, allowing an effective
suppression of higher order transmissions. The transmission
of light through these mirrors can be described by the periodic
Airy function that allows light to only pass if the mirror spac-
ing is a multiple of half its wavelength. The absolute value of
the frequency shift is determined by comparing the detected
signal with the frequency of a reference signal that directly
enters the interferometer.
A key advantage of BLS over microwave techniques is its
exceptional sensitivity, which allows the detection of ther-
mally activated, incoherent spin waves even in systems with-
out external excitation195. In addition to that, BLS can be
combined with a microwave source to excite the system, fa-
cilitating the detection of resonantly driven magnon modes.
Furthermore, BLS is compatible with many different mea-
surement modalities including microfocused BLS, wavevec-
tor resolution, phase resolution and time resolution. We re-
view key features of these measurement methods in the fol-
lowing; for more detailed discussion, we refer to the dedicated
literature, for example Refs. [195–197].
In microfocused BLS, a high numerical aperture objective
is used to detect sub-micron dynamics by coupling the system
to a 2D scanning stage and rastering the porbing laser beam
over the sample195. This enables to reconstruct 2D spin-wave
intensity profiles [see, for example, Fig. 10(d)], which can be
easily compared to 2D power maps obtained by micromag-
netic simulations.
Wavevector-resolved BLS is enabled by the momentum
conservation, Eq. (36). The laser wavelength in a BLS sys-
tem is fixed, hence, the wavevector of the incident light |kin|
is constant. The wavevector resolution can be achieved by
varying the direction of the incident beam with respect to the
sample surface. In a thin film, the translation symmetry is bro-
ken at the sample surface, resulting in a lack of conservation
for the out-of-plane component of the wavevector. However,
the in-plane component of the wavevector remains conserved.
Therefore, the momentum transfer can be determined by pro-
jecting the wavevector of the incident light onto the plane of
the sample surface197.
BLS is a phase-sensitive process, which enables the recon-
struction of the phase of probed magnons. This is achieved by
interference of two signals - a coherent reference signal with
constant phase and the inelastically scattered light carrying the
phase information of the probed magnons198.
BLS can also operate in a stroboscopic mode, allow-
ing for the measurement of spin-wave dissipation and the
propagation of short spin-wave pulses.
Time resolution is
achieved through a time-of-flight measurement, which tracks
the elapsed time between the external excitation of a spin-
wave pulse by a microwave pulse and the relative arrival time
of inelastically scattered photons from the spin-wave pulse at
a specific laser beam position. Due to the weak BLS scatter-
ing cross section, reconstructing the temporal evolution from
a single spin-wave pulse is not feasible; instead, multiple mea-
surements must be accumulated. To ensure consistent starting
conditions for each measurement, sufficient time must elapse
between successive pulses.
Brillouin light spectroscopy on ASI:
BLS has been em-
ployed to study various aspects of dynamics in the ASI. As
mentioned earlier, a key advantage of BLS is that it can
be used to obtain the eigenfrequencies of ASI lattice by
measuring the thermal magnon spectra. This is unlike mi-
