these determinations are incompatible with the previous LOHVP determinations at the
4σ level. While waiting for the resolution of this theoretical controversy, we decided to
adopt a conservative approach here and include in our results only a line corresponding to
the ALP parameter values such that its presence would decrease atheory
µ
by δaµ = −10−9,
i.e. corresponding to a negative 2σ shift from the current experimental value, when cur-
rent theoretical and experimental errors are combined. Nevertheless, this result must not
be considered as a binding constraint, as nothing prevents the presence of additional new
processes contributing to aµ and counteracting the ALP effect.
A similar conservative approach is required as well for the electron anomalous mag-
netic moment, albeit for different reasons. In this case, the discrepant determinations of the
LOHVP do not play a relevant role because this contribution is negligible due to its elec-
tron mass suppression. However, at the current level of accuracy of 10−13, the theoretical
prediction is sensitive to different measurements of the fine-structure constant employed in
its determination, where a 5.4σ difference has been observed in its two latest experimental
determinations [95, 96]. The latest experimental determination of ae, measured with a
precision similar to the theoretical uncertainty, sits between the two theoretical determina-
tions [97]. Therefore, we adopt a similar approach to the muon case, showing in our results
the line corresponding to ALP parameters values such that they would decrease atheory
e
by
10−13. Once again, this constraint does not have to be considered binding due to possible
additional contributions to this channel.
4.8
ALP lifetime
Axion-like particles decaying into leptons and photons in the early universe may change
its expansion rate, the temperature of the electron-photon bath relative to the one of
neutrinos and the primordial element abundances [98].
While a detailed calculation of
these constraints is challenging, in particular for the muonic decay mode, it is expected
that ALP decays are harmless for cosmology if the ALP lifetime is shorter than 0.1 s. To
give the reader a feeling for how relevant this consideration is, we indicate a line labelled
“τa = 0.1 s” in our plots. This line should, however, not be interpreted as a hard constraint
since additional effects can change the cosmological evolution, and the resulting constraints
may be weaker.
5
Results
In this section, we present and discuss the bounds on the leptophilic ALP models obtained
from the beam-dump experiments E137 and NA64 discussed in section 3 as well as the other
constraints discussed in section 4. In order to remain agnostic about the UV completion
of this scenario, we analyse different coupling structures independently:
• Scenario E: Non-vanishing electron coupling ˆgae ̸= 0 ,
• Scenario M: Non-vanishing muon coupling ˆgaµ ̸= 0 ,
• Scenario T: Non-vanishing tau coupling ˆgaτ ̸= 0 ,
– 24 –
