should not vary µF only for only one channel, since DGLAP evolution mixes the parton
channels – thus, even for these individual variations we vary µF in all channels together.
The results for the case of the β = 1/6 deviation are given in figure 5. These results are
given for the differential cross section at Y = 0 and Q2 = M2
Z; the same behaviour is seen
in the integrated cross section.
In figure 5 one observes that at NLL′, the variations for the partonic channels have
the opposite sign, and there is a large cancellation between channels when performing the
variation for both channels together. However, for NNLL′ the individual channel variations
have the same sign outside the nonperturbative region and add together. A similar pattern
is observed for the other (α,β) variations – for some variations, there is some cancellation
between channels at NNLL′, although never as much as for the NLL′ case.
The large
cancellations in the NLL′ case are accidental and will lead to an underestimation of the
theoretical uncertainty when using the overall (α,β) variations. A promising feature of the
(α,β) variations for the individual channels is that the NNLL′ deviation is smaller than the
NLL′ deviation as expected. It was explicitly checked that this type of cancellation does
not occur in the prediction for the gluon-fusion Higgs + 0-jet predictions with a TB/Cj veto
from [17]; here the gg channel simply dominates the uncertainty prediction and there is no
such cancellation.
0.1
0.5
1
5
10
50
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.1
0.5
1
5
10
50
-0.02
-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
Figure 5.
Deviations in q¯q and qg channels for NLL′ (left) and NNLL′ (right) differential
TBj < T cut cross section for the β = 1/6 variation.
Given this behaviour, we decided to produce results with a modified scale variation,
that we shall refer to as MaxDev. Here the resummation uncertainty is obtained by per-
forming the individual channel variations for the q¯q and qg channels, and then picking the
largest deviation out of the two. We used this prescription for the final results in section
5. Note that even with this prescription we anticipate that the resummation uncertainty
for the NLL′ results will be underestimated, due to the effects described in section 4.1.
4.3
Missing Higher Order Terms and Nuisance Parameters
In this section, we aim to use an alternative method to produce another estimate of the
theoretical uncertainties to check the MaxDev approach gives reasonable values for the
resummation uncertainties.
To do this we will utilise the method of Theory Nuisance
– 10 –
