4.3
B factories
In ref. [78], the BaBar collaboration reported results from a search for dark photons A′
produced in the reaction e+e−→γA′, A′ →ℓ+ℓ−with ℓ= e, µ in terms of a 90% CL
upper bound on the kinetic mixing parameter ϵ as a function of the dark photon mass mA′.
We reinterpret these results in terms of the couplings of leptophilic ALPs by comparing
the cross section for dark photon production with the one for non-resonant production of
ALPs, see appendix B.2.
Since the BaBar search focuses on dark photon decays to light charged leptons, the
bound does not apply to models of ALPs coupled exclusively to tau leptons. For ALPs
coupled exclusively to electrons, we only reinterpret the bounds up to the muon production
threshold, ma < 2mµ. Similarly, for ALPs coupled exclusively to muons, we only reinterpret
the BaBar bound for ma > 2mµ. Note that even though there is no tree-level coupling
to electrons in this case, the ALP can still be produced through the s-channel process
e−e+ →γ∗→aγ via the effective photon coupling induced through the muon loop.
In ref. [79], the Belle II collaboration reported results from their search for a muon-
philic scalar S via the process e−e+ →µ−µ+S with S →µ−µ+. The Belle II collabo-
ration assumed an interaction Lagrangian of the form Lint ⊃−igaµaψµψµ, which allows
us to directly use their results, neglecting the small differences of scalars compared to
pseudoscalars. Moreover, this constraint applies to both the derivative and pseudoscalar
coupling cases since it involves a tree-level coupling between the muon and the ALP.
4.4
Meson and W + boson decays
Ref. [35] pointed out the possibility of searching for leptophilic ALPs using rare decays
such as π+ →e+νa or K+ →e+νa or W + boson decays such as W + →e+νa. The
resulting constraints can be directly applied to our setup, noting that the derivative scenario
corresponds to the weak-violating ALP in ref. [35] and the pseudoscalar scenario to the
weak-conserving ALP.
4.5
Anomalous cooling of SN 1987A
A burst of ALPs can be produced by the electrons, muons or photons that are present in
large numbers in the hot and dense plasmas of core-collapse supernovae. In 1987, one of
these explosions, named SN 1987A, was observed in the Large Magellanic Cloud, around
50 kpc away from Earth. This is the only supernova to date for which the accompanying
neutrino emission was measured by experiments here on Earth.
The duration of this
neutrino burst is in overall agreement with simulations [80], which can be used to constrain
ALP models. If any exotic particle would be produced in the central neutrinosphere of the
nascent proto-neutron star in the supernova core and was coupled so weakly that it escaped
without re-depositing its energy, it would provide an additional cooling channel that is not
present in simulations.
Following approximate, order-of-magnitude physical arguments
supported by early simulations of the explosion, the additional cooling power cannot be
larger than the neutrino luminosity — otherwise the duration of the neutrino burst would
be significantly shortened, contrary to observations [42, 81].
– 21 –
