33
photons. This leads to substantially enhanced photon-
photon interactions and potentially many-body physics
with light.
This idea is not new in the field of nonlinear quan-
tum optics (Chang et al., 2014; Firstenberg et al., 2016,
2013; Roy et al., 2017), but it has mainly been tried
along t in the 1D+1 configuration. However, a significant
limitation in the temporal t dimension is that the effec-
tive photon mass, arising from the group velocity disper-
sion, tends to be relatively large for typical parameters,
severely constraining achievable nonlinear dynamics. An
interesting extension of nonlinear quantum optics there-
fore lies in considering dynamics in the transverse (x, y)
plane. In this transverse propagation approach, the effec-
tive mass of the photons, determined by diffraction rather
than dispersion, is significantly smaller for typical exper-
imental parameters. Lighter mass means lower kinetic
energy and faster dynamics, such that the requirements
on the interaction term are drastically lower than in the
case of previous experiments. As a consequence, we be-
lieve that we could use this mass imbalance to observe
quantum phase transition in 2D along the transverse di-
rection.
In particular, we propose to study the superfluid to
Mott insulator transition in 2D (K¨ohl et al., 2005; Spiel-
man et al., 2007). Since structured optical potentials are
feasible with cold atoms, such as optical lattices formed
by standing waves of laser beams, this enables to im-
plement a lattice potential and tunable on-site interac-
tions. A fluid of light will be injected at the input of the
medium in a superfluid (coherent) state, with an average
of Nt photons. If the on-site energy becomes larger than
the tunnel rate, it becomes favorable for the photons to
equilibrate between the sites. If the number of sites is
equal to Nt, the predicted final state at the output of
the medium is an array of single photons (one per site).
Achieving this photonic analogue of the Mott insulator
phase transition would represent a breakthrough, provid-
ing a direct route to generate and control single-photon
states.
Even though a perfect single-photon source is
likely hard to achieve, this approach is a promising new
way to create non-classical (squeezed) light inspired by
the quantum gases phenomenology (Greiner et al., 2002).
C. Quantum effects and beyond mean-field
As we just saw, going beyond the mean-field descrip-
tion of fluids of light represents an exciting frontier in
the study of optical quantum fluids. While current ex-
periments largely operate within a classical, mean-field
regime described accurately by the Gross-Pitaevskii
equation, introducing quantum fluctuations and corre-
lations into these systems opens important perspectives
both for fundamental physics and applications in quan-
tum technologies.
A natural next step in fluids of light experiments, since
it relies on well established quantum optics techniques,
involves exploring genuinely quantum phenomena such
as entanglement and photon number squeezing.
One experiment has tried to go into this direction
(Steinhauer et al., 2022), but currently, the major dif-
ficulty is to find a way to avoid the low frequency noise
coming from the exciting laser source (Corzo et al., 2013;
Marino et al., 2012). Indeed, for paraxial fluids of light in
the transverse (x, y) plane, cameras are used to record the
integrated intensity over time t. If the camera exposure
time is Tcam, all laser noises on timescales longer than
Tcam will add fluctuations to our data when recording
a series of images. When computing the noise variance,
this low frequency noise will artificially increase the vari-
ance above the standard quantum limit and hide purely
quantum effects (Clark et al., 2012).
We propose two
strategies to circumvent this current limitation.
The laser beam propagating in the nonlinear medium
could be seen as the macroscopic occupation of the
ground state similar to an atomic BEC. This laser is at
kx = 0, ky = 0. Taking into account time t as a third
spatial dimension, we could define the laser frequency as
kt = 0. The first idea is to filter spatially this ground
state to only look at fluctuations in ki ̸= 0 modes, where
i = x, y or t. By putting a spatial filter in the Fourier
plane, it is possible to remove the kx = 0, ky = 0 com-
ponents. After the filter only remains the fluctuations
that could be detected using standard homodyne detec-
tion (Agha et al., 2011; Glorieux et al., 2012; Vogl et al.,
2014).
The second approach follows a similar idea but might
be more practical. It requires to introduce a local oscilla-
tor to select the fluctuations that we want to detect. We
propose a modified version of the off-axis interferometry.
As explained earlier, off-axis interferometry consists in
creating an interference pattern with a tilted reference
beam with respect to the signal beam and filter the
detected intensity after numerical Fourier transform
to reconstruct both amplitude and phase of the signal
beam.
However, this technique still integrates all the
low frequency noise on the camera as explained above.
Nevertheless, if we set the local oscillator to a different
laser frequency, only fluctuations at this specific local
oscillator frequency will create a non-zero signal on the
camera. Following then the same procedure as off-axis
interferometry,
this version of non-resonant off-axis
interferometry will allow us to measure only the noise
variance around the local oscillator frequency getting
rid of the low frequency noise.
This technique could
be compared to a nonlinear implementation of similar
ideas to gain temporal resolution in phase measurement
(Tikan et al., 2018).
As we have seen, several novel experimental techniques
