2
FIG. 1. Floquet cavity and frequency comb. a Several typical examples of cavity with a periodically modulated resonance
frequency. The resonance frequency at b and intracavity field amplitude at c of the Floquet cavity are shown as functions of
time. For demonstration purposes, cavity dissipation is neglected, where β ∼25. d The relative intensity in the frequency
domain of the Floquet cavity. The red dotted line shows where the cavity’s intrinsic frequency is located. e Schematics of the
spectral density of Floquet cavity quasi-energy with increasing modulation intensity A (where n is the Fock basis and m is
the index number of Floquet states). f The schematic diagram of the generation of Floquet frequency comb. The pump tone,
acting as a probe, enters the pre-modulated cavity and radiates photons outward across multiple modes, thereby producing
frequency comb.
lation [43]. In contrast to Kerr optomechanical combs
[44–46], which rely on the nonlinear coupling between
phonons and photons [47–49], our approach achieves a
significantly extended tuning range for the pump signal,
including frequencies that are substantially red-detuned
from the cavity’s natural resonance. Furthermore, this
approach reduces the input power required for detection
by a factor of approximately 106, which is limited pri-
marily by the detection efficiency.
This positions Flo-
quet cavities as a promising platform for frequency comb
generation.
Results
Floquet cavity frequency comb
We introduce the general Floquet cavity, whose res-
onance frequency is periodically modulated in time. It
can be mapped to counterparts in well-established phys-
ical systems, including Fabry–P´erot resonators of vary-
ing mirror or microwave circuits with adjustable capac-
itance or inductance, as illustrated in Fig.
1a.
The
resonance modes of these Floquet cavities evolve from
a single-frequency state to a superposition of multiple
frequencies (see Supplementary Note I.A). The Hamil-
tonian of Floquet cavity system is given by HFloquet =
ℏ(ω0 + A cos(Ωt + ϕ)) ˆa†ˆa , where ω0 is the intrinsic fre-
quency, A is the modulation strength, Ωis the modula-
tion frequency, and ϕ is the inconsequential initial phase.
In terms of Floquet theory, such periodic modula-
tion of the cavity frequencies effectively creates “Flo-
quet sidebands” around the cavity’s intrinsic frequency.
The quasi-energy of this Floquet cavity satisfies ϵnm/ℏ=
nω0 + mΩ, with the eigenfrequencies ω0, ω0 ± Ω, ω0 ±
2Ω, . . .(see Methods).
Fig.
1b and 1c illustrate a nu-
merical example of the time evolution of the modulated
cavity frequency and the corresponding intracavity pho-
ton number, respectively. Correspondingly, the Fourier
transform of the intracavity field amplitude presents
equally spaced frequency components, as shown in Fig.
1d. The relative strength of the Floquet modes is deter-
mined by Jm(β), the Bessel function of the first kind with
order m (see Supplementary Note I.B and I.C). Here we
define the dimensionless modulation coefficient β = A
Ω.
With sufficiently large β, a substantial number of de-
tectable Floquet modes can be produced.
Remarkably, since these modes are induced by Flo-
quet engineering, they are not indepedndent (as in sep-
arate physical cavities) but are correlated.
The mod-
ulation strength A/2 determines the coupling strength
between the different Floquet modes, thus forming what
is referred to as a giant-mode cavity. A stronger mod-
ulation strength clearly enhances the generation of ad-
ditional sidebands with appreciable intensity, as shown
in Fig. 1e. Furthermore, this coupling enables energy
