Figure 4: Maps from the overview scan showing integrated intensity (left column), peak position
(middle column), and peak width (right column) for peaks 211, 310, and 321. Rows correspond
respectively to: peak 211 in (a–c), peak 310 in (d–f), and peak 321 in (g–i).
fitted to a Gaussian distribution given by
g(2θ) = H exp
 
−1
2
2θ −µ
σ
2!
+ C.
(2)
To study local variations, using the fitted Gaussian parameters, maps for peak height, peak position,
and peak width were computed for each scan point of each peak. The integrated intensity Iint was
obtained using Iint = H ·
√
2π · σ. Maps of the integrated intensity, peak position and peak width
for the overview scan were obtained for all peaks; maps for peaks 211, 310, and 321 are shown as
examples in Figs. 4(a-i). The lattice parameter of unstrained martensitic steel was estimated by the
observed, averaged lattice parameter a0. The latter was retrieved from 10 peaks in the diffraction
pattern averaged over an entire scan. The result was a0 = 2.866(4) ˚A, which is in agreement with
published values (Xiao et al., 1995).
Since cracks are not directly visible in the XRD maps, the cracks were located using the self-
absorption of fluorescent x-rays within the material, which blocks the XRF signals and creates
highlighted and shadowed areas in the XRF image (similar to scanning electron microscopy (Baba-
Kishi, 1994)), as shown in Fig. 5(a). The resulting XRF image is shown in Fig. 5(b). However, due
to the limited spatial resolution and contrast, crack tip segmentation directly from XRF data was
challenging. To achieve accurate crack segmentation, optical microscope images (see Fig. 5(c)) were
acquired and registered onto the summed XRF image (total XRF), enabling crack localization, as
depicted in Fig. 5(d). The resulting crack silhouette is shown in Fig. 5(e).
The crack silhouette (see Fig. 5(e)) was overlaid onto the XRD maps to investigate variations near
the crack. As an example, three peak width maps with the crack overlay are shown in Figs. 6(a-
6
