4
The second, quite similar but different testing method
was presented by Martinez et. al. [43] that is based on
the Borel-normality criterion [44]. In our case, the test
takes into account subsequences of consecutive bits that
can overlap, while in the latter approach, no overlapping
is considered. Furthermore, they claim that the longest
length of a considered subsequence should be of the or-
der of log2(log2(n)), while our test takes into account
subsequences of length log2(n).
III.
SEISMIC DATA
Since its formation, the planet has manifested natural
movements, pulsations, and vibrations due to interac-
tions of fluids and solids caused by heat exchange. In par-
ticular, seismic waves correspond to mechanical waves of
acoustic energy that travel through the media and their
surfaces. In the case of the Earth, these can be caused
naturally by earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, magmatic
movements, and landslides. They can also be generated
artificially by impacts, explosions, and industrial pro-
cesses [e.g., 45].
Seismic waves can be classified into two large groups:
surface and body waves. As their name suggests, surface
waves propagate through the Earth’s surface, while body
waves propagate through the interior of the Earth. The
principal’s body waves are the P-waves (primary or prin-
cipal) and the S-waves (secondary, shear). P-waves are
faster and are the first wave to arrive, presenting a lon-
gitudinal movement of compression and expansion, and
the particles of material affected by its passage move back
and forth in the same direction of wave propagation, like
an accordion. S-waves are a little slower than P-waves;
they arrive in the second position as a pure wave, their
movement is transverse (shear), and the affected particles
move in a perpendicular direction, vertically for SV-waves
and horizontally for SH-waves (for review see [e.g 46–48]
The instruments that record the Earth’s vibrations are
called Seismometers [46]. Their composition is equivalent
(nowadays, instruments are digital) to three masses held
by springs, each with a degree of freedom of movement in
the three spatial components: vertical, north-horizontal,
and east-horizontal. Each sensor can record the vibration
within a range of amplitude or intensity, frequency, and
duration (continuous or triggered by an event), which de-
pends on each instrument. This instrument is designed to
capture the Earth’s vibrations caused by earthquakes, in-
cluding body and surface waves that convey details about
the event’s magnitude and geometry and insights into the
Earth’s interior [46, 49]. Additionally, some seismologi-
cal stations continuously record environmental vibrations
of the ground, natural or artificial, called noise, which
do not correspond to specific seismic events. The sta-
tions are deployed all around the planet, and the seis-
mic records are open and free for everyone who needs
to use them [46]. Each station is generally connected to
multiple national and/or international seismological ser-
vices, such as the SSN of Mexico (www.ssn.unam.mx),
the CSN of Chile (www.csn.uchile.cl), the USGS of the
USA (www.usgs.gov), or EarthScope (IRIS and UN-
AVCO [50]), where the records are stored and available
in various formats.
A.
Type of the seismic data
The seismic information obtained to prove randomness
corresponds to two data types obtained from seismologi-
cal stations. The first corresponds to waveforms from dif-
ferent earthquakes, and the second corresponds to noise
recorded by certain stations.
1.
Waveforms
To obtain the waveform of the earthquakes, we selected
all the events between Mw = 6.0 and Mw = 7.0, from
1976–2021, with depths between 30–1000 km, from the
GCMT catalog [51, 52], which has a total of 2218 events.
For each earthquake, we downloaded, from the Earth-
Scope seismic service, the record of all the available sta-
tions in a range of 10 and 50 degrees of epicentral distance
(stations located at between ∼1000–5000 km from the
epicenter). It is important to mention that to increase the
aleatory of the data and due to the large amount of data,
we use all the available earthquake-station pairs that fol-
low the previous criteria (including those that may have
incorrect instrument responses or clipping signals).
Then, we transform the raw signal to displacement,
velocity, and acceleration and filter the signal between
0.1 and 200 Hz, obtaining the principal body waves
and the high-period signals.
Then, we cut the signal
with dynamic windows into two sections. The first win-
dow had been selected from the P-wave time arrival un-
til 15[s/◦] ∗∆after its arrival, with ∆the epicentral
distance in degrees, containing principally body waves.
The second window starts at the S-wave time arrival to
35[s/◦]∗∆after its arrival, where the surface waves would
be predominant [53]. Once we have cut the signal, we
unite (concatenate) each one of the time windows for all
the stations and earthquakes. Finally, we will have six
files corresponding to the two different time windows for
the three data types (displacement, velocity, and accel-
eration).
2.
Noise
For the noise signals, we selected stations close to
populated areas to increase the human noise in the
records. The seismological station selected corresponds
to Chile, Argentina, Iceland, Indonesia, Malaysia, Aus-
tralia, Nepal, India, and the USA, and the time window
corresponds to 24 hours, respectively. These instruments,
