5
eVB/Δind
P1
P2
P3
P4
SC 1
V!
SC 2
N
VB
a
Δ!"e#$!
Δ%&e#$"
Δ#'(e#$!
Δ#'(e#$"
b
3-terminal Model
c
d
𝑽𝑱
P1
P3
5
10
15
20
25
𝑦⃗
𝑧⃗
eVJ/Δind
eVJ/Δind
E/Δind
Ws
Ws
WN
Floquet Model
FIG. 3.
(a) Schematic of the 3-terminal model in which two
blue squares indicate two superconducting (SC) leads con-
nected to the green region representing the normal tunnel
junction.
The potential of the left SC lead is VJ, and the
right SC lead is grounded. The normal tunnel probe is indi-
cated by a green tip at the bottom. Orange arrows indicate
the tunneling current path, which is related to the DOS of
each SC lead.
(b) A cross-sectional view of the Josephson
junction with the superconducting pairing terms identified in
each region. The coordinates used in the numerical simula-
tion are labeled. y = 0 is located at the center of the junction.
(c) DOS as a function of VJ and the DC voltage VB on the
tunnel probe. Red and blue dashed lines are guides to the
eye, tracking two pairs of coherence peaks associated with
the SC leads. (d) DOS as a function VJ and energy of tunnel-
ing electrons calculated from the numerical simulation using
Floquet theory. White dashed lines indicate coherence peaks
centered around zero energy. On both positive and negative
energy sides, low DOS regions due to Floquet hybridization
are highlighted by two red dashed lines on each side.
DOS of proximitized InAs 2DEG. The total differential
conductance will be proportional to the sum of contribu-
tions from each NS interface. Additionally, we consider
the gap suppression due to the supercurrent and Zeeman
field, as shown in the supplementary materials section. In
Fig. 3(c), we plot the differential conductance as a func-
tion of VJ and the voltage applied to the normal tunnel
contact, VB.
In this calculation, two pairs of conduc-
tance peaks are observed, with each pair of conductance
peaks corresponding to the two coherence peaks associ-
ated with each SC lead. Since SC terminal 2 is grounded,
two coherence peaks (blue dotted lines in Fig. 3(c)) of
this terminal are centered around zero energy while the
two coherence peaks (red dotted lines in Fig. 3(c)) of
SC1 disperse with VJ. This simple model quantitatively
captures the main features seen in our data plotted in
Fig. 2(c).
(We note that the Tien-Gordon theory [19]
predicts additional multiphoton peaks, which we do not
observe.)
In addition, the suppression of the gap due
to the increase in supercurrent is qualitatively consistent
with the observations shown in Fig. 2(d).
Given the presence of the AC Josephson effect, one
may attempt to understand the appearance of four con-
ductance peaks in the regime 0 < eVJ < 2∆Al in the
framework of Floquet theory. For a gapped system driven
at an angular frequency ω, an additional Floquet gap
arising from the avoided crossing between the Floquet
sidebands is expected to appear at an energy given by
half the drive frequency ℏω/2 [8–11, 20].
The size of
the Floquet gap is related to the strength of the inter-
action between the Floquet sidebands [8–11, 20]. In a
Josephson junction with a time-periodic pairing poten-
tial, the size of the Floquet gap is proportional to the size
of the proximity-induced superconducting gap, which de-
termines the interaction between hole-like Floquet side-
bands and electron-like Floquet sidebands. The Floquet
gap will be heralded by the appearance of additional co-
herence peaks [10]. The results showed in Fig. 2(a) for
the energy separation between two apparent gaps and in
Fig. 2(d) for the decrease of ∆Vpair 1(pair 2), are qualita-
tively consistent with the Floquet theory [8–11].
To determine if the four conductance peaks observed
when a finite DC voltage is generated at the Josephson
junction are consistent with the Floquet prediction for
a driven SNS system, we perform a numerical simula-
tion of our device using combined tight-binding [21] and
the Floquet theory. In this simulation, we assume that
the superconducting phase of the left superconducting
lead, ϕL, is zero, while the phase for the right side is
ϕR = 2eVJt/ℏ, as illustrated in the cross section in Fig.
3(b). We then construct the Floquet Hamiltonian to ob-
tain the DOS as a function of VJ and the energy of the
tunneling electron [8, 10, 11, 22], as shown in Fig. 3(d).
More details of the simulation can be found in the sup-
plementary materials section.
The predictions of Floquet theory shown in Fig. 3 (d)
differ significantly from the experimental data in Fig. 2
(a). Although the simulation of Floquet theory success-
fully generates the primary spectral gap and the conduc-
tance peaks centered around zero energy, qualitatively
consistent with P1 and P3 in Fig. 2(a), the observed be-
havior of the second pair of conductance peaks, P2 and
P4, is not captured by the numerical simulation.
In-
stead, the Floquet model generates low DOS regions due
to partial Floquet hybridization that disperses to nega-
tive and positive energy as a function of increasing VJ.
These regions are highlighted in Fig. 3 (d) by red dashed
lines. Additionally, we expect the DOS to be symmetric
around zero energy due to the particle-hole symmetry of
the model, whereas the experimental data is asymmetric.
Although one of the figures in [8] indicates asymmetric
behavior, symmetric behavior is expected based on the
