Tools and methodology
49
is taken as an estimate of the missing higher orders, and it may be used for the construction of a
covariance matrix. Explicit expressions of the scale varied coefficient functions and anomalous
dimension, up to N3LO, can be found in [6, App. A]. In particular, we refer to renormalization
scale variation when varying ρ = ρr inside the partonic coefficient, while we consider variation
of ρ = ρf inside the anomalous dimensions as factorization scale variations. It is possible to
prove that scale variations factorize during the DGLAP evolution [6] and the scale-varied EKO
can be constructed as
¯E(Q2 ←Q2
0, ρf) = K

as(ρfQ2), ρf

E(ρfQ2 ←Q2
0) ,
(2.17)
where at NkLL (i.e. with the anomalous dimension computed at NkLO) the additional evolution
kernel K(as(ρfQ2), ρf) is obtained by imposing
¯E(Q2 ←Q2
0, ρf) = E(Q2 ←Q2
0) [1 + O(as)] ,
(2.18)
and expanding
K

as(ρfQ2), ρf

=
k
X
j=0

as(ρfQ2)
j Kj(ρf) .
(2.19)
Eqs. (2.17) and (2.18) mean that the effective scale-varied evolution kernel evolves from Q2
0
to ρfQ2, and then from ρfQ2 back to Q2, but with the latter evolution expanded out to fixed
NkLO. Let us mention that the procedure to perform scale variations is not unique and different
scale varied terms can either be included during the PDF evolution or in the coefficient function,
as pointed out in Refs. [6, 151]. In particular, in this work, we adopt the scheme B of Ref. [151],
taking the advantage that, both during renormalization and factorization scale variation, PDFs
are always evaluated at the initial unvaried scale Q2
0 which facilitate the fitting procedure.
Construction of the covariance matrix.
To construct a theory covariance matrix from scale
varied predictions we follow Refs. [152, 151]. First, we define the shift in theory prediction for
the i-th datapoint due to renormalization and factorization scale variation
∆i(ρf, ρr) ≡Ti(ρf, ρr) −Ti(0, 0),
(2.20)
where Ti(ρf, ρr) is the prediction for the i-th datapoint obtained by varying the renormalization
and factorization scale by a factor ρr, ρf respectively. Next, we choose a correlation pattern for
scale variation, as follows:
• factorization scale variation is correlated for all datapoints, because the scale dependence
of PDFs is universal;
• renormalization scale variation is correlated for all datapoints belonging to the same
category, i.e. either the same observable (such as, for instance, fully inclusive DIS cross-
