dimension D = −2/3. In contrast, the interactions studied in this paper were either marginal or
nearly marginal, rendering the one-loop integrals dominated by the UV and simple to evaluate.
There are several promising future directions: i) The scaling exponent γ in nk has been
measured in a range of experimental setups, both in weakly coupled and strongly coupled regimes,
see e.g., [30–36]. Can the results of Sec. 3 — with ϵ taken to be of order-one — be matched to
these exponents? ii) The exponent γ lowers the dimension of the interaction, making it possible to
have marginal interactions with a significant number of derivatives. A four derivative interaction
was studied in Sec. 3.3. More derivatives increase the number of marginal operators, which will
mix under RG flow, creating a potentially rich set of possibilities, similar to RG flow for theories
with multiple fields [37–41]. iii) While we focused on a single field, many physical applications
involve two fields, one of which is usually integrated out, making the remaining interaction appear
non-analytic. In the RG framework it would be more appropriate to keep both fields.
In nonlinear systems, it is common to introduce a dimensionless nonlinearity parameter, heuris-
tically defined as the ratio of the interaction energy to the kinetic energy in a state with occu-
pation numbers nk ∼k−γ [3, 42, 43]. For the Hamiltonian (3.1) the dimensionless parameter is
ϵk ∼λkkkknkkd/ωk, involving the ratio of the quartic to quadratic terms with the replacement
|Ψk|2 ∼nk. For the scaling λkkkk ∼kβ, ωk ∼kα, this gives ϵk ∼kβ+d−γ−α. This work has made
explicit that, in the language of quantum field theory, the dimensionless nonlinearity parameter
ϵk is simply the dimension of the interaction operator in the state with occupation numbers nk.
Indeed, the dimension of the interaction (3.7) is the power of k appearing in ϵk.
For weakly interacting theories, the occupation numbers nk for a stationary far-from-equilibrium
state can be found analytically, as reviewed in Appendix A. At strong nonlinearity there is of course
no clear answer for nk; a widely discussed — and sometimes empirically successful — scenario is
that of critical balance [44,45,6,46]. Critical-balance scaling postulates that once the nonlinearity
parameter becomes of order unity, it stops growing: the system attains “critical balance” between
the interaction energy and the kinetic energy. With the recognition that the power of ϵk is the
dimension of the interaction, we can restate this in the language of RG flow: critical balance scal-
ing conjectures that in either the UV or the IR, the exponent γ in nk ∼k−γ takes such a form
so that the interaction becomes marginal, i.e. γ = β+d−α. This paper has discussed the state
dependence of the dimensions of operators. The possibility that the state dynamically changes in
order to make interactions marginal is fascinating and worthy of further study.
Acknowledgments
We thank Greg Eyink, Grisha Falkovich, Xu-Yao Hu, and Daniel Schubring for helpful dis-
cussions. This work is supported in part by NSF grant 2209116 and by BSF grant 2022113.
18
