1
Introduction
For ordinary groups, the idea of anomaly resolution [1, 2] is as follows. Given a
theory T with some global symmetry G with a ’t Hooft anomaly, one replaces G
by a larger symmetry group Γ with trivially-acting kernel K, acting on the same
theory T , related by
1 Ð→K Ð→Γ Ð→G Ð→1,
(1.1)
such that the action of Γ is anomaly-free and hence gaugeable. Previous work
by several of the authors [3–6] has argued that by virtue of decomposition [7, 8],
gauging Γ in two-dimensional theories is equivalent to a disjoint union of theories
in which one gauges anomaly-free subgroups Hi ⊂G. Schematically,
[T /Γ] = ∐
i
[T /Hi]ωi ,
(1.2)
where ωi ∈H2(Hi,U(1)) are choices of discrete torsion.
This relationship was
given a completely systematic, predictive, expression in [5].
In this paper, we discuss examples of analogous resolutions in which the groups
above are replaced by noninvertible symmetries, deﬁned by fusion categories. We
discuss constructions from both the perspective of SymTFTs and also algebraically,
as exercises in exact sequences of (quasi-)Hopf algebras.
We leave systematic
predictions valid for all cases, analogous to those for ordinary groups in [5], for
future work.
We begin in section 2 by reviewing anomaly resolution for ordinary groups
and the role of decomposition [1–6].
In section 3 we describe a more general
procedure, in terms of (possibly) noninvertible symmetries, in the language of
SymTFTs. In section 4 we describe what is morally the same procedure from an
algebraic perspective, in terms of monoidal functors between (quasi-)Hopf algebras.
In section 5 we discuss how these two diﬀerent-looking procedures are equivalent
to one another.
Next, we turn to examples. In section 6 we discuss how anomaly-resolution
procedure for ordinary groups can be understood in the language of SymTFTs and
quasi-Hopf algebras, as a special case. In section 7 we turn to more interesting
examples, focusing especially on examples in which an anomalous Z2 is resolved
using a noninvertible symmetry group.
Finally, we collect some technical results in several appendices. Appendix A
discusses the ideas of missing charges and their relation with trivially acting sym-
metries. In addition we also give an example computation of reduced topologi-
cal order; appendix B deﬁnes condensable algebras and distinguishes them from
gaugeable algebras; appendix C deﬁnes exact sequences of tensor categories.
4
