8
the occurrence of the full KS near the A-A pattern and
the genuine SKS near the A-B pattern. Complications
arise in the intermediate situation (0 < δ0 < a0) where
the C6 or C3 symmetry breaks down to the Mx symmetry,
resulting in the delicate V1-V2 Kondo frustration.
Among many sliding-driven phenomena observed so
far, the most remarkable observation is the metallic state
in the SKS phase even at the half-ﬁlling.
A moder-
ately higher hybridization strength Vc,B < V < Vc,A is
required, and conventional perturbative treatment with
respect to V is not accessible to this region where the
Luttinger theorem is violated. In this sense, this metal-
lic state is strange, distinguished from the Fermi liquid.
Notice that in conventional heavy fermion systems the
conduction and valence hybridization bands are sepa-
rated by a ﬁnite Kondo gap, resulting in a Kondo in-
sulator at the half-band ﬁlling.
In the present model,
similar conduction and valence hybridization bands with
a moderate bandwidth could become active only below
the 1/4- or above the 3/4-band ﬁllings, both correspond-
ing to the low carrier density limit. For comparison, the
strange metallicity in the present SKS phase is due to
the in-gap hybridizing metallic state at the half-band
ﬁlling, characterized by a very narrow bandwidth.
It
is remarkable that such a ﬂat band accommodates a van
Hove singularity precisely at the Fermi energy at the half-
band ﬁlling, resulting in a divergent susceptibility at the
low-temperature limit.
Therefore, ferromagnetic order
and other interesting correlation eﬀects can be expected.
All these results enrich the general multiorbital Kondo
physics driven by breaking the inversion symmetry.
Landscape of band structures. By tuning the sliding
distance, a periodic evolution of such physics can be en-
visioned, and the successive transformation of the elec-
tronic band structures can be expected. As a function of
the sliding distance and interlayer hybridization strength,
the band structure exhibits a remarkable evolution as
schematically illustrated in Fig. 7. Here, Fig. 7(a) rep-
resents the band structure in the fully decoupled phase
for the relatively small hybridization strength V ; Fig.
7(b)/(c) represent the band structures in the full KS
phase for suﬃciently large V with two identical or dis-
tinct Kondo scales with or without the inversion sym-
metry, respectively; Fig. 7(d) the band structure in the
genuine SKS phase with a single non-vanishing Kondo
scale. Notice that in this phase the second in-gap band
closed to the Fermi energy is nearly ﬂat. Starting from
the A-A pattern with a moderately large hybridization
strength V , we can envision that upon sliding, both the
lower and upper Dirac bands (below or above the Kondo
gap scaled by r2) open a band gap (scaled by δ2x0) at
the Dirac points (located at corners of the hexagonal BZ
) due to the inversion symmetry breaking similar to the
situation in the multilayered graphene[59]. Near the A-B
pattern, one of the bands could be decoupled in a wider
parameter region. The bandwidth of the second band in
the three hybridization bands is proportional to r2
B near
the boundary of this phase, thus becoming nearly ﬂat.
−4
−2
0
2
Γ
M
K
Γ
−4
−2
0
2
Γ
M
K
Γ
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Γ
M
K
Γ
-0.01
0
0.01
(e)
K
M
Γ
k
x
k
y
(f)
FIG. 7. Evolution of the band structure landscape: (a) The
full-decoupled phase; (b) and (c) The full-KS phase with two
identical or distinct Kondo scales with or without the inver-
sion symmetry, respectively; (d) The genuine SKS with a sin-
gle non-vanishing Kondo scale.
Notice the in-gap band is
nearly ﬂat. (e) The ampliﬁed band structure of the nearly
ﬂat band in the A-B pattern, with the band top at the Γ-
point and bottom at the K-point. The Van Hove singularity
is located at the M-point; (f) The plotted momentum path
in the ﬁrst Brillouin zone.
The stability of the nearly ﬂat band in this SKS phase is
enhanced by the restored C3 symmetry.
Phase transitions by tuning electric voltage. Given that
the critical values of Vc,B and Vc,A are relatively large in
our previous calculations, it is also necessary to brieﬂy
discuss the tunability of the SKS. In the limit U →∞,
the f electrons are local magnetic moments as we as-
sumed. In the SKS phase, the eﬀective interlayer Kondo
coupling can be estimated by JK =
2V 2
|Ec−Ef| in this limit,
with Ec is roughly around the Fermi energy and E0 the
energy level of f electron’s. For the purpose of illustra-
tion, we have ﬁxed E0 = 5 in most of our previous calcu-
lations and the resultant Vc,B is about 1.5 ∼3.0. How-
ever, the relative energy diﬀerence Ec −E0 can be tuned
by applying the interlayer voltage Vg. In the homoge-
neous bilayer stricture, this can eﬀectively tune the elec-
tron densities in each layers. In the present heterostruc-
tre, it eﬀectively shifts the interlayer energy diﬀerence
to Ec −E0 −Vg, or equivalently E0 →˜E0 = E0 + Vg.
So increasing the voltage will increase E0 and in turn
