11
tracting the white noise power corresponding to the mean of
the noise distribution, which dominates the measurement at
high ğ‘˜values. [46] fitted the noise data for each redshift bin,
as estimated by [69], to a log-normal distribution. To assess
whether the noise flux power may be underestimated in the
data, [46] added an additional term to the theoretical model,
which accounts for deviations from the mean of the noise dis-
tribution. We model the noise in the same way, including an
extra parameter with log-normal priors, ğ´ğ‘§ğ‘–
noise, alongside the
power spectra predicted by the emulator as given by Eq. 4 in
[46]. This analysis excludes pure thermal relics with ğ‘šWDM <
3.82 keV (2ğœ), in agreement with [46].
Moreover, we recover the same behavior for ğ´ğ‘§ğ‘–
noise, which
remains largely insensitive to ğ‘šWDMâˆ’1 (that is, the free-
streaming effect), while exhibiting a correlation with the ther-
mal parameters ğ‘‡0ğ‘§ğ‘–and ğ‘¢0ğ‘§ğ‘–. This correlation with the IGM
temperature favors hotter models (see Table II), whereas its
anti-correlation with ğ‘¢0ğ‘§ğ‘–suggests a preference for later reion-
ization, implying smaller heat injection. Importantly, we ob-
tain mean values for the posteriors of ğ´ğ‘§=4.2
noise
= 0.72+0.98
âˆ’0.34,
ğ´ğ‘§=4.6
noise = 1.19+1.61
âˆ’0.85, and ğ´ğ‘§=5.0
noise = 1.19+1.65
âˆ’0.78, suggesting that
the noise in the data might indeed be underestimated. Com-
pared to [46], the 1ğœerror is broader, primarily due to the large
uncertainty in ğ‘‡0ğ‘§ğ‘–, which allows for a very warm IGM temper-
ature, thereby weakening constraints on the WDM mass. The
preference towards less heat injected (lower ğ‘¢0) is particularly
noticeable at ğ‘§= 4.6, as shown in Figures 9 and 10.
Regarding CWDM constraints, we find that the upper
bounds on ğ‘“WDM decrease by up to 25% (see Figure 11),
yielding very similar results to those obtained in the scale-
cut analysis as described in Subsection V B.
D.
Effect of mass resolution
Our emulator provides an averaged prediction of the abso-
lute binned flux power spectrum, as described in Section IV A.
Assuming that the box size and mass resolution corrections
are independent of the parameters in our flux models, we ap-
ply these corrections a posteriori, that is, after obtaining the
predicted flux power spectrum from the emulator. This cor-
responds to the default analysis resulting in the fit shown in
Figure 8.
However, this simplified method does not account for the
fact that the mass resolution correction depends on thermal
parameters. The missing small-scale perturbations in the flux
power spectrum are influenced by the initial perturbations in
this regime. These perturbations contribute to the formation of
small-scale structures, which are smoothed out in models with
more cumulative injected heat (higher ğ‘¢0). As a result, models
where the hydrodynamic response naturally suppresses small-
scale perturbations tend to be more numerically converged,
leading to a smaller resolution correction. This effect was ex-
plored in [46], which allowed this work to impose even tighter
constraints on dark matter free-streaming. We re-compute the
models and find that scenarios with earlier reionization re-
quire a correction that is about 5% smaller than that required
for colder models. This refined resolution correction is de-
noted as ğ‘…ğ‘ cdm (ğ‘¢0). In practice, we also apply this correction
a posteriori, interpolating in ğ‘¢0ğ‘§ğ‘–on the fly during sampling.
We find that including the thermal dependence in the mass
resolution tightens the posteriors in the thermal parameter
space while broadening the contours in the dark matter pa-
rameter space, ultimately leading to weaker constraints on
ğ‘šWDM and ğ‘“WDM. This conclusion holds for the default Gaus-
sian ğ‘‡0 priors, and when including ğ‘¢0 âˆ’ğ‘‡0 priors on top of
the default prior, with the latter exhibiting only a slightly re-
duced constraining power in the high ğ‘šWDMâˆ’1 regime due to
the posteriors in ğ‘¢0 âˆ’ğ‘‡0 being confined to the envelope of the
simulations. For a pure WDM cosmology, we obtain a lower
bound of ğ‘šWDM > 4.66 keV for ğ‘“WDM = 1 when accounting for
the thermal dependence of mass resolution, similar to bounds
found by [46]. The constraints on ğ‘“WDM and fixed mass bins
become weaker by 5-10% (Figure 11).
E.
Effect of patchy correction
We account for the effect of patchy reionization on the de-
fault analysis by repeating the inference using a new set of
emulators trained on models that include the patchy correction
described in Section III D. With default thermal priors, we
find that the data tends to prefer cold models with very low ğ‘¢0
values. This was observed in [46], and occurs due to patchy-
corrected models showing less structure at the small scales as
a result of the peculiar velocity field structure [115]. These
models therefore match a very late end of reionisation, even-
tually becoming unphysical. If we impose a ğ‘¢0 âˆ’ğ‘‡0 prior, the
posterior still shifts to lower values but within the envelope of
simulations, leaving more room for dark matter free-streaming.
The bounds on WDM now become ğ‘šWDM > 5.86 keV, with
little change of â‰¤5% on mixed models.
Adding the thermal-dependent resolution correction shifts
the posterior in the other direction, since resolution correction
increases flux power at small scales, increasing with decreas-
ing heat injected during reionization.
As a result, slightly
warmer IGM temperatures are allowed with ğ‘¢0, specially at
high ğ‘§, pushing the lower bound. As a result the constraints
slightly weaken to ğ‘šWDM > 5.11 keV with the ğ‘¢0 âˆ’ğ‘‡0 prior,
and to a lesser extent (ğ‘šWDM > 5.39 keV) with the ğœCMB
prior. We show this behavior in orange for the analysis with
thermal priors using ğœCMB, patchy and a thermal-dependent
resolution correction in Figure 7. We further note that the ğœ’2
does not change noticeably compared to the default analysis
when both patchy and ğ‘…ğ‘ cdm are modeled (see Table II). The
CWDM constraints, as shown in Figure 11, are stronger than
the other analyses and comparable to the default one. From
the 2ğœcontour in Figure 6, the patchy + ğœCMB + ğ‘…ğ‘ cdm (ğ‘¢0)
orange model is more inflated than the fiducial model towards
high ğ‘šWDMâˆ’1, yielding slightly weaker constraints at the fixed
mass bins shown in Figure 11. In general, the difference with
respect to other analyses is more noticeable in the intermedi-
ate mass bin, ğ‘šWDM = 3 keV, corresponding to the region in
Figure 6 where the degeneracy between ğ‘“WDM and ğ‘šWDMâˆ’1 is
stronger. While these models incorporate physical effects ap-
plied a posteriori, the resulting constraints remain unchanged,
