the study of tensor categories. Under this analogy, the projection to the trivial summand U0⊗U ∗
0
for the monoidal unit U0 = 1C corresponds to the dual conditional expectation ˆE : B1 →A
characterized by ˆE(e) = (Ind E)−11A, where Ind E is the index of E giving the relative size of
A over B0. This suggests that the ﬁniteness of Ind E corresponds to the property of DHR(A•)
being a fusion category, which we substantiate in Corollary 4.19.
Another key ingredient in our proof of modularity is a system of local operators called charge
transporters. This is an analogue of unitary intertwiners that shows up in the theory of algebraic
quantum ﬁeld theory to relate the endomorphism realizations of the same superselection sector,
and is a crucial ingredient in M¨uger’s analysis of such theories [M¨ug99].
In the context of
holographic topological order these have been called patch operators [IW23, CW23], and have
played a crucial role in the physicists’ approach to accessing the information that is contained
in the DHR category (which in the case of topological holography is the bulk topological order).
For a fusion category C and its Drinfeld center Z(C), the triviality of monodromy for an
object X ∈Z(C) and the distinguished object AC implies that the underlying C-object for X is
a direct sum of copies of 1C, which can be taken as a ﬁrst step for the proof of modularity for
Z(C). The above analogy between AC and B1 suggests that we should look at the monodromy
for X ∈DHR(A•) and B1 to understand the modularity question for DHR(A•). Indeed, the
triviality for monodromy with B1 implies that the charge transporters for X, with respect to
excitations in the positive and negative regions, belong to the subalgebra B0. Expanding on
this correspondence, we show that DHR(A•) is modular when B0 and the charge transporters
for the DHR bimodules generate the observable algebra A (Theorem 5.12).
We then look at the question of Witt triviality. The construction of fusion spin chains suggests
that DHR(A•) should be the Drinfeld center of the bimodule category C−for the subalgebra
A−⊂A, which is generated by the observables on the negative half line (−∞, −1]. The structure
of braiding on DHR(A•) leads to a natural tensor functor DHR(A•) →Z(C−). Now, looking
at the correspondence between the central vectors into A-bimodules and the morphisms from
the A itself as a bimodule, together with a consideration on charge transporters, show that
this functor is in fact full. This result could be viewed as the main result of the paper, so we
explicitly state a version of it here.
Theorem 1.1. Let A• be an abstract spin chain with charge transporter generation (see 4.10).
Then
(1) If A• is rational (see 3.3), then DHR(A•) is a fusion category.
(2) If in addition A• is locally aligned (see 5.6), then DHR(A•) is unitary modular tensor
category.
(3) If A• also satisﬁes algebraic Haag duality 2.2, then DHR(A•) is braided equivalent to
Z(C−), hence is Witt trivial.
We note that this last result contrasts with the case of conformal nets, where the DHR
category of superselection sectors is in general not Witt trivial, for example in the case of
conformal nets built from loop groups [Was98,Gui20]. However, even in the conformal net case,
we still expect DHR categories to be Drinfeld centers of some W∗-tensor category, which will
generically fail to be fusion [Hen17]. Indeed our category C−is very similar in spirit to the
W∗-tensor category used in the above reference.
In addition, our result gives a holographic conﬁrmation of expectations concerning the non-
chirality of local topological order. Indeed, local topological order essentially captures the class
of topologically ordered Hamiltonians that have a commuting projector representation, e.g.,
toric code, quantum double models, and the Levin–Wen models. It is largely expected to be
the case that the resulting modular tensor category for this class of topologically ordered spin
systems has no chiral anomaly, or in other words, is a Drinfeld center of some fusion category.
Let us summarize the structure of the paper. In Section 2, we provide preliminary details on
abstract spin chains. In Section 3, we recall some standard construction of algebras that will be
crucial to our discussion in next sections. In Section 4, we introduce the half-line category C−,
which serves as the candidate for witnessing the Witt triviality of DHR(A•). In Section 5.2,
3
