10
Fig. 12.
Specular reﬂection as a function of the common bias voltage for
the uniformly-loaded RIS. The incident wave illuminates the RIS from θ =
−15◦.
Fig. 13. Experimental characterization of the varactors through RIS measure-
ments with uniform loading: (a) A capacitance-voltage (C-V) curve extracted
from simulations is compared with the one extracted from the theoretical
spice model. (b) The normalized losses at 5GHz as calculated from the
measurements and from the unit cell’s simulation with an R = 3Ωlumped
resistance for each varactor.
Fig. 13(a) is preferred to determine the required voltages from
the optimized surface impedances/capacitances.
In addition to the capacitance value for different bias
voltages, the assumed model of a series lumped resistance of
R = 3Ωfor each varactor is veriﬁed through measurements.
Speciﬁcally, the drop in the measured S21 values at 5GHz
for different bias voltages Vc (or, equivalently, for different
capacitance values) is plotted in Fig. 13(b). In comparison, the
simulated losses are plotted for an RIS unit cell under periodic
boundary conditions, with an illumination from −15◦and a
lumped resistance of R = 3Ωin series with the varactor’s
capacitance. Both curves are normalized to their peak value
that is non-resonant and exhibits negligible losses. As ob-
served, the series lumped resistance of R = 3Ωis a reasonable
estimation at 5GHz, as the curves match closely, especially
for the capacitance values close to the resonance that exhibit
the highest loss. It is highlighted, that both experimentally-
extracted curves in Fig. 13(a)-(b) are approximate, as all
other parameters of the RIS (e.g., permittivity or loss tangent
of the substrate) are assumed to take their nominal values.
Additionally, they only provide an average estimation of the
varactors’ parameters, as a small detuning may exist among
the different varactors on the assembled RIS.
C. Beamsteering Measurements
The beamsteering patterns are ﬁrst measured to assess the
RIS ability to steer the incident beam with high directivity
(limited only by the aperture size) and low power losses.
As mentioned before, the frequency is set at 5GHz and the
illumination angle is −15◦. The optimized surface impedances
of Fig. 4 are converted to capacitances and applied DC bias
voltages using the experimentally-extracted C-V curve. The
set of 30 voltage values are applied to the RIS meta-wires and
the reﬂection is captured at different angles. The directivity
patterns for these untuned cases are plotted in Fig. 14(a).
It is noted that the retro-reﬂection case (θout = −15◦) is
not measured, as it is not possible to measure at a ±7.5◦
range around the transmitting antenna due to the two antennas
colliding with each other. Moreover, the specular case is
not optimized, but a measurement with all the voltages set
to 0V (producing a beam towards the specular) is included
as reference. As observed, the patterns show an efﬁcient
steering of the reﬂected beam up to ±60◦with the measured
directivities for each case matching closely with the expected
values in Fig. 5. The average illumination efﬁciency, as deﬁned
in Eq. (12), is 0.87 among the demonstrated steering angles
and the average power efﬁciency is 0.61, limited primarily by
the varactors’ losses.
In order to obtain the highest performance metrics from the
RIS, a tuning step is performed for each set of voltages. In
particular, the receiving antenna is positioned at the angle of
the expected peak radiation and the voltages are tuned through
particle swarm optimization at a tight range of ±0.25V around
their initial values. At every function evaluation, input is taken
from the VNA regarding the S21 transmission coefﬁcient.
Maximizing the received power through optimization leads to
a higher total efﬁciency of the RIS for each beamsteering case.
At the same time, the tight range is selected with the aim
to maintain the nature of the initial optimized solution and
only correct small issues stemming from the alignment of the
setup, the variation of the individual varactors’ properties, the
ﬁniteness of the RIS along the x-direction and any fabrication
errors. The tuned patterns are given in Fig. 14(b) and the
relative metrics are included in Table I that summarizes all
efﬁciency metrics both before and after tuning. On average,
the tuning increases the average illumination efﬁciency to
0.94% and the average power efﬁciency to 0.63. While tuning
provides a simple way to enhance the efﬁciency of the reﬂected
beams for beamsteering, it is also evident that applying directly
