SigChord: Sniffing Wide Non-sparse Multiband Signals for
Terrestrial and Non-terrestrial Wireless Networks
Jinbo Peng
jbpeng22@m.fudan.edu.cn
Fudan University
Shanghai, China
Junwen Duan
jwduan24@m.fudan.edu.cn
Fudan University
Shanghai, China
Zheng Lin
zlin20@fudan.edu.cn
Fudan University
Shanghai, China
Haoxuan Yuan
hxyuan22@m.fudan.edu.cn
Fudan University
Shanghai, China
Yue Gao
gao.yue@fudan.edu.cn
Fudan University
Shanghai, China
Zhe Chen
zhechen@fudan.edu.cn
Fudan University
Shanghai, China
Abstract
While unencrypted information inspection in physical layer (e.g.,
open headers) can provide deep insights for optimizing wireless
networks, the state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods heavily depend on
full sampling rate (a.k.a Nyquist rate), and high-cost radios, due to
terrestrial and non-terrestrial networks densely occupying multiple
bands across large bandwidth (e.g., from 4G/5G at 0.4-7 GHz to
LEO satellite at 4-40GHz). To this end, we present SigChord, an
efficient physical layer inspection system built on low-cost and
sub-Nyquist sampling radios. We first design a deep and rule-based
interleaving algorithm based on Transformer network to perform
spectrum sensing and signal recovery under sub-Nyquist sampling
rate, and second, cascade protocol identifier and decoder based
on Transformer neural networks to help physical layer packets
analysis. We implement SigChord using software-defined radio
platforms, and extensively evaluate it on over-the-air terrestrial
and non-terrestrial wireless signals. The experiments demonstrate
that SigChord delivers over 99% accuracy in detecting and decoding,
while still decreasing 34% sampling rate, compared with the SOTA
approaches.
CCS Concepts
• Networks →Network measurement; Mobile networks; •
Applied computing →Telecommunications; • Computing
methodologies →Neural networks.
Keywords
Landau rate, deep learning, compressed sensing, network monitor-
ing, sub-Nyquist sampling
Our code is open-sourced at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/Anonymous-A3F5.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
MobiSys ’25, June 23–27, 2025, Anaheim, California, US
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN xxx-x-xxxx-XXXX-X/25/06
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
ACM Reference Format:
Jinbo Peng, Junwen Duan, Zheng Lin, Haoxuan Yuan, Yue Gao, and Zhe
Chen. 2025. SigChord: Sniffing Wide Non-sparse Multiband Signals for
Terrestrial and Non-terrestrial Wireless Networks. In Proceedings of The
23rd ACM International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and
Services (MobiSys ’25). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 14 pages. https://doi.org/
XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1
Introduction
Wireless communication plays a vital role in modern network in-
frastructure, underpinning countless applications and services [9–
15]. In this context, a lack of precise situational awareness will
complicate management and undermine the ability to maintain
network quality [16, 17]. Therefore, physical layer inspection tools
are important in these environments. Such tools play a role similar
to the upper layer sniffing and monitoring tools [4, 17–20] which
help dissect and optimize network communication. Similarly, by
enabling researchers and network operators to analyze wireless
signals directly for deep packet inspection, these tools facilitate
better understanding, optimization, network configurations, and
protocol designs [21–23], ultimately improving the performance
and reliability of wireless networks.
However, current packet inspection tools, such as Wireshark [4],
provide narrow and isolated views of individual signals, lacking the
holistic perspective needed to address the complexities of modern
wireless environments, which are characterized by heterogeneous
networks sharing spectrum resources to improve spectrum utiliza-
tion [24–30]. On the one hand, terrestrial networks, including Wi-Fi,
LTE, and 5G NR, share the unlicensed spectrum around the 5GHz
band for flexible network deployments [31]. This leads to a complex
and dynamic environment, creating significant management chal-
lenges and making it increasingly difficult for individual systems
to assess and adapt to the coexistence of heterogeneous wireless
networks [31, 32]. On the other hand, the rise of non-terrestrial
networks has exacerbated these challenges. Low-Earth Orbit (LEO)
satellite networks, although typically assigned dedicated frequency
bands, have been observed occupying unlicensed bands, leading
to coexistence with terrestrial networks [33–35]. Furthermore, the
wide beam coverage of satellites often overlaps with multiple terres-
trial networks. In bent-pipe communications [36], satellites function
as relay nodes to extend coverage, further complicating the dynam-
ics of wireless coexistence and heterogeneity. Therefore, there is
arXiv:2504.06587v1  [cs.NI]  9 Apr 2025
