Under consideration for publication in J. Fluid Mech.
1
Banner appropriate to article type will appear here in typeset article
Uncovering flow and deformation regimes in the
coupled fluid-solid vestibular system
Javier Chico-V´azquez, Derek E. Moulton and Dominic Vella†
Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford, Woodstock Road, Oxford, OX2 6GG, UK
(Received xx; revised xx; accepted xx)
In this paper, we showcase how flow obstruction by a deformable object can lead to symmetry
breaking in curved domains subject to angular acceleration. Our analysis is motivated by
the deflection of the cupula, a soft tissue located in the inner ear that is used to perceive
rotational motion as part of the vestibular system. The cupula is understood to block the
rotation-induced flow in a toroidal region with the flow-induced deformation of the cupula
used by the brain to infer motion. By asymptotically solving the governing equations for
this flow, we characterise regimes for which the sensory system is sensitive to either angular
velocity or angular acceleration. Moreover, we show the fluid flow is not symmetric in the
latter case. Finally, we extend our analysis of symmetry breaking to understand the formation
of vortical flow in cavernous regions within channels. We discuss the implications of our
results for the sensing of rotation by mammals.
Key words:
1. Introduction
Rotational motion of the head in humans is perceived through the vestibular system, which is
located in the inner ear (Paulin & Hoffman 2019). For mathematical modeling purposes, this
system can be described as a set of three mutually orthogonal, nearly circular canals, known
as the semicircular canals (SCCs) in the anatomical literature (Oghalai & Brownell 2020;
Curthoys & Oman 1987). These canals resemble deformed tori, where the slender regions
are filled with a Newtonian fluid called endolymph. The larger region, termed the utricle,
houses a gelatinous protein-polysaccharide elastic membrane known as the cupula (Casale
et al. 2024), which is innervated by hair cells (cilia); the innervated cilia transmit mechanical
deflections of the cupula to the nervous system via the vestibular nerve (Waxman 2024). In
mechanical terms, a change in angular velocity about a given axis drives a fluid flow in that
canal, which generates a pressure gradient, deforming the cupula (and hence the innervated
hairs) and thus allowing the brain to sense the motion. Specifically, as the walls of the canal
rigidly rotate with the head, the fluid in the center is left behind, causing the cupula to deform
in the opposite direction to the imposed rotation. The mutually orthogonal structure of the
† Email address for correspondence: dominic.vella@maths.ox.ac.uk
Abstract must not spill onto p.2
arXiv:2504.06394v1  [physics.flu-dyn]  8 Apr 2025
