Fig. 2 The temporal evolution of ship-track width, Nd enhancement, changes in droplet effective
radius (∆Reff), and cloud optical depth changes (∆COD). Relative ∆Nd is shown here because that
is the variable used to calculate aerosol effective radiative forcing and the absolute change depends
on factors such as ship emission strength and background clouds.
We can study temporal evolution of ship-track properties and cloud adjustments
by composite analysis of segments with different ages using the space-time inter-
changeability assumption (see the Method section and [28]). Temporal evolutions of
ship-track width and Nd enhancement (∆Nd/Nd) obtained using our method closely
resemble those reported in the literature based on individual long tracks (Figure 2a&
b) [8, 16, 24], which indirectly validates the space-time interchangeability assumption.
Ship-track width, defined as the ratio of area over length of a segment, expands with
time rapidly at first, reaching more than 10 pixels within a few hours. Then it reaches
peak value of 14 to 15 pixels by 10 hours, and plateaus afterwards, which agrees with
previous results both in terms of timing and peak width[16, 29]. The fast horizontal
spread in the initial phase could be the result of effective mixing in the boundary layer
while the plateauing of the width may be related to the horizontal scale of mesoscale
cellular convection that limits further effective mixing [30]. We calculate ∆Nd/Nd
based on all cloudy pixels within a ship-track segment and its average is close to 60%,
which is consistent with values reported in the literature[12, 14, 19, 31–34]. Our mean
value of ∆Nd/Nd is lower than some in-situ measurements, possibly due to their lim-
ited sampling volume and a selection bias toward fresher plumes, among other factors.
The temporal evolutions of Nd perturbations follow similar trend of first increasing
with time and then plateauing, but it decreases with age as its age further increases,
especially after 10 hours. Similar temporal evolutions have been observed in individ-
ual large-tracks or invisible tracks [8, 16, 24]. The initial increase is likely due to the
time scales of gas to particle conversion such as from SO2 to sulfates. The decrease of
∆Nd/Nd with time may be due to wet deposition by precipitation, dry deposition of
particles, and diffusion. The temporal evolution of ∆Reff mirrors that of the ∆Nd,
which is roughly consistent with the Twomey effect. The temporal evolutions of mean
5
