B. Environment lights
For our texture generation setup, we utilize the HDRI light map visualized in Figure 7(b). In contrast, the Paint-it HDRI light
map, shown in Figure 7(c), represents an alternative lighting configuration. All the HDRI light maps used in this work are
publicly available for download from polyhaven.
C. Texture Synthesis Results in Verying Setups
In this section, we provide textures obtained with different diffusion model combinations to illustrate the impact of model size
and the role of super-resolution model. We also provide additional illustrations to compare our method to the baselines.
M
M + L
XL + L
XL
Figure 9. Textures obtained with middle (M) and extra-large (XL) diffusion models along with their versions improved with large (L)
super-resolution model on the second stage.
D. High frequency study in DIP
Our investigation into integrating Deep Image Prior (DIP) with our framework reveals certain limitations that affect its practical
utility in texture synthesis. Despite being computationally more expensive, our experiments suggest that DIP may not provide
sufficient benefits to justify its implementation costs.
As shown in Figure 11, spectral analysis conducted on the Objaverse dataset [12] demonstrates why the parameterization of
DIP performs poorly compared to our standard explicit approach. The spectral plot (Figure 11(a)) reveals DIP’s significant
deficiency in high-frequency components, visually translating to outputs with noticeably less textural detail and surface
variation. To further illustrate this effect, we provide additional examples in Figure 11(b) using two cow prompts, which
clearly demonstrate the degradation of the detail in the generation based on DIP.
This limitation in creating detailed textures further validates our choice of explicit parameterization, which achieves better
visual quality and quantitative metrics with less computational cost.
E. Visualization of PBR Texture Maps
Even though physically based texture improve the overall results, our method occasionally struggles to fully disentangle the
lighting effects. We visualize a few examples in Figure 12. For instance, consider partially baked highlights on the coffee
maker or the suitcase.
