ﬁned in Eq. 1. Since Aµ ≪AT when macroscopic mixing occurs at the BCZ, we essentially
have a direct measure of the temperature gradients from the inversion of the Ledoux discrim-
inant. Essentially, efﬁcient mixing of the chemical elements renders the Ledoux discriminant
to the Schwarzschild discriminant. The method is similar to that of Baturin et al. (2015)82 to
study the composition proﬁle at the BCZ, or that of Gough (2004)83 to determine the opacity of
a seismic model.
The reconstruction procedure yields density and pressure proﬁles consistent with helioseis-
mic data. As shown in Buldgen et al. (2020)51, an agreement of around 0.1% is achieved
for all structural inversions after the reconstruction. Using the obtained pressure (P) and den-
sity (ρ) along with the chemical composition proﬁle of the non-standard evolutionary mod-
els, deﬁned by the hydrogen (X) and heavy elements (Z) abundance, we infer the temperature
T = T(ρ, P, X, Z) at each point of the radiative zone using any equation of state available for
classical stellar evolutionary computations. We have assumed that the transport of chemical ele-
ments has been properly taken into account during the solar history by the non-standard models
ﬁtting the surface metallicity, the lithium and helium abundances at the age of the Sun.
Parametrization of the solar core
Buldgen et al. (2020)51 do not consider thermal equilibrium in solar models. As they rely on
adiabatic oscillation equations, direct constraints on temperature and chemical composition are
not provided. For more information and additional references on seismic solar models, we refer
to84;85;86. Assuming a speciﬁc equation of state enables the inference of “secondary” thermo-
dynamic variables like temperature or chemical composition (See e.g.,87;88;89;90;91). This study
aims to reconstruct a full opacity proﬁle from seismic inversions using the radiative transfer
equation. This is meaningful only if the energy production equation is satisﬁed—meaning the
right amount of energy is produced in the solar core by nuclear reactions—and if thermal equi-
20
