9
FIG. 4. ASI microstate control, global field and local scanning probe approaches. (a) The four possible vertex types in square artificial spin
ice illustrated schematically as macrospins/charge dumbells. Red and blue circles represent positive and negative magnetic charge (e.g., north
and south poles), respectively. System energy increases from type 1 (low energy) to type 4 (high energy). (b) Experimental magnetic force
microscope data showing ASI arrays prepared in type 1-4 vertex states, corresponding to the schematics in (a). Here, global field control
is used combined with bicomponent nanopatterning where an ASI array of wide (low coercive field) and thin (high coercive field) has been
fabricated to allow for expanded microstate control using simple global field control. Adapted from Ref. [71]. (c) Scanning electron micrograph
illustrating the bicomponent nanopatterning allowing the expanded global field microstate control shown in (b). Adapted from Ref. [71]. (d)
Schematic of local microstate writing via surface probe, using a magnetic force microscope tip. The local magnetic field from the tip apex
injects vortex core topological defects to nanoislands, resulting in magnetization reversal of the macrospin state of the nanoisland. Adapted
from Ref. [72]. (e) Experimental magnetic force microscope data demonstrating a complex ASI microstate written via local surface probe
control. Adapted from Ref. [72].
actions. This effective thermodynamics picture has been ex-
tended to describe the low-energy states that can be accessed
by field sequences86–88 but while such sequences have been
shown to reliably generate low-energy magnetic configura-
tions with small net moments, it seems that even in the limit
of very small field steps rotating field protocols cannot access
the ground state78,89.
This failure to reach true thermal states can be explained
using a network model90,91 where microstates are represented
as nodes connected by edges where a transition between two
microstates is possible through a single spin flip92 for which
the corresponding switching field is below the local magnetic
field strength.
It can be shown within this model that al-
though quenched disorder vastly increases the number of mi-
crostates that can be reliably accessed, non-random field se-
quences (e.g., linear field sweeps or rotating field protocols)
generally tend to end up in dynamical limit cycles localized in
a strongly connected component of the wider microstate net-
work. This is a result of the fact that athermal ASI systems can
only ever lower their energy in response to applied magnetic
fields, unlike thermally active ASI systems in which thermal
fluctuations may increase the internal energy to overcome en-
