which in turn vanishes by the equation of motion. Therefore, it is shown that the gauge
transformations are equivalent to the diffeomorphism transformations on-shell and as a result
the gauge transformations of the fields compensate those of the coordinate transformations.
Stating the result more clearly, the invariance of the action under the gauge transformations
ensures the general covariance of the theory. In addition, it is confirmed that the appropriate
group for constructing the 3-d gravity as a gauge theory is the ISO(1, 2).
3
Four-dimensional Einstein gravity as a gauge theory
The way the 4-d gravity is described as a gauge theory is less straightforward than in 3-
d, discussed in Section 2. Denoting again collectively the vielbein and spin connection as
a gauge field A, as it was done in the 3-d case, the expression of the E-H action would
have the form ∼A ∧A ∧(dA + A2) and such an action cannot be reproduced by a gauge
theory. However, one could build the Ricci scalar invariant using the curvature tensor, Rµνab
and an action including this invariant could be constructed recovering the E-H action [63].
However, there is still another indirect way to result with E-H action treating the Lorentz and
translational part in a unified way, based on intuitive and physical arguments. The idea is to
start from an action with larger gauge symmetry than the Lorentz and break it to SO(1, 3)
either by constraints or spontaneously (SSB) employing a scalar field. The natural choice of
the larger gauge group to be spontaneously broken to SO(1, 3) would be the Poincar´e group,
ISO(1, 3). However, the distinct behaviour of the translation generators does not allow a
full local gauge symmetry, as is the case of Lorentz transformations, thus another group has
to be employed, in which all the generators would be on equal footing. The two candidate
groups that fulfill this additional requirement are the dS, SO(1, 4), and the AdS, SO(2, 3),
groups, which moreover, both contain the same number of generators as the Poincar´e group.
Such actions have already been constructed, [33, 34, 40, 48] and following the SSB, they lead
to the E-H action with cosmological constant.
Let us be more explicit on the above.
First, as in the 3-d case described in Section
2, the vierbein formalism has to be employed for the construction of the gauge theory of
gravity. In absence of cosmological constant, the isometry group (symmetries of the metric)
of the Minkowski space-time is ISO(1, 3) (the Poincar´e group) and it is the one that will
be considered as the gauge group, in accordance with the three-dimensional case, where
isometry groups of the Minkowski, dS and AdS spaces were considered as the gauge groups.
The Poincar´e algebra comprises ten generators, four local translations, Pa and six Lorentz
transformations, Mab , satisfying the following commutation relations1:
[Mab, Mcd] = 4η[a[cMd]b],
[Pa, Mbc] = 2ηa[bPc],
[Pa, Pb] = 0,
(24)
where ηab = diag(−1, +1, +1, +1) is the four-dimensional Minkowski metric. Following the
standard procedure, the gauge covariant derivative is defined as:
Dµ = ∂µ + [Aµ, ·],
(25)
1The bracket notation implies the antisymmetricity of the indices inside, i.e. ηa[bPc] = 1
2(ηabPc −ηacPb).
7
