12
for pphys = 0.005, we find that when panc = 0.0025, the
physical state fidelity is 0.89 and the mean final training
accuracy is 0.82 ± 0.07, whereas when panc = 0.004, the
physical state fidelity is 0.82 and the mean final training
accuracy is 0.83 ± 0.02. The similarity in final training
accuracy despite clear difference in physical state fidelity
is most likely from using only 10 samples to determine
mean training accuracy and standard deviation.
Finally, we note that for both noise models, ancilla fi-
delities are lower than physical fidelities at the same error
rates. This is because there are more gate operations ap-
plied to the ancilla register than physical register, and
thus a higher chance of both gate errors and a greater
level of simulated environmental noise in the ancilla reg-
ister. The ancilla register thus accumulates more errors
than the physical register under both noise models.
3.
Error Detection and State Fidelities
We show the impact of error detection on the mean
physical and ancilla fidelities in Figures 8 and 9, respec-
tively, under the gate noise model and with varying Pauli
Error Rates on both registers. While there is slight im-
provement in ancilla fidelity after one round of syndrome
extractions, likely from removing the errors that would
have otherwise propagated from the physical to ancilla
register, the application of more syndrome extractions to
the physical qubits has minimal effect on ancilla fideli-
ties. Additionally, we notice that the physical fidelities
also plateau after approximately one set of syndrome ex-
tractions, and lower mean ancilla fidelities are associated
with lower mean physical fidelities, at their respective
plateaus. These observations support our earlier asser-
tion that ancilla errors impact the physical qubits in ways
that cannot be detected by the [[4,2,2]] stabiliser code.
More fundamentally, the Pauli errors that originate in
the ancilla register and are propagated to the physical
register through entangling gates may not remain Pauli
errors when they reach the physical qubits. It is these
non-Pauli errors that the stabiliser code is unable to de-
tect effectively, resulting in a maximum mean physical
qubit fidelity that can be reached even with error de-
tection, and consequently a maximum mean training ac-
curacy. We also observe very similar trends under the
environmental noise model.
We identified the ancilla fidelities corresponding to
the threshold Pauli Error Rates we established earlier:
panc = 0.003 and panc = 0.004. Since ancilla fidelities
tend to stabilise and plateau after one round of syndrome
extractions, we determined the threshold ancilla fidelities
by averaging the fidelity measurements taken at 1, 2, 3,
and 5 rounds of syndrome extractions, which should all
be close to the true ancilla fidelity at the threshold error
rate. Table II reports the mean ancilla and physical fi-
delities we measured in this way from the 4000-shot simu-
lations, at ancilla error rates slightly above, equal to, and
slightly below the thresholds. We included some ancilla
error rates more than once, with different physical Pauli
Error Rates. We generally find that the ancilla fidelities
remain roughly the same despite differences in the physi-
cal Pauli Error Rates. This is because after one round of
syndrome extractions is applied, the vast bulk of the im-
pact from the errors in the physical register is removed,
leaving non-Pauli errors that cannot be removed.
We
conclude from our results that the thresholds for mean
ancilla fidelities that correspond to the Pauli Error Rate
thresholds are 0.85 and 0.83, for the gate noise model and
the environmental noise model, respectively. The corre-
sponding proportion of states with fidelities near 0 and
1 at the thresholds are 12% and 82% for the gate noise
model, and 14% and 82% for the environmental noise
model.
It is important to highlight that these threshold fideli-
ties and Pauli Error Rates are dependent on the mod-
els we have used in this study. For different noise mod-
els and a different VQC, we cannot guarantee that the
threshold fidelities and error rates will remain in the same
ballpark. However, our insights about how errors inter-
act and propagate between ancilla and physical registers,
their limiting effect on error correction schemes and the
existence of a threshold error rate for ancilla qubits (and
associated ancilla fidelity) are highly relevant to the gen-
eral implementation of VQCs with error correcting codes
on both NISQ devices and fault-tolerant devices. Any
QEC implementation that relies on ancilla qubits for en-
coding and is limited in the type of error it can detect
and correct, will have a limiting error rate for which er-
ror correction cannot effectively protect the training and
prediction processes. This limit is in addition to the limit
accounted for by the Threshold Theorem.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
Through classical simulations of a 2-qubit VQC im-
plemented with the [[4,2,2]] code, we have demonstrated
that applying QEC can improve QML training accuracies
in noisy environments, proving that even in a non-fault
tolerant setting, QEC is useful for practical QML imple-
mentations. However, the effectiveness of error correction
is limited by the error rate of ancilla qubits. We can de-
fine a threshold ancilla error rate such that the QEC code
can reliably guarantee a reasonable final training accu-
racy if the ancilla error rate is below the threshold, and
such that above the threshold, training accuracies may
be poor and quite variable.
Under our gate noise and environmental noise mod-
els, respectively, we determined this threshold to be
panc = 0.003 and panc = 0.004, for a desired minimum
training accuracy of 0.90.
The ancilla fidelities corre-
sponding to these error rates are 0.85 and 0.83, respec-
tively. The threshold error rate for the gate noise model
compares favourably to the lowest single-qubit gate er-
ror rates exhibited by a NISQ device of 0.15%. Under
a more complex noise model with both gate noise and
