5
ally, the shifts in ∆(1/Q) and resonance frequency due
to TLS are correlated with the strength of local electric
fields, E, in the TLS region, Wlocal, as they are weighted
by the factor
R
Wlocal dr|E|2/
R
W0 dr|E|2 (see Supplemen-
tary Notes for details), where W0 includes all electric
fields generated by the resonator. Indeed, both γ and
−αqp + βTLS,1 show quadratic dependence on |Vlocal|.
The correlation between strength of the local electric field
and (γ, −αqp + βTLS,1) supports the interpretation that
the observed changes in the resonance characteristics are
TLS-induced. Here, we ignored changes of the permit-
tivity of the silicon substrate.
DISCUSSION
Finally, we summarize and propose microscopic mech-
anisms for the optically induced changes in ∆(1/Q) and
∆fr/fr.
The 515-nm photons incident on the super-
conductor generate quasiparticles in the superconduc-
tor, leading to the degradation of Q and decrease in
∆fr/fr (Fig.
5 (a)).
Simultaneously, the photons ab-
sorbed at the surface of the silicon substrate generate
non-equilibrium, high-energy phonons through the re-
combination of excited electron-hole pairs. The recom-
bination of quasiparticles in the superconductor can also
excite non-equilibrium phonons. These non-equilibrium
phonons destroy Cooper pairs and alter the state of TLS
via phonon absorption and emission processes.
Given
that most non-resonant TLS are in their ground state in
the absence of laser irradiation at 15 mK, this process
increases the average population of TLS, which results
in a similar situation to that of equilibrium temperature
increase. This is one of the reasons why ∆fr(Popt)/fr is
fitted using the function reproducing ∆fr(T)/fr. Mean-
while, changes in non-resonant TLS lead to fluctuations
in the resonant TLS frequency via TLS–TLS interactions
[37–42] (Fig. 5 (a)(b)). If TLS with resonance frequen-
cies close to that of the resonator (resonant TLS) expe-
rience enhanced frequency fluctuations due to TLS–TLS
interactions, then a larger number of TLS become effec-
tively coupled to the resonator, leading to an increase in
the density of states of TLS at the resonance frequency,
ρTLS(fr).
Considering both ∆(1/Q) and ∆fr/fr are
proportional to ρTLS(fr) (i.e., ∆(1/Q) ∝ρTLS(fr) and
∆f/f ∝ρTLS(fr); see Supplementary Notes for detailed
equations), the increase in ρTLS(fr) results in increases
in both ∆(1/Q) and ∆fr/fr as a function of the optical
power, which is consistent with the measurements. To
summarize, the linear shifts in ∆(1/Q) and ∆fr/fr are
attributed to the changes in the excited state population
of TLS and the increase in the number of coupled or res-
onant TLS with the resonator. This model also explains
that the shifts in ∆(1/Q) and ∆fr/fr are approximately
one order of magnitude larger than those expected from a
mere temperature change (see Supplementary Notes for
details on temperature dependence of ∆fr/fr).
In conclusion, we have successfully measured the spa-
tial and mode-dependent optical response of the high-Lk
microwave resonator. This method, based on laser mi-
croscopy, allows precise control over the irradiation po-
sition.
We have shown that the local optical response
of the microwave resonator strongly depends on the local
electric potential of the resonator, which can be explained
by quasiparticle generation, changes in the population of
TLS, and the frequency fluctuation of TLS induced by
non-equilibrium phonons. This understanding provides
new insights into the design and understanding of devices
involving both microwave and optical interactions, such
as quantum transducers and superconducting detectors.
Furthermore, the developed technique can be applied to
a superconducting qubit, contributing to revealing the
critical effect of particle irradiation that generate non-
equilibrium phonons on a quantum computing chip.
METHODS
Sample fabrication
The fabrication process of the NbTiN nanowire mi-
crowave resonator is as follows. First, a NbTiN thin film
of about 10 nm thickness is deposited on a hydrogen-
terminated silicon wafer by magnetron sputtering, where
the silicon wafer had a resistivity of 20 kΩcm or higher.
Patterning of the wafer is performed using an EB lithog-
raphy system (ELIONIX ELS-125) for the nanowire and
photolithography with a maskless aligner (Heiderberg
MAL150) for the large area such as bonding pads. After
forming alignment marks for the subsequent EB lithog-
raphy and photolithography, aligned to these marks, the
nanowire with a line width of 120 nm is patterned by
EB lithography using a 150-nm-thick positive EB resist
ZEP530A. Next, a 2-nm-thick MgO is deposited as a
mask layer for etching the NbTiN thin film using CF4
gas, and the ZEP530A is lifted-off using N-Methyl-2-
Pyrrolidone (NMP). Then, a large-area pattern is pat-
terned on the nanowire using photolithography, and the
NbTiN thin film is etched by RIE using CF4 gas. After
removing the photoresist using NMP, wet etching using
buffered HF is performed to remove the MgO mask layer
remaining on the nanowire. The line width of the fab-
ricated nanowire is checked by SEM observation. It is
found to be approximately 150 nm for the design value
of 120 nm.
Experimental setup
All experiments are performed in a closed-cycle di-
lution refrigerator (LD-400, Bluefors) in the presence
of an ambient magnetic field.
To reduce blackbody
radiation from the high-temperature plates,
a cop-
per plate with a 10-mm-diameter hole is mounted on
each plate.
The mixing chamber plate is maintained
