with 5 < n < 16) are selected to be weakly interacting with inner orbitals. A Detailed Line
Accounting (DLA) calculation is then performed for all transition arrays starting from that con-
ﬁguration. DLA calculations are only carried out for pairs of conﬁgurations that give rise to
fewer than 800,000 lines (with the maximum size of a J-block within a conﬁguration set to
4,000). For all other cases, transition arrays are represented statistically using Gaussian proﬁles
within the frameworks of Unresolved Transition Arrays (UTA)118 or Spin-Orbit Split Arrays
(SOSA)119. If the supershell contains at least one electron, transitions originating from the su-
perconﬁguration are treated using the Super Transition Arrays (STA) model117, ensuring that
no conﬁguration is omitted. The contribution of the supershell is thus kept as small as possi-
ble. The computational effort in SCO-RCG is now dominated by these detailed calculations.
As a result, the computed spectrum becomes less sensitive to the modeling of the remaining
statistical contributions (UTA, SOSA, STA). The Partially Resolved-Transition-Array (PRTA)
model121 has also been implemented, allowing for the replacement of many statistical transition
arrays with smaller-scale DLA calculations. These DLA computations are carried out using
the wavefunctions of the ”real” conﬁguration that was previously calculated. The electrostatic
variance due to passive subshells is added to the widths of individual lines of the DLA calcu-
lation. This approach has been extended to the STA formalism by temporarily excluding the
Rydberg supershell during the calculation, and adding its contribution to the widths of all lines
as a Gaussian “dressing function”. For instance, the calculation of the iron opacity in the solar
mixture at the boundary of the solar convective zone involves about 1,000 non-relativistic (nℓ)
conﬁgurations, 75,000 relativistic (nℓj) conﬁgurations, and 2 billion J-levels. The total number
of lines in the spectrum is approximately one billion, corresponding to 20,000 DLA transition
arrays. The statistical part includes 460,000 UTAs, SOSAs, and STAs.
Recent developments: inverse Bremsstrahlung and Stark effect
41
