2
duced plasmas in such EUV lithographic machines.
To start with a simplistic approach within our model,
the particles are considered conductors, monodisperse
and spherical in shape.
There are very small number
of dust particles in the plasma environment so that local
quasi-neutrality condition between electrons and ions are
valid. Depending on the bulk locations (inside or outside
of EUV beam) and time (during or after the EUV pulse),
the particles are charged through a balance between elec-
tron, ion and photon ﬂuxes. The charging equation can
be written as,
dZ
dt =
X
Iα
(1)
Here Z is the particle charge and I is the ﬂux for diﬀerent
plasma components α (= electrons [e], ions [i] or photons
[ph]). In our model, the electron ﬂux expression can be
written as:
Ie = πa2ne ×
Z r
2Ee
me
(1 −Y (φp, Ee))fe(Ee)
×

1 + eφp
Ee

Θ(Ee + eφp)dEe.
(2)
Here, Ie, ne, Ee, me are the ﬂux, density, energy and mass
for electrons respectively.
The parameter fe(E) is the
electron energy distribution function, Y is the total yield
of secondary electrons and Θ is a step function.
The
ﬂoating potential of the particle is represented as φp and
a is radius of the particle. In detail, the parameter fe(Ee)
represents the ﬂux of electrons with energy Ee to parti-
cle surface, Y (φp, Ee) ∗fe(Ee) is the ﬂux of secondary
electrons from particle surface released by incoming elec-
trons with energy Ee. The factor (1 + eφp/Ee) is the
collection cross section. Charged particle distorts trajec-
tories of incoming electrons. Positively charged particle
attracts electrons with larger impact parameter and vice
versa. Electrons with energy Ee less than |e ∗φp| can-
not reach particle surface with potential φp (if φp < 0).
Step function theta removes this electrons from integra-
tion procedure. In contrast, the ion ﬂux can be written
asssuming a thermal distribution of ions with a temper-
ature Ti,
Ii = πa2 X
i
ni(qi/e)vT i ×
(
exp(−eφp/kTi),
if φp ≥0.
(1 −eφp/kTi),
if φp < 0.
(3)
Here, Ii, ni are the ﬂux and density for particular ions
respectively. k is the Boltzmann constant and e is the
elementary charge. The ion thermal velocity is deﬁned
as, vT i =
p
kTi/mi where mi is the ion mass.
Similarly, the photon ﬂux to the particle can be written
as,
Iph = πa2γ(φp) I
hν
(4)
Here, γ is the photoionization yield (mean number of
electrons expelled due to single photon absorption), I is
the local EUV intensity at the particle. The correction
of a yield can be done by following factor,
γ(φp) = γ0
Z +∞
eφp
fph(E)dE
(5)
Here, γ0 is the yield in absence of charge on the particle
and fph is the energy distribution function of the emitted
electrons normalized by one.
Initially the charge state of all the particles located in
the bulk region are considered neutral. As the EUV pulse
propageates through background hydrogen gas, the EUV
induced plasma is formed. The spatial-temporal evolu-
tion of electron density in EUV induced plasma at the
beginning and end of EUV pulse is shown in Figure 1(a-
b).Then the particles start to interact with surrounding
plasma and gets charged or remains neutral which has
spatial and temporal dependency. Two distinct types of
particle charging mechanisms which depend on particle
location within RME and EUV pulse timing as shown
in Figure 1c: (1) the EUV photon ﬂux to the particle
plays important role along with electrons and ions ﬂux
when the particles are within EUV beam path and EUV
pwer ON. (2) the traditional charging mechanism (bal-
ance between electron and ion ﬂuxes from EUV induced
plasmas) occurs for particles located outside EUV beam
path when EUV power is ON and when EUV power is
OFF. The charge variation of 100 nm particle inside and
outside EUV beam in the bulk is shown in Figure 1d.
Furthermore, diﬀerent size particles interact diﬀerently
with the same background plasma. The spatial-temporal
evolution of charging-decharging dynamics of 100 nm, 1
µm and 10 µm particles are shown in Figure 2. Within
the EUV pulse, the positive charges acquired by the 100
nm particles are signiﬁcantly less than that of 1 µm and
10 µm particles.
Unline 10 µm particles, the positive
charge for 100 nm particles decay faster so that many
particles becomes neutral in this phase [Figure 2(a,c,e)
for comparison]. In this phase it is also clear that bigger
size particles acquire negative charge much faster than
smaller size particles which is reﬂected in the population
of negatively charged particles. The above chacteristics
of particles charge dependence on size gets even more
clarity in the afterglow phase as shown in Figure 2(b,d,f).
The transient population dynamics of neutral parti-
cles as well as diﬀerent polarity (positive and negative)
charged particles within a single pulse have been investi-
gated in detail which is shown in Figure 3. Considering
20 µs single pulse duration, the complete transient popu-
lation dynamics within each pulse can be divided in three
phases with diﬀerent time scales: The phase-1 exists dur-
ing EUV power ON mode (< 100 ns) during which the
population of neutral particles declines sharply (∼0.5%).
The interesting dynamics is associated with population
of negatively charged particles which declines up to 100
ns (∼0.16%) and then starts increasing. This is due to
the fact that the negatively charged particles from the
previous pulse are hit by the EUV photons within 100 ns
which converts them to positively charged particles. As a
