matter interactions [6–17]. The applications of metasurfaces have expanded to numerous domains as 
they enable one to control and manipulate light characteristics such as phase, amplitude, and 
polarization [18–21]. Metasurfaces design is traditionally based on the forward prediction of the 
optical properties using Finite Element Methods (FEM) and Finite Difference Time Domain (FDTD) 
methods. While accurate, these methods are computationally expensive, and optimization does not 
follow a completely systematic approach, especially for multi-parameters problems [22], which are 
typical of metasurfaces’ design due to the collective nature of their effect. Therefore, finding an ideally 
optimized design is difficult when the forward prediction is used. 
Machine learning algorithms are able to learning sophisticated relationships between the structural 
parameters of metasurfaces and their optical properties through datasets provided by simulation. 
Therefore, recent efforts have been incorporating machine learning approaches to metasurface 
design to achieve a more systematic optimization [23–25], enabling to reduce computation time 
significantly using systematic exploration of parameters, while predicting solutions for new design 
problems. It has been demonstrated that deep learning is more efficient than conventional 
optimization methods to predicting optical response of simple metasurfaces [26]. Machine learning 
has been also used for phase response optimization in research focused on optimization of binary-
coded metasurfaces [27]. A recent work incorporated an optimization algorithm into machine learning 
to design multifunctional metasurfaces, considering constraints such as dimensions and 
materials [28]. However, the standard machine learning methods, being purely data-driven, may 
struggle with physical constraints existing in optical systems, such as energy conservation and phase 
continuity. They may also predict non-unique solutions for the same inputs. Physics-informed neural 
networks are thus introduced to overcome such challenges by incorporating physical laws to the 
training process [29–34]. Incorporating the Helmholtz equation and neural network is utilized to 
optimize a solitary cylinder as a replacement for an array of cylinders while the structure maintains 
the same electric field response [35]. Recently, physical guidance within recurrent neural networks 
has been used to derive the resonant frequency of structures [36]. The physics-informed methods can 
increase the accuracy of the predictions, and use smaller datasets to training models [22]. 
In this research we propose a physics-constrained neural network specifically designed to include 
physical laws in the prediction of metasurface optical response. While previous physics-informed 
methods have made important contributions to metasurface’s machine learning, our approach 
embeds the unit circle normalization directly as a non-trainable network layer and effectively handles 
the challenging gap-dependent phase behavior, achieving high accuracy with small, imbalanced 
datasets of 580 and 1075 samples compared to several thousand typically required in previous 
works [37,38]. Unlike methods that use specialized weighting strategies for imbalanced datasets or 
