A Scalable Automatic Model Generation Tool for Cyber-Physical Network Topologies and Data Flows for Large-Scale
Synthetic Power Grid Models
XXX:3
• SAM-GT is scalable and validated with three synthetic power networks ranging from 500
to 10,000 buses.
• The models are created by SAM-GT include high-fidelity representation of the following:
– Communication protocols;
– Cyber devices such as firewalls and forwarding rules, routers and their internet protocol
(IP) configurations, and Ethernet switches;
– Special types of hosts found in utilities such as computers that host Human Machine
Interface (HMI) or SCADA master or database applications;
– Cyber-physical devices such as relays and relay controllers depending on the number
of buses in a substation as configured by the user.
• The process of creating the models is automated and configurable. This allows users to
generate and test different large-scale realistic cyber-physical power system models un-
der different network topologies, such as star, radial, and a statistics-based topology, and
configure the number of control centers and balancing authorities. It also allows users to
generate and test impacts of varying model features including different network topologies
and substation layouts on system performance metrics.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents an overview of electric and cyber-physical
synthetic models. Section 3 describes the communication model. Section 4 presents the process of
creating the cyber-physical network. Section 5 compares statistics of the 500, 2,000 and 10,000-bus
models, and discusses our findings and related work. This paper is concluded in Section 6.
2
Existing Test Cases and Models
This section is divided into two subsections: the first provides an overview of synthetic electric
grid test cases, while the second reviews cyber-physical test cases.
2.1
Electric Grid Models and Test Cases
Protecting power infrastructure is a priority for many countries, as they view their power grid net-
works as essential to national growth and security. Consequently, the components and architecture
of an active power grid are often kept confidential. Test cases have historically played a role in
evaluating new algorithms in power system research. Some of these test cases are available in the
IEEE format [1, 20]. These test cases are often small; they have fewer buses and lack geographical
information. Although these test cases have contributed significantly to seminal research, there is
a growing need to study electrical networks on a larger scale, better mimicking real-world power
grids. Several large-scale test cases have emerged in the past decade[2, 3, 10, 21, 23]. Since these
cases have fictitious information, they are called synthetic electric grids. Their goal is to mimic
the behavior of a real-world power system network, relevant data, such as geographic locations
and population density, are extracted from census information to guide the creation of realistic
synthetic grids.
The electric grid models contain information about the power network: buses with loads, gener-
ators, and transmission lines connecting these buses. The synthetic networks used in this work
can be found at [16]. This repository’s power system test cases contain a few hundred to 80,000
buses associated with substations containing geographical information. While the algorithm in
this paper to build a cyber-physical model can be applied to a power grid synthetic model of any
size, the results are shown for three synthetic cases as described below, also seen in Fig.1:
• the 500-bus case on the footprint of South Carolina: This case has 500 buses, 90 generators,
206 loads, and 468 transmission lines. It has a total of 208 substations. For this case, the
assumption made in this paper is that it has 4 utilities and 1 balancing authority.
