EDP convergence for nonlinear RDS
April 10, 2025
G. Heinze, A. Mielke, A. Stephan
assumptions on our reaction coeﬃcients. The proof of our convergence result is carried out in
Section 5. Here, we ﬁrst derive the compactness, before showing the claimed liminf-estimate.
Finally, Section 6 contains the detailed proofs of the chain rules inequality ﬁrst for discrete and
then for the continuous reaction-diﬀusion systems.
2
Abstract strategy
To improve clarity, before challenging the reader with the notation of our concrete problem, we
ﬁrst present on a formal and abstract level the strategy of our work.
2.1
Gradient systems with explicit abstract gradient mappings
We begin by introducing a quintuple (X, Y, G, E, R∗), called a gradient system. This notion is
a small modiﬁcation of gradient systems in continuity equation format introduced in [PeS23].
The elements of the gradient system are two pairs of base spaces X = (Xdom, Xtar), Y =
(Y dom, Y tar), where Xdom, Y dom are Borel subsets of a Euclidean space, and Xtar, Y tar are Eu-
clidean spaces. Test functions over these spaces are linked by an abstract linear gradient map G :
C∞
c (Xdom, Xtar) →C∞
c (Y dom, Y tar), with dual G∗: (C∞
c (Y dom, Y tar))∗→C∞
c ((Xdom, Xtar))∗,
which is sometimes called process-space to tangent map. Here, for Z ∈{X, Y } the dual pairing
is deﬁned as usual by
∀φ ∈C∞
c (Zdom, Ztar)
∀µ ∈(C∞
c (Zdom, Ztar))∗: ⟨φ, µ⟩Z := ⟨φ, µ⟩:=
Z
Zdom φ · dµ,
with · denoting the canonical inner product in the Euclidean space Ztar.
The fourth element of the quintuple is a lower semicontinuous (lsc) energy functional
E : M+(Xdom, Xtar) →R ∪{∞}, where M+(Xdom, Xtar) denotes the set of Xtar-valued,
component-wise non-negative Radon measures. The ﬁnal element is a dual dissipation potential
R∗: M+(Xdom, Xtar) × C(Y dom, Y tar) →[0, ∞], which, by deﬁnition, is lsc and non-negative
with R∗(ρ, 0) = 0, and satisﬁes for all ρ ∈M+(Xdom, Xtar) that ξ 7→R∗(ρ, ξ) is convex.
Fixing an arbitrary time horizon T > 0 and an initial datum ρ0 ∈M+(Xdom, Xtar), the gra-
dient system (X, Y, G, E, R) induces on [0, T] an evolution equation, the gradient ﬂow equation
∂tρ = G∗∂ξR∗(ρ, −GDE(ρ)),
(2.1a)
ρ(0) = ρ0,
(2.1b)
where DE denotes the variational derivative of E and ∂ξR∗denotes the convex subdiﬀerential
of R∗(ρ, ·).
By specifying R∗and E, the gradient system contains more information than the gradient-
ﬂow equation. Indeed, it is well-known that the same gradient-ﬂow equation can be derived
from diﬀerent gradient systems, each corresponding to a diﬀerent physical setting, see [Mie23].
Before further discussing the link between gradient ﬂow and gradient system, we comment
on the relation of the presented notion of gradient ﬂow with other notions.
Remark 2.1 (Link to other notions of gradient ﬂow). The presented notion is heavily inﬂuenced
by the gradient systems in continuity equation format introduced in [PeS23], the only diﬀerence
5
