instances of materials with free-atom like states serves as an illuminating test for the capability of this model
to generalize well to rare cases in the training dataset.
Figure 3: A visual representation of the three constrained generation tasks. (1) Masked generation: a
single atom of the structure is conditioned on Ni’s DOS, while the remaining atoms are left unconditioned.
(2) Template guided generation: Instead of complete random initialization, use an existing material as a
template. A subset of the template material’s atoms is then conditioned on Ni’s DOS. (3) Fixed atom type
generation: a single atom of the structure is conditioned on Ni’s DOS, but with its atom type held fixed
(e.g., pre-defined as Co).
3.2.1
MASKED GENERATION
In the masked generation task, we seek to match the target DOS for an arbitrary subset of atoms, while
allowing the DOS of the unconditioned atoms to vary freely, thereby enabling the generation of diverse
structures that still meet the specified constraints. Effectively, we are generating new local atomic envi-
ronments which yield the same desired DOS, which still come together to form a stable crystal structure.
Constraining only a subset of atoms rather than the entire material also allows for greater diversity in the
generated structures, without compromising on the overall goal of finding materials with free-atom like
states. We begin the generation procedure at starting timestep T = 1000, where AT , XT and LT are
sampled from their respective prior distributions. In the masked generation case, we constrain the number
of atoms to the set Natoms ∈{4, 5, 6, 7}, though this can be readily changed as needed. For each value of
Natoms, we condition the first atom using Ni’s DOS from Au3Ni, while leaving the remaining atoms uncon-
ditioned. We then generate 50 candidate structures for each Natoms and select a representative structure to
visualize its first atom’s DOS with the ground truth in Fig. 4.
NiKNSr
NiHo2N2
NiCd2Pd2S
NiBr2I3Mn
Figure 4: Density of states (DOS) for generated materials with Natoms ∈{4, 5, 6, 7}. The orange curve
represents the DOS of the first atom in each generated material, conditioned on Ni’s DOS from Au3Ni
(shown in blue). The element type of the first atom is indicated in red. Visualizations of all structures are
of a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell.
As shown in Fig. 4, the ground truth DOS of the nickel atom in Au3Ni features a centralized sharp peak.
Similarly, the four selected generated materials, each with a different Natoms, also exhibit a centralized sharp
peak near the ground truth. While the first atom in each generated material is explicitly conditioned on the
reference Ni DOS, the other atoms are free to adopt different element types and locations. Consequently,
the majority of the generated structures end up with Ni for the conditioned atom (even though it is not
explicitly specified), while the other atoms in the unit cell end up with many diverse compositions. This test
therefore successfully demonstrates the ability of DOSMatgen to recreate the Ni electronic structure within
Au3Ni in novel materials are dramatically different from the original reference material.
6
