6 Decay spectra for multilayer and monolayer
Ar@C60 coverage
In Fig. 5 of the main paper we show a comparison of the Auger spectrum for an
Ar@C60 multilayer and monolayer for which we have aligned the corresponding Auger
peaks and also subtracted a linear background from the spectrum for the Ar@C60
monolayer. For completeness, we show here (Fig.S8) the raw data before adjustment.
Ar@C60 monolayer/Ag(111)
Ar@C60 bulk film
Ar 2p3/2 → 4s 
on-resonance 
decay spectra
ℏ𝜔=245.3 eV
Fig. S8 Decay spectra for multilayer vs monolayer. Fig. 5 of the main paper shows a compar-
ison between the Auger/spectator decay spectra for multilayer and monolayer coverages, following
removal of a linear background and a shift of binding energy of the latter to bring it into alignment
with the multilayer spectrum. Here we show the raw spectra before adjustment (other than removal
of a constant background for display purposes).
7 Population analysis: Argon and carbon
contributions to the 4s excited state
We found that the quantification of argon and carbon contributions to the excited
state is less straightforward than one might have anticipated (or hoped for). Essen-
tially, we tackle the notion of “mixing of argon and fullerene orbitals” directly by
decomposing each orbital ψ(r) into contributions from the argon atom and the carbon
atoms in the fullerene cage. There are, however, many decomposition schemes, with
each giving different decompositions that have varying degrees of physicality.
The most popular decomposition scheme is that of Mulliken[19], which simply
computes the trace of the density matrix block corresponding to basis functions
centred on the atom of interest while ignoring all off-diagonal blocks (see also Section
3.9.3 of the Multiwfn manual). Even though this scheme gives reasonable results most
of the time, it is susceptible to producing negative decomposition values, which are
unphysical. The Ar-contributions to the relevant molecular orbitals in the ground and
excited calculations as calculated using Mulliken’s decomposition scheme are shown
10
