conclusion with β = 1.
By contrast, with K = 3 and (δ1, δ2, δ3) = (0.05, 0.45, 0.5), equation (10) yields α =
0.691397. This violates the condition α < maxk δk, making it impossible to obtain the Born
rule with these values of δk.
It is diﬃcult to provide a simple necessary and suﬃcient condition on δk that guarantees
β = 1 is feasible in Theorem 1.
However, for K = 3, one useful suﬃcient condition is:
If min(δ1, δ2, δ3) > (1 + 2e3/2)−1 ≈0.10037, then equation (10) yields an α satisfying α <
maxk δk, ensuring β = 1 is feasible.
Note that condition (i) in Theorem 1 must still be
satisﬁed independently. This simple example for a suﬃcient condition demonstrates that the
Born rule emerges for a substantial range of branching parameters δk, not just in isolated
special cases.
The speciﬁc value of α in equation (10) required for β = 1 appears arbitrary at this stage.
In Section 5, we show that the threshold ξt = ǫ αt with that value for α emerges naturally
when the threshold is determined endogenously within the model, providing a principled
justiﬁcation for the Born rule. Nevertheless, our discussion here has already demonstrated
that the Born rule can emerge from a simple branching process with small-signal truncation,
given appropriate conditions on the model parameters.
4
More general models
The goal of the previous section was to present a simple deterministic branching model with
small signal truncation that yields the Born rule (Theorem 1 with β = 1), without invoking
probabilistic concepts. In this section, we signiﬁcantly generalize the branching process and
introduce stochastic process representations in both discrete and continuous time, which
oﬀer various mathematical conveniences. However, the truncation threshold ξt will remain
exogenously speciﬁed as an exponential decay throughout this section. The extension to
endogenously determined thresholds will be discussed in the next section.
The process φt(b) deﬁned in (6) is entirely deterministic, in line with the argument in
Subsection 2.2 that all experimentally testable predictions of quantum mechanics can be
17
