16
ϕt = ϕe +ϕm =
π
λEt
Z
LV(r⊥,z)dz−e
¯h
Z
L A(r⊥,z)dˆz,
(32)
where V and A represent electrostatic and magnetic vector po-
tentials, respectively. Et is the total energy of the electron
beam, and integration is done along the straight line L aligned
with the incident beam. r⊥is a position vector which is per-
pendicular to the electron beam. The phase of the electron
wave is associated with the intensity gradient along the trajec-
tory under paraxial approximation, which can be satisfied in
Lorentz TEM since the Lorentz deflection angle is very small,
as discussed above. The relationship between the total phase
shift and intensity can be expressed by using the transport-of-
intensity equation (TIE)181,182,
∇˙(I0∇ϕt) = −2π
λ
∂I
∂z,
(33)
where I0 is the intensity of the Lorentz TEM image at the
in-focus condition, ∂I
∂z represents the derivative of the inten-
sity along the electron-beam direction (along the z-axis). The
derivative of the intensity is evaluated by taking a through-
focal series of Lorentz TEM images at under-focus, in-focus
and over-focus conditions, as shown in Fig. 9(c). The gradi-
ent of magnetic phase shift, ∇ϕm, is related to the magnetic
induction, which can be written as183
∇ϕm = −e
h(B⊥× ˆn)t,
(34)
where n is the unit vector aligned with the electron beam.
Therefore, the in-plane magnetic induction, which is perpen-
dicular to the electron beam, can be retrieved from the mag-
netic phases after removing the electrostatic phase shift, as
shown in Fig. 9(d). One way to remove electrostatic ϕe in-
volves flipping the sample over and taking a second image in
the same region, in which only the magnetic contrast should
reverse sign182.
Another approach is to use off-axis electron holography.
This technique uses the interference of two coherent elec-
tron beams from the sample and vacuum regions to generate
a hologram, which must then be post-processed to reconstruct
the magnitude and phase information176. The magnetic field
of square ASI can be resolved using this technique184.
The Lorentz mode in scanning TEM (STEM), such as dif-
ferential phase contrast185 and 4D STEM186 methods, can
provide quantitative characterization of magnetic induction B
with a better spatial resolution (∼1 nm) than Fresnel modes
(∼10 nm). However, so far, Fresnel imaging is more com-
monly used as the experimental operation is more straightfor-
ward (Fig. 9).
Lorentz TEM is most commonly used for the obser-
vation of the static magnetic microstates of ASI, includ-
ing the variation of local spin structures (such as domain
walls and vortex defects) within each nanomagnet or mag-
netic bars164,168,169,187, and interaction (stray field) between
nanomagnets167,173,177,184. On the other hand, one of signifi-
cant advancements of Lorentz TEM is the real-space and real-
time observation of quasi-dynamic magnetization, such as do-
main wall motion and changes in spin textures, under vary-
ing external stimuli, e.g., magnetic field, temperature, electric
current and field. Lorentz TEM studies have been extensively
leveraged to visualize the magnetization reversal behavior that
is driven by external magnetic field in ASI. It is straightfor-
ward to generate an in-plane magnetic field with respect to the
sample by using a magnetizing TEM holder and out-of-plane
magnetic field that is aligned with the optical axis in the mi-
croscopy by applying a current to the objective lens. The cre-
ation and annihilation of monopole charges and Dirac strings
in a square ASI have been investigated, unveiling that the
positive and negative monopoles are always paired and con-
nected by Dirac strings173. The aperiodicity was also found
to impact the avalanches of magnetization in a connected ar-
tificial quasi-crystal lattice, forming dendritic cascades178 as
seen Fig. 9(e). Furthermore, the field-driven behavior in a pin-
wheel ASI shows the coherent magnetization reversal which
is analogous to that in natural ferromagnets at a certain field
angle [Fig. 9(f)]168,179.
Other possible external stimuli that are compatible with
Lorentz TEM are temperature and electric current/voltage.
Thermal dynamics are important to understand physical
mechanisms of the formation of equilibrium states in ASIs
(see Sec. V B). Although the magnetic configurations of
the ASIs after a thermal quench were studied via Lorentz
TEM187,188, the in-situ imaging of thermal magnetization dy-
namics of ASI using Lorentz TEM have not been reported
yet. This research area has been extensively studied using
photoemission electron microscopy with X-ray magnetic cir-
cular dichroism (PEEM-XMCD)189, see Sec. VI B. The in-
situ electrical current/voltage-driven magnetization dynamics
in the ASIs is also intriguing for future potential application
in spintronic devices and can be achieved by using a voltage-
biased TEM holder. This research direction using Lorentz
microscopy still remains to be explored in the future. One
challenging issue for Lorentz TEM experiment is the sample
preparation. In order to be electron-transparent, the ASIs typi-
cally have to be patterned on a 30-100 nm silicon nitride mem-
brane, which makes the process of electron-beam lithography
more challenging (see also Sec. IV).
While still in its infancy we want to add that there are ef-
forts to use Lorentz TEM for studies of magnetization dynam-
ics, which are the focus of the next section (Sec. VI B). Here,
we note that real-time imaging of dynamic magnetization in
ASIs using Lorentz TEM represents an exciting, challenging,
and largely unexplored area of research. Magnetization dy-
namics span a wide temporal range, from ultrafast exchange
interactions at the 10 ps scale to slower domain wall motion
occurring over nanoseconds to hundreds of milliseconds.
Recent advancements in TEM techniques aim to enhance
the temporal resolution of imaging.
Ultrafast electron mi-
croscopy (UEM), for instance, employs stroboscopic imaging
with laser-excited190 or laser-free191 electron pulses, achiev-
ing sub-picosecond temporal resolution. An advanced laser-
free UEM by integrating a phototype RF electron beam pulser
