6
Figure 4. Examples of CBO for a randomized target Hamiltonian under different types of interactions. Shown is the pulse
optimization energy errors for 12 agents with non-optimized (blue) and optimized positions (gold). Energy errors stay high
for the non-optimized positions, whereas several agents for the optimized positions reach low errors. a) Dipole-Dipole energy
interactions, showing order magnitude lower errors. b) VdW gr-interaction, illustrating faster convergence when full optimiza-
tion is not possible. c) VdW gg-interaction, showing low errors for qutrit system. For all cases, Nin = 20, Nout = 20.
Figure 5. Varying of hyperparameters in CBO algorithm. a) pulse energy optimization for varying hyperparameters. b-e)
position evolution of varying hyperparameters, with color of top right square indicating corresponding pulse evolution in a). b)
normal hyperparameters of α = 4, σ = 0.1, λ = 0.4. c-e) position evolution for respective adjustment of hyperparameters α, σ
and λ. Qubits are colorized by index. For all cases, Nin = 20, Nout = 100.
D.
Randomized Hamiltonians
In this section, we illustrate the consistency of our
method by solving for a fixed Htarg for 20 instances of
initial configurations.
We then repeat this for several
Htarg, each of which constitutes an ‘individual problem’.
We want to compare the final results with the ran-
domized initial configurations.
However, as seen from
Figs. 2 and 5, the final configuration must always lie in
the simplex of the originally initialized configurations
(unless σ ≫λ). Therefore, the final configuration will
on average have smaller interatomic distances and thus
create more entanglement.
Thus, it is not entirely
fair to compare the random initializations to the final
contracted configuration.
For this reason, random configurations that are more
comparable to the final configurations are desired. Since
all initial configurations and Htarg considered are drawn
from the same distributions, we will estimate a probabil-
ity density function of all interatomic distances between
the final configurations.
