estimation in first quantization [29], but tackle real-time quantum evolution, a problem for which a more
limited suite of classical methods is available and the threshold of classical simulability occurs at smaller
problem sizes.30 Nonetheless, we expect that further algorithmic, compiling, and physics optimizations will
be needed to determine scientifically interesting and cost-efficient dynamical problems for early-generation
FTQC. For example, one may apply architectural optimizations based on active volume [92] in order to
reduce compilation costs that are dominated by arithmetic, as was recently shown in the context of energy
estimation [93].
The present work is the most in-depth study of the potential of quantum computers to probe entirely
new physical regimes via fully quantum mechanical calculations of a molecular system dynamics, with the
aim to understand (and eventually better control) catalytic chemical processes at a fundamental level. We
consider this as a milestone in a broader research effort, opening up a range of new venues that we broadly
categorize into three themes: simulating other elementary processes, handling the computational issue of
rare events, and the incorporation of additional physics.
Regarding other elementary processes, in this manuscript, we have focused on studying bond reconfigu-
ration/reaction mechanisms. However, the same concepts may be applied towards studying adsorption and
desorption processes. Note that a number of techniques and heuristics coming from less accurate theories
may be needed to accelerate the process so that the likelihood of an event is not too low, while retaining
the ability to extrapolate the true rates and/or infer binding energies. A combination of adsorption, bond
reconfiguration, and desorption forms the basic set of elementary processes that produces surface chemistry.
Our exact quantum dynamical simulations on short timescales might aid in discovering the types of struc-
tures that naturally occur due to the fully-coupled motion of electrons and pseudoions, although significant
work must be done on how to best synergize our methods with existing classical methods.
Concerning rare events, we indicated that if we simply initialize states according to thermodynamic
considerations our quantum algorithm may display low reaction rates, i.e. small wavefunction amplitudes
of states corresponding to non-trivial bond reconfigurations, since reaction events rely on fairly unlikely
thermodynamic fluctuations. Luckily, the challenge of having to sample from rare events in not an issue
specific to quantum algorithms, so one can take inspiration from classical techniques to mitigate this problem.
We have already taken steps to avoid inactive configurations in Sec. 2.2, but more can be done to lift classical
techniques into the quantum algorithm.
Finally, in terms of additional physics, in this work we have only considered isolated quantum systems,
with an ‘environment’ provided only by a limited number catalyst atoms mimicking the catalyst surface.
Real chemical reactions, however, critically involve thermalization and require notions of temperature and
pressure, thus necessitating further discussion of how to handle open system effects for realistic modeling.
Furthermore, there is increasing scientific interest in photocatalysis and plasmonic catalysis (and also elec-
trochemistry), which additionally require the inclusion of electromagnetic fields. Many reactions also involve
radicals and open-shell species that play a crucial role in determining reaction rates. Some of these settings
can be tackled within the framework described in this work or simple extensions thereof, but others (e.g.
inclusion of open system dynamics) require considerable further modeling and algorithmic development that
we leave to future work.
Author contributions and acknowledgments
Author and contribution lists are alphabetical. ML, BŞ, KS developed the initial state preparation, block-
encoding algorithm, and quantum chemical identification (QCI) protocol. FJ developed the initial state
preparation, provided guidance with chemical physics, developed the QCI protocol, and performed the
classical simulations to validate QCI. SP performed the compilation of the algorithm. BŞ, KS performed
the numerical resource estimation. KS envisioned and managed the project. All authors contributed to
discussing, reading, and writing the manuscript. We particularly acknowledge helpful discussions with Arvin
30Specifying a direct classical comparison is difficult since this type of exact dynamics simulation is seldom, if ever, considered
in conventional quantum chemistry. However, as discussed at the end of Sec. 1.2, we note that full configuration-interaction
real-time simulations with additional constraints such as the BO approximation as in [61] are still limited to just a few atoms
and for a few femtoseconds. Furthermore, Ref. [61] remarks that allowing joint electron and nuclear motion would allow the
study of charge transfer and chemical reactions, as we consider in this work.
53
