120
The Path to aN3LO Parton Distributions
This optimized approximation is shown at NNLO in Fig. 4.9, where we compare it to the exact
result for the massive gluon-initiated coefficient function xC(2)
2,g(η), expressed in terms of the
variable
η = Q2(1 −x)
4m2
hx
−1 .
(4.26)
Results are shown for two different values of the Q2/m2
h ratio, close to threshold and at higher
scales. Note that η →0 corresponds to x →xmax (threshold limit), while η →∞corresponds
to either Q2/m2
h →∞for fixed x (asymptotic limit), or x →0 for fixed Q2 (high-energy limit).
In this case the uncertainty band is obtained by varying the interpolating functions only.
The results found using the same procedure for the gluon and quark singlet coefficient functions
at aN3LO are displayed in Fig. 4.10, compared to the approximation of Ref. [78], each shown
with the respective uncertainty estimate. Good agreement between the different approximations
is found, especially for the dominant gluon coefficient function. The approximations agree in
the asymptotic η →0 and η →∞limits and in most of the η range, but differ somewhat in the
sub-asymptotic large η region at fixed Q2, which corresponds to the small x limit at fixed Q2.
These differences can be traced to the aforementioned inclusion in the procedure of Ref. [88,
79] of a particular class of NLL terms related.
The uncertainty involved in the approximation can be included as a further IHOU, alongside
that discussed in Section 4.1.2, through an additional contribution to the theory covariance
matrix. Namely, we define
covC
mn = 1
2 (∆m(+)∆n(+) + ∆m(−)∆n(−)) .
(4.27)
Here ∆m(±) is the shift in the prediction for the m-th DIS data point obtained by replacing the
central approximation to the massive coefficient function with the upper or lower edge of the
uncertainty range determined in Ref. [88] and shown as an uncertainty band in Fig. 4.10. Note
that unlike in Eq. (4.8), we divide by the number of independent variations, without decreasing
it by one, because the central value is not the average of the variations, and thus is independent.
The contribution Eq. (4.27) is then added to the IHOU covariance matrix as a further term on
the right-hand side of Eq. (4.8).
The impact of this contribution to the IHOU is assessed in Fig. 4.11, where the square root of the
diagonal component of the covariance matrix is shown for all the DIS data points in our dataset,
comparing the IHOU before and after adding to Eq. (4.8) the extra component Eq. (4.27)
due to the IHOU on the massive coefficient function. It is clear that the impact of IHOUs due
to perturbative evolution is generally negligible, in agreement with the results discussed in
Section 4.1.6 and shown in Fig. 4.7: IHOUs on splitting functions are only significant at small x,
but available small-x data are at relatively low scale where the evolution length is small. The
impact of IHOUs on massive coefficient functions is relevant for data on tagged bottom and
