Kuramoto meets Koopman: Constants of motion, symmetries, and network motifs
— Supplementary information —
CONTENTS
I. Introduction to the Kuramoto model under Koopman’s perspective
1
A. Different descriptions for the Kuramoto model
1
B. Koopman generator for the Kuramoto model
3
II. Monomial eigenfunctions and their conservation
4
A. Proof of Theorem 1: Monomial eigenfunctions of the Koopman generator
4
B. Monomials as constants of motion
7
C. Basic examples for Theorem 1 and the conservation of monomials
7
III. Conservation of cross-ratios
8
A. Introduction to cross-ratios
8
B. Cross-ratios as joint invariants of the special linear algebra
9
C. Functional independence of cross-ratios
11
D. Proof of Theorem 2: Cross-ratios as constants of motion
13
E. Basic examples for Theorem 2
19
F. Corollaries of Theorem 2
20
IV. Lie symmetries and the generation of new constants of motion
23
A. Proof of the Lemma: Infinitesimal criterion of symmetry under Koopman’s perspective
24
B. Basic symmetries of the Kuramoto model
26
C. General determining equations for the Kuramoto model
27
D. Determining matrix and its singular vectors as symmetry generator coefficients
30
E. Proof of Theorem 3: Symmetry-generated constants of motion
30
F. Basic examples for Theorem 3
33
I.
INTRODUCTION TO THE KURAMOTO MODEL UNDER KOOPMAN’S PERSPECTIVE
Koopman theory has been initially developed to formulate classical dynamics using linear operators on spaces of
observables—mirroring the structure of quantum mechanics [23–25, 28]. Despite this elegant framework, the theory
long lacked concrete theoretical examples for complex systems, where intricate interactions among many constituents
give rise to emergent phenomena such as synchronization. Since, moreover, these dynamical systems are transformed
into infinite-dimensional systems as a price to pay for having a linear operator, this casts doubt among many researchers
on the usefulness of Koopman theory. For these reasons, one of our goals is to provide concrete analytical results on a
widely-used dynamics on networks. For its 50th anniversary and its significant impact on the study of complex systems,
the Kuramoto model is a natural choice to achieve this goal. In this section, we introduce different descriptions of the
Kuramoto model and derive the Koopman generator K of the Kuramoto model presented in the paper.
A.
Different descriptions for the Kuramoto model
First of all, we provide more precise descriptions of the Kuramoto model. Note that we define a more general form
of the model than the original one [1] and even more general than the Kuramoto-Sakaguchi model (or Sakaguchi-
Kuramoto model if preferred) [5]. To highlight the original contribution of Kuramoto, we will stick to the name
“Kuramoto model”.
Definition S1. The Kuramoto model is an initial value problem of dimension N such that, for θj : T →E with
T , E ⊂R,
˙θj(t) = ωj + σ
N
X
k=1
Wjk sin(θk(t) −θj(t) −αjk) ,
j ∈{1, ..., N}
(S1)
θj(0) = ϑj ∈E
(S2)
