Consideration of the relative energies of the levels underpinning the core hole clock
experiment broadly supports the proposal of delocalization via mixing with SAMO
density. By comparison with the Ar 2p3/2 core level and HOMO binding energies, both
referenced to the Fermi level (EF), we find that the Ar 2p3/2 →4s resonance is located
4.80 ± 0.15 eV above the HOMO level (S.I., Fig. S1). This agrees remarkably well –
although see S.I. for a discussion of the role of core/valence excitons – with the band
structure calculations of Zhao et al.[25], which place the centre of the s-SAMO band
at 4.8 eV above the HOMO level (i.e. resonant with the (core-excited) Ar 4s energy).
We also note that our measured value of the Ar 2p →4s X-ray absorption resonance
for ∼1 monolayer (ML) coverage (see below) of Ar@C60 on Ag(111), viz. 3.2 ± 0.1
eV above EF, is identical to that reported by Dutton et al.[50] for the position of the
s-SAMO resonance of the 1 ML C60/Ag(111) system. Moreover, our measured on-
resonance value of τD = 6.5±0.1 fs for the bulk Ar@C60 film is entirely in line with the
4 – 20 fs range for the s-SAMO lifetime (for empty C60) determined by Zhu et al. [51].
Role of the Z+1 approximation
Argon in the core-excited 2p54s1 state is chemically very similar to ground state
potassium: this is the well-known Z + 1 approximation[41, 42] used extensively to
interpret core level spectra and core hole clock measurements. Given that, in turn,
potassium readily dopes the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of C60[43],
the rapid delocalisation of the photoexcited Ar 4s electron that we observe could
possibly arise from “transient doping” of the LUMO (although we highlight that, as
discussed in the preceding paragraph, the Ar 4s resonance lies significantly above
the LUMO energy). We have investigated this “K”-doping possibility at length using
ground state DFT calculations.
We computed the ground state of K@C60 at the PBE/6-31++G** level. Our results
are very similar to those previously reported by ¨Ostling and Ros´en[44]. In partic-
ular, we find electron transfer from the encapsulated K atom to the C60 LUMO,
resulting in the occupation of one of the previously vacant t1u molecular orbitals and
the close-to-complete (98%) deoccupation of the K 4s level (Fig. S9). However, in
addition to the energy of the LUMO level being more than 2 eV below that of the
Ar 4s resonance in our X-ray absorption and core hole clock measurements, we note
that the spatial extent of the K-doped LUMO is considerably smaller than that of
the photoexcited state shown in Fig. 3.
Moreover, and as described in more detail in the S.I., we find evidence for what we
consider back-donation of electron density from the C−
60 cage to the K+ ion. Figures
S9(a) and S9(b) show two occupied molecular orbitals that have significant mixing
between potassium and the cage, and that also incidentally have Ag symmetry in the
Ih point group. This effect is noticeably absent in the excited state of Ar@C60, where
apart from the distorted 4s molecular orbital, all occupied molecular orbitals reside
either entirely on the Ar atom or entirely on the C60 cage.
8
