Characteristic exciton energy scales in antiferromagnetic NiPS3
Jacob A. Warshauer,1, ∗Huyongqing Chen,1 Qishuo Tan,2 Jing Tang,2 Xi Ling,2, 3, 4 and Wanzheng Hu1, 3, 4, †
1Department of Physics, Boston University, 590 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA
2Department of Chemistry, Boston University, 590 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA
3Division of Materials Science and Engineering, Boston University,
590 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA
4Photonics Center, Boston University, 8 Saint Mary’s St., Boston, MA 02215, USA
Two-dimensional antiferromagnets are promising materials for spintronics. The van der Waals
antiferromagnet NiPS3 has attracted extensive interest due to its ultra-narrow exciton feature which
is closely linked with the magnetic ordering. Here, we use time-resolved terahertz spectroscopy to
investigate photo-excited carriers in NiPS3.
We identify the onset of interband transitions and
estimate the exciton dissociation energy from the excitation wavelength and fluence dependence of
the transient spectral weight. Our results provide key insights to quantify the exciton characteristics
and validate the band structure for NiPS3.
The van der Waals antiferromagnets have received sig-
nificant attention for their strong potential to be a build-
ing block in two-dimensional electronic and spintronic de-
vices [1, 2] and as nonlinear photonics devices [3]. In this
material family, NiPS3 is a particularly interesting case
due to its ultra-narrow linewidth exciton [4–6]. Although
the origin of this exciton is still under debate [4, 7–12],
the consensus is that this exciton couples to magnetism
[6, 7, 13–15] and is clearly different from the excitons in
conventional semiconductors.
Characterization of the bandgap and the exciton dis-
sociation energy of NiPS3 is crucial for understanding
the unconventional excitonic physics in this material. In
general, bandgap information can be obtained by equilib-
rium spectroscopic measurement. In reality, the bandgap
may be obscured due to the complex electronic structure
in strongly correlated materials, where many excited-
states of varied origin may overlap as a result of their
close proximity in energy [16–18]. To date, the existing
literature reports diverse values of the bandgap for NiPS3
[5, 8, 19–23]. As for the exciton dissociation energy, a
large exciton binding energy at the eV level has been
predicted in this material family at the monolayer limit
[24]. Experimentally, the narrow linewidth exciton per-
sists down to the trilayer, but no exciton feature is seen
in the monolayer [6]. Furthermore, the exciton dissoci-
ation energy for bulk antiferromagnetic NiPS3 remains
unknown. Therefore, probing the exciton band structure
in NiPS3 is in great demand.
Photo-excitation can provide critical insights into the
band structure of semiconductors and insulators.
The
pump fluence dependence of the photo-excited carriers
disentangle the underlying mechanisms through which
the carriers are generated, i.e., whether the carriers origi-
nate from single-photon absorption to unoccupied states,
or they come from two-photon absorption to higher en-
ergy levels (Fig.1(a)). The pump wavelength dependence
∗warsh@bu.edu
† wanzheng@bu.edu
of photo-excited carriers can more conclusively determine
the onset of interband transitions.
Here, we choose three excitation energies to drive bulk
NiPS3 single crystals out of equilibrium at 7 K: 1.476 eV
(resonant with the ultra-narrow exciton), 1.494 eV (reso-
nant with the magnon sideband of the exciton), and 1.610
eV (close to the optical bandgap) [4, 5]. In comparison,
we also conduct measurements at room temperature with
the same excitation energies, where the spin-orbit exciton
features are no longer present [4–6]. We use time-domain
terahertz (THz) spectroscopy to measure photo-excited
carriers as a function of temperature, excitation fluence,
and excitation energy. We evaluate the transient spec-
tral weight of optical conductivity, which is proportional
to the photo-excited carrier density. At low temperature
(7K), the pump fluence dependence of the carrier den-
sity is purely quadratic for all pump energies, which we
attribute to the two-photon absorption process. The ab-
sence of a linear pump fluence dependence suggests that
the bandgap is above 1.610 eV at 7 K. This observation
sets the lower limit of the exciton dissociation energy as
134 meV. At room temperature, the quadratic pump flu-
ence dependence persists, while a linear fluence depen-
dence sets in when pumping with 1.494 eV, indicating
that this excitation energy is above the absorption onset.
These observations provide key insights to the exciton
band structure for NiPS3.
Broadband THz pulses were generated by laser-ionized
plasma from a 35 fs Ti-Sapphire laser. The reflected THz
signal from a bulk NiPS3 single crystal was detected by
electrooptical sampling in a 1 mm thick ZnTe crystal.
The pump photon energies were selected by bandpass fil-
ters (10 nm bandwidth) from the same Ti-Sapphire laser
used for the THz probe [25]. The incident fluence was
varied from 0.45 mJ/cm2 to 3.20 mJ/cm2.
The THz
transient and the pump-induced change were simultane-
ously measured by two lock-in amplifiers.
A typical set of THz time-domain data is shown
in figure 1(b).
The light-induced change in the THz
field (∆E = Epump on
THz
−Epump off
THz
) peaks at a slightly
shifted position in comparison with the incident THz field
arXiv:2504.06053v1  [cond-mat.str-el]  8 Apr 2025
