5
The quality of the extracted correlations allows for
close comparison with DMRG calculations based on a
model S = 1/2 Hamiltonian for the material. For the
ρi correlation parameters corresponding to bonds in the
kagome plane, we can make direct comparisons to DMRG
calculated spin-spin correlations after weighting by the
bond abundances. For these calculations, we parameter-
ize the spin Hamiltonian [36]
H = J1
X
⟨ij⟩
⃗Si·⃗Sj + J2
X
⟨⟨ij⟩⟩
⃗Si·⃗Sj +
X
⟨ij⟩
⃗Dij·(⃗Si×⃗Sj), (2)
with J1 and J2 representing couplings over nearest-
neighbor and second-nearest-neighbor kagome sites and
Dz, the Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya (DM) interaction with
the DM vector pointing out-of-plane [37]. Setting J1 > 0,
panel (f) of Figure 4 shows a contour map over unitless
quantities J2/J1 and Dz/J1. The red region indicates pa-
rameter combinations where DMRG yields positive sec-
ond and third nearest-neighbor kagome spin correlations,
as observed in the data. This comparison suggests that
J2 is ferromagnetic with magnitude less than ∼5% of J1,
assuming a 0.1J1 bound on Dz.
For a more quantitative comparison, we integrate the
T=1.7 K data over ℏω=[1.3, 1.7] meV (a range with min-
imal impurity influence) to determine the kagome-only
correlations with improved statistics. We then use the
calculated DMRG nearest-neighbor correlations to set
the absolute scale and let the sum of squared differences
in the other two correlations be a loss metric. Setting a
conservative threshold yields the yellow region in Figure
4 representing parameters that most closely align with
the scattering data. This tighter region again indicates
that Dz and J2 are nonzero but small compared to J1.
The case J2/J1 ≫0 would drive q = 0 ordering and the
opposite case J2/J1 ≪0 would drive
√
3 ×
√
3 order-
ing over the kagome lattice [38]. The parameter space
for J2 and Dz that we deduce are consistent with Zn-
barlowite being in an intermediate region of the phase
diagram away from either type of order, consistent with
a quantum spin liquid.
KAGOME SPIN GAP ANALYSIS
In herbertsmithite, after impurity-induced effects are
taken into account, the intrinsic QSL state is believed to
have a spin gap characterized by an energy ∼0.8 meV
based on neutron scattering [13] and NMR [12] measure-
ments, with indications of spatial inhomogeneity of the
gap size [14]. Determining whether the QSL state in Zn-
barlowite is similarly gapped will also require accounting
for the impurity-induced correlations. While the analy-
sis shown in panels (c, d) of Figure 4 already hints at
changes in the kagome-kagome spin correlations around
∼1 meV, the persistance of the impurity-kagome corre-
lations prevent a direct observation of kagome spin gap
behavior.
To determine whether a spin gap exists in Zn-
barlowite, we employed the fluctuation dissipation the-
orem to derive χ′′(q, ω) from S(q, ω). Following the ap-
proach of Han et al. [13] we assume that χ′′(q, ω) is the
sum of contributions from impurity and intrinsic kagome
contributions that are separable in q and ω. Next, we
model the energy dependence of the impurity contribu-
tion as a damped harmonic oscillators (DHO) and that
of the kagome contribution as a sigmoid function (see
Methods for details).
FIG. 5.
Signature of a possible spin gap in intrinsic
kagome spin excitations. (a) Energy cuts of χ′′(ω) over
various high-symmetry positions scaled and modeled as de-
scribed in the text. Fitted function curves for each are shown
as dashed lines. Inset shows integration regions inscribed by
the q-region kinematically accessible at all reported energies.
(b) non-normalized data from (a) with DHO component sub-
tracted. Resulting sigmoid fits are highlighted showing similar
widths and centers consistent with a 1.1(2) meV energy gap.
(c) Subtractions of χ′′
K(ω) from χ′′
Low−q(ω), where the latter
is scaled such that the mean of the T=1.7 K data subtraction
is zero at energies in the hatched region. Subtractions with
this same scale are reported for T=1.7 K and T=40 K data
along with a fitted sigmoid for the former. Error bars in (a-c)
are propagated from counting statistics.
