A&A proofs: manuscript no. main
ported were LB-1 (Irrgang et al. 2020; Shenar et al. 2020) and
HR 6819 (Bodensteiner et al. 2020a; El-Badry & Quataert 2021),
both featuring low-mass stripped stars (≲2 M⊙). More recently,
bloated stripped stars of intermediate masses have been found
in systems like VFTS 291 (Villaseñor et al. 2023), SMCSGS-
FS 69 (Ramachandran et al. 2023) and AzV 476 (Pauli et al.
2022) in the Magellanic Clouds. Bloated stripped stars exhibit
cooler effective temperatures and larger radii than compact hot
stripped stars, making them brighter in optical wavelengths and
often indistinguishable from regular, that is, single B-type stars
based only on their positions in the Hertzsprung–Russell dia-
gram (HRD, e.g., Bodensteiner et al. 2020a; Villaseñor et al.
2023).
The envelope stripping of an initially more massive donor
star can invert the binary mass ratio, making the accretor star the
more massive but (seemingly) less evolved component in the bi-
nary, a process typically known as the Algol phenomenon. This
mass and angular momentum transfer is believed to induce rapid
rotation in the accreting star, potentially leading to the formation
of Be-type stars (Pols et al. 1991; de Mink et al. 2013). These
are rapidly rotating B-type stars with Balmer-line emission from
circumstellar decretion disks (see e.g., Rivinius et al. 2013; Riv-
inius & Klement 2024, for extensive reviews on Be stars). Vari-
ability of line strength and shape is a common feature of the
emission lines formed in Be star-decretion disks. Emission can
fully disappear and reappear on time scales of years to decades.
Variability on shorter timescales of a few days can be caused by
phenomena in the close circumstellar environment or on the stel-
lar surface (Porter & Rivinius 2003). The discovery of subdwarf
companions to several Be stars supports the idea that binary in-
teraction is the primary mechanism behind the formation of Be
stars (e.g., Gies et al. 1998; Peters et al. 2008; Chojnowski et al.
2018; Wang et al. 2023; Klement et al. 2024). Additionally, the
relative scarcity of main sequence companions to Be stars, com-
pared to regular B-type stars, strengthens the binary origin hy-
pothesis (Bodensteiner et al. 2020b).
Observational constraints on the stripped star population are
essential to address the uncertainties that persist in theoretical
models, particularly concerning the efficiency and stability of
mass transfer, modes of angular momentum loss, and the struc-
tural responses of donor and accretor stars to mass loss and
gain. Although binary population synthesis models predict that
Be+subdwarf binaries should be abundant (Shao & Li 2021), to
date only a few dozen have been identified, and even fewer have
been studied in detail. The low number of identified systems is
a consequence of challenges in detecting post-interaction bina-
ries. When the stripped star evolves into a hot but faint subdwarf
star, it is typically outshone by the Be star, making it difficult
to identify in the optical part of the spectrum. Furthermore, the
lower mass of the stripped star results in a low radial velocity
(RV) amplitude for the Be star, only marginally detectable in the
oftentimes variable and rotationally broadened spectra.
Most of the known subdwarf companions in Be star binaries
have been discovered using (far-) ultraviolet (UV) spectroscopy
(e.g., Peters et al. 2008, 2013; Wang et al. 2021, 2023). Al-
though subdwarf companions are faint in the optical, their higher
temperatures compared to the Be companions imply a relatively
greater flux contribution at shorter wavelengths (on the order of
a few percent). Therefore, detections are more favourable in the
UV (Götberg et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018).
In addition to UV spectroscopy, several stripped stars have
been discovered or confirmed through near-infrared interfero-
metric observations (Mourard et al. 2015; Klement et al. 2022,
2024). Long-baseline interferometry can detect stripped star
companions with low flux contributions (as small as ∼1%, Kle-
ment et al. 2022) and spatially resolve binary orbits. However,
current telescope setups, particularly their limiting magnitudes,
restrict these observations to bright, typically nearby targets.
Optical, multi-epoch spectroscopy offers a complementary
strategy for identifying post-mass transfer binaries, especially
for binaries where the stripped star still is in the bloated phase
shortly after detaching from mass transfer. Binaries like LB-1,
HR 6819 and VFTS 291 are examples of such systems, where
optical spectroscopy revealed the stripped nature of the compan-
ions. In these systems, the former donor stars are in the process
of contracting and evolving toward the subdwarf or helium white
dwarf stage but retain their inflated radii, making them compa-
rably or even more luminous than their Be star companions in
the optical. The stripped nature of the stars could be revealed
spectroscopically by anomalous surface abundances (in partic-
ular enhanced N and deficient C and O) and relatively small
surface gravities, leading to lower inferred spectroscopic masses
compared to regular B-type stars.
In this study, we present the binary system HIP 15429, which
was highlighted in the third data release of the Gaia catalogue
as a promising candidate for a dormant black hole companion
due to its high binary mass function (Gaia Collaboration et al.
2023a). Instead, our multi-epoch, high-resolution spectroscopic
and photometric analysis suggests that the system comprises a
bloated stripped star and a recently spun-up Be star compan-
ion. This system bears similarities to the bloated stripped star
binaries HR 6819 and LB-1, which were also initially suspected
to harbour stellar-mass black hole companions (Liu et al. 2019;
Rivinius et al. 2020). However, HIP 15429 stands out among
these systems in that it has a highly eccentric orbit (e = 0.52)
with a moderately long period (P = 221 days). Eccentric orbits
are unexpected for post-mass transfer binaries, in which tidal in-
teraction is expected to circularise the orbit. Understanding the
peculiarities of HIP 15429’s orbit and confirming its status as a
post-interaction binary will contribute to our understanding of
binary evolution and add to the landscape of post-interaction bi-
naries.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Sect. 2
gives an overview of the observations and subsequent reduc-
tion of the multiepoch high-resolution spectra obtained for
HIP 15429. Sect. 3 describes the observed spectral variabil-
ity and Sect. 4 the orbital analysis of the binary. In Sect. 5,
the results from the spectral disentangling of the components
are presented followed by the spectral analysis of the disentan-
gled single-star spectra in Sect. 6. A complementary photomet-
ric analysis of the binary components is presented in Sect. 7. In
Sect. 8, we construct binary evolution models to study the sys-
tem’s formation history. We discuss the implications of our re-
sults and, in particular, the orbital eccentricity of the system in
Sect. 9. Our main results are summarised in Sect. 10.
2. Observations and data reduction
We analysed 24 optical spectra obtained with the Tillinghast Re-
flector Echelle Spectrograph (TRES; F˝urész 2008) mounted on
the 1.5 m Tillinghast Reflector telescope at the Fred Lawrence
Whipple Observatory on Mount Hopkins, Arizona. The ex-
tracted TRES spectra cover a wavelength range ≃3900 to
7000 Å with a spectral resolving power of R = λ/∆λ ≃44000.
The spectra were extracted and reduced as described in Buch-
have et al. (2010) including bias and flat-field corrections and
wavelength calibration. We combined the spectra by merging
the individual orders with linearly decreasing/increasing weights
Article number, page 2 of 28
