tor v in (30) – indicates a fundamental anisotropy of space-time. As highlighted in (33), in QFT
with dimensional reduction, the vacuum possesses not only energy but also momentum along
a particular direction. Consequently, even though all the possible new effects are suppressed
by the scale M, the stress-energy tensor is expected to develop non-diagonal components. This
might impact the Friedmann equation, potentially suggesting non-standard cosmological ef-
fects, namely, departing from the cosmological principle [45]. Further exploration of this direc-
tion is compelling but beyond our current scope.
In summary, while phenomenological studies in the literature investigate potential effects
of varying dimensions [46], we believe our work provides the theoretical foundation for such
scenarios. A dedicated study will be needed to analyze further consequences for particle physics
and cosmology.
Acknowledgement
AM thanks Emanuela Pichelli for discussions during this work on the appearance of fractals in
the physical world.
A
S-matrix and Poincar´e invariance of the vacuum
This appendix highlights some known problems in building a consistent S−matrix in interaction
picture in QFT.
Equation (40) relies on the interaction picture where the free field, ϕ0, and the interactive
field, ϕ, are unitarly related:
ϕ(t,⃗x) = U(t0, t)†ϕ0(t,⃗x)U(t0, t) ,
(45)
and the vacua |0⟩and |Ω⟩of the free and interactive Fock spaces, respectively, are two distinct
vectors, e.g., as (39),
|Ω⟩̸= |0⟩.
(46)
In standard QFT, namely, in the absence of the fractality and reduction scale, the unitary op-
erator U(t0, t) exists only in the trivial case, with no interaction, for which such an operator is
just the identity. This result is known as the Haag theorem, heavily relying on the translational
invariance of the vacuum. It may be helpful to recall how this invariance leads to the no-go of
the theorem, following [35] – see [47] for a rigorous proof within axiomatic QFT.
For shortness, we denote U(t0, t) := U and call T0 and T the translational operator in the
free and interactive Fock spaces. The translational invariance of the vacuua reads,
T0|0⟩= |0⟩
T|Ω⟩= |Ω⟩.
(47)
16
