7
check failure.
They can repeat this method for arbitrary many times.
Thanks to the no-cloning theorem, leaking one of the se-
crets will not expose any other historical shared secrets
because no one can keep a record of the historical pho-
tons.
We may have realized that this method can be used to
transmit any message b rather than random b; and this
method generally works in any quantum protocol that
involves photon transmission.
If Alice wants to send an arbitrary message m, to fur-
ther secure the communication, Alice can use a post-
quantum symmetric key encryption scheme (e.g.
AES
[27]) to encrypt the message into a psuedorandom ci-
phertext b, then use b as the state section string.
V.
CONCLUSIVE GENERAL SOLUTION
We have shown quantum cover communication in con-
crete protocols. Note that these methods are not limited
to the discussed protocols, they can be applied to a broad
range of protocols, providing a general solution to quan-
tum covert communication.
Speciﬁcally, the method on BB84 can be applied to all
quantum communication protocols that involve a (pub-
lic) parameter estimation phase similar to BB84. For ex-
ample, E91 [20], DL04 [25], and many more. The method
on DL04 can be applied to almost all quantum commu-
nication protocols that involve photon sending and re-
turning. The method for subsequent covert communica-
tion can be applied to almost all quantum communication
protocols that involve photon sending.
Now we summarize the methods and conclude a gen-
eral solution to quantum cover communication that
works for most (if not all) quantum protocols that in-
volve photons sending and/or returning.
The controller is deﬁned as:
Controller V: It is a quantum computer that
bans classical public key cryptography and post-
quantum public key cryptography, and controls
quantum cryptography by demanding three secret
strings from the photon sender: the basis selection
string a, the state selection string b, and the Bell
state selection string c (if the protocol originally
uses entangled photons).
The solution to quantum covert communication under
this controller includes three stages:
1. Quantum Covert Key Distribution: Using en-
tangled photons similar to the revised DL04 (re-
gardless of whether the protocol originally uses en-
tangled photons).
2. Subsequent Quantum Covert Key Distribu-
tion: Setting the state selection string to be the
new secret intended to distribute, and the basis
selection string to be the common key shared via
stage 1.
3. Quantum Covert Communication: Setting the
state selection string to be the message itself or
the ciphertext of the message encrypted by a post-
quantum symmetric key encryption scheme using a
key shared via stage 1 or 2, and the basis selection
string to be (another) key shared via stage 1 or 2.
As we analyzed earlier, with the use of entangled pho-
tons, any third party, including Colin, will not be able
to detect covert communication, even if he requires the
sender to use pre-agreed strings a, b, and c. The pho-
ton sender can still use diﬀerent strings a′, b′, and c′ to
achieve covert communication and attribute all unusual
changes to Eve. Unless Colin can control any Eve or pre-
dict the behaviors of any Eve, he is not expected to have
any advantage in solidifying the existence of covert com-
munication. This completes our discussion of quantum
covert communication.
[1] M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang, Quantum computation
and quantum information (Cambridge university press,
2010).
[2] M. R. Garey and D. S. Johnson, Computers and in-
tractability, Vol. 174 (Freeman San Francisco, 1979).
[3] M. Sipser, Introduction to the Theory of Computation,
3rd ed. (Course Technology, Boston, MA, 2013).
[4] W. K. Wootters and W. H. Zurek, A single quantum
cannot be cloned, Nature 299, 802 (1982).
[5] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, Can quantum-
mechanical description of physical reality be considered
complete?, Physical Review 47, 777 (1935).
[6] C. H. Bennett and S. J. Wiesner, Communication via
one-and two-particle operators on Einstein-Podolsky-
Rosen states, Physical Review Letters 69, 2881 (1992).
[7] W. Heisenberg, ¨Uber den anschaulichen Inhalt der quan-
tentheoretischen Kinematik und Mechanik, Zeitschrift
f¨ur Physik 43, 172 (1927).
[8] W. H. Zurek, Decoherence, einselection, and the quan-
tum origins of the classical, Reviews of Modern Physics
75, 715 (2003).
[9] D. Dieks, Communication by EPR devices, Physics Let-
ters A 92, 271 (1982).
[10] W. Diﬃe and M. E. Hellman, New directions in cryp-
tography, in Democratizing Cryptography: The Work of
Whitﬁeld Diﬃe and Martin Hellman (2022), pp. 365–390.
[11] R. L. Rivest, A. Shamir, and L. Adleman, A method
for obtaining digital signatures and public-key cryptosys-
tems, Communications of the ACM 21, 120 (1978).
[12] P. W. Shor, Algorithms for quantum computation: dis-
crete logarithms and factoring, in Proceedings 35th An-
