9
This is a non-trivial technical requirement that must be considered when designing a real-world experimental implementation.
Since gravity is a very weak interaction, the minimum time duration of the experiment in the non-classical regions can be of the
order of hours or even days, as shown in Fig. S.4.
FIG. S.4. Minimum time required spectrally resolve the transparency window as estimated in Eq. (S.49). This figure assumes a linearized
Newtonian force and an experimental apparatus characterized by the gravitational critical frequency reported in Eq. (S.44). The red star
corresponds to the parameters of Fig. S.1. The black dotted lines are the borders between the quantum and classical regions analyzed in Fig.
S.2.
E.
Minimum effective transmissivity and minimum probe power
A further technical requirement is that the gravity-induced transmissivity cannot be too small since at least some photons of
the input signal must be transmitted through the channel to make any meaningful experiment. Using equation (S.45), we can
estimate and plot the optimal transmissivity in the full (ωB, Q) parameter space as shown in Fig. S.3.
Taking into account that the power of the input probe field is necessarily bounded (e.g. it must be smaller than the laser pump
power), we get the following lower bound:
num. output photons = (num. input photons)ηopt ≳1 ⇒ηopt ≥
1
num. input photons ≃
ℏωA
Pprobeτ,
(S.50)
where τ is the time duration of the experiment. Notice that this is not a limitation in the low-frequency regime where ηopt ≈1.
However, this is a severe limitation for any experiment in the high-frequency regime. If we fix the experiment time duration to
τmin as defined in (S.49), we can rewrite inequality (S.50) as lower bound for the probe power that must be injected into the GIT
channel in order to transmit at least a photon:
Pprobe ≥
ℏωA
ηoptτmin
,
(S.51)
The lower bound on the probe power is reported in Fig. S.5. We observe that the lower bound is irrelevant in the low-frequency
region but becomes very important in the high-frequency region.
