Swinging small quantum systems out of available values of
control parameters
Xikun Li1 & Tomasz Sowi´nski2
1School of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Anhui University
Hefei, Anhui 230601, China
2Institute of Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences
Aleja Lotnik´ow 32/46, PL-02668 Warsaw, Poland
E-mail: tomasz.sowinski@ifpan.edu.pl
Abstract.
When a quantum system is prepared in its many-body ground state, it can be
adiabatically driven to another ground state by changing its control parameter. However,
relying on adiabaticity is experimentally unjustified. Moreover, the target value of the control
parameter may occur outside the experimentally accessible range. The indicated target state,
however, can still be reached within a clever protocol of temporal changes of the control
parameter provided its decomposition into some basis is known. It turns out that such a
protocol can be obtained in the framework of the optimal control theory. In this paper, we
show how to apply such an optimization scheme to small quantum systems treating interaction
strength as the control parameter. We believe that the proposed approach can be creatively
extended to various complex quantum systems.
1. Introduction
The wide variety of exotic properties of many-body physics makes it a promising candidate
for tasks in quantum simulation, quantum information, and quantum computation [1, 2, 3].
To accomplish these tasks, it is desirable to have full control over many-body quantum
systems. Particularly important is possibly quick and robust experimental access to many-
body eigenstates of the system for a selected value of control parameter of the Hamiltonian
like the interaction strength, the intensity of external confinement, the value of the external
field, etc. [4, 5]. This possibility would open up a window for studying very exotic phases
of quantum matter that are not accessible for usual values of control parameters [6, 7].
Of course, from an experimental point of view, adjusting these extreme values of control
parameters is a huge challenge or even impossible. It may require very strong electric or
magnetic fields, huge laser intensities, or enormous electric currents. Therefore, it would
be very vital and promising to have a well-established scheme of reaching extreme-value-
parameter ground states by some time-dependent manipulations in a sufficiently small,
experimentally accessible, range of control.
In this work, we show that this goal can be achieved using the quantum optimal
control techniques, at least for relatively small many-body quantum systems. We leverage
arXiv:2504.07023v1  [quant-ph]  9 Apr 2025
