6
1
2
3
4
5
7
6
(a)
(b)
Single Waveguide Transit
Triple Waveguide Transit
Single Waveguide Transit
+ Single Ring Transit
Quintuple Waveguide Transit
Triple Waveguide Transit
+ Single Ring Transit
Single Waveguide Transit
+ Double Ring Transit
Quintuple Waveguide Transit
+ Single Ring Transit
Triple Waveguide Transit
+ Double Ring Transit
1
2
3b
4
5
6
7
3a
Fig. 5. (a) Schematic representation of the various possible paths the acoustic
signal can take from transmitter to receiver, arranged in chronological order,
grouped by temporal delay (b) Temporal transmission (blue line) of the pulley-
coupled ring device, along with a best-fit model prediction (red, cf. Appendix
A for details).
ring transit and its associated triplet transit (for ex: between
paths 3a and 4 in Fig.5(a)) and noting that the triplet transit
undergoes two additional reflections at the waveguide taper in-
terface in addition to the (known) propagation loss encountered
in traversing the straight waveguide section back and forth,
we can extract the interface (power) reflection coefficient (R).
Given the waveguide taper interface (dashed white box in Fig.
1(a)) stays the same, regardless of the waveguide-resonator
geometry, we can apply this procedure to extract R across
all devices to improve the estimate. We extract an overall
R ≈0.21±0.07, but find in practice, that there is a significant
device-to-device variation beyond what we can attribute to
fabrication imperfections, cf. Appendix A for representative
datasets. We would also like to clarify that, given the temporal
resolution of our system, we can only get a net reflection
coefficient and not the individual components due to mode-
mismatch at the waveguide taper interface, and the reflection
from the IDT fingers (Cr/Au) due to (mechanical) impedance
mismatch.
By fitting the overall temporal response using this procedure
as shown in Fig.5(b) and knowing the different trajectories
(with their different relative losses), we can extract the full
waveguide resonator coupling matrix [16], cf. Table I in
Appendix A. As expected from using the direct transit pulse
shape as a template, we get better agreement with predicting
the pulse arrival time, but our simplified model doesn’t fully
capture all the pulse distortion effects leading to differences
between the predicted pulse shapes and the experimental
measurements. We would like to note that some of the sources
of error are down to the intrinsic temporal resolution of our
experiments that makes some of these multipath events hard to
resolve (cf. events 5 and 6 from Fig.5(a)). A second source of
error in our model prediction is that we are simplifying some
of the interactions and not fully accounting for the complex
phase. For instance, the waveguide resonator coupling, even
for the pulley coupled device in Fig.3(a) is modelled using
an effective point coupling matrix [17]. These errors are not
detrimental in the current instance and can be used effectively
for parameter extraction, as evidenced by the better model
fit to the drop port data shown in Fig.6 for a 4-port device.
Fig.6 clearly shows the spectral and modal filtering effects of
the ring resonator as the fitting errors for the drop port data
(using this template model) are significantly lower than in the
through port.
As discussed above, interface reflection in a low-loss waveg-
uide platform is the main source of spectral (phase) distortion,
and while these time domain measurements can uniquely
pinpoint the different interference terms, it is an open question
how well they can be mitigated [1]. It is important to note
here that this interface reflection (R ≈0.21±0.07) issue
for PnICs is significantly worse than for analogous photonic
circuits (R ≪0.01). This is due to a combination of reasons
outlined in [1]: an intrinsically multi-modal system with slow
surface modes and the need to simultaneously satisfy electrical
impedance matching and acoustic mode matching constraints
[19]. Tackling this interface problem and ensuring one can
get GHz acoustic fields into and out of µm-scale devices with
near-unity efficiency is critical to ensuring that PnIC platforms
