14
W. Shen, Y. Ge, Z. Han, Y. Zhao and Y. Yang
(a) t = 0
(c) t = 0. 32
(b) t = 0.08
(d) t = 0. 8 
(e) t = 2.0
Figure 8. Temporal evolution of the isosurface of the swirling strength (Zhou et al. 1999) ğœ†ğ‘ğ‘–= 0.1ğœ†ğ‘ğ‘–,max
depicting vortex structures in a DNS of turbulent channel flow initialized with the SWAT field at Reğœ= 1000,
where ğœ†ğ‘ğ‘–,max denotes maximum swirling strength ğœ†ğ‘ğ‘–value in the flow field at a given time instant. The
friction Reynolds number Reğœcorresponding to each flow field is annotated in the circles shown in figure 7.
5. Conclusions
This study presents a systematic approach to constructing wall turbulence using hierarchically
organized hairpin vortex packets. The method is carefully designed and encapsulated without
adjustable parameters. It enables the efficient generation of SWAT at a range of given
Reynolds number while faithfully reproducing the coherent structures and key statistical
characteristics observed in wall-bounded turbulent flows.
Combining insights from numerical simulations and experimental observations, we employ
realistic hairpin vortices with geometrically complex centerlines and vortex core sizes that
vary along their centerlines as the fundamental building blocks of wall turbulence. Hairpin
vortices of different heights are then organized into vortex packets with spanwise meandering
structures. Using the attached-eddy model, these hierarchically structured hairpin vortex
packets self-similarly populate the wall with different population densities at varying scales
and levels. Additionally, wall-coherent superstructures within the largest vortex packets are
incorporated as very large-scale motions to account for the outer layer dynamics. Finally,
by carefully integrating inflow conditions and boundary constraints, the method generates
synthetic wall turbulence at any prescribed Reynolds number with minimal computing
resources.
Through direct comparisons with DNS data, the SWAT model successfully replicates
key statistical and structural features of turbulent channel flows across different Reynolds
numbers. It accurately captures the mean velocity profile, including the scaling in the
logarithmic region, without relying on external flow datasets. The log-law naturally emerges
from the collective behavior of hairpin vortices, while the transitions in the viscous sublayer
and buffer layer are self-consistent. Moreover, the model successfully reproduces the
anisotropic distribution of Reynolds stresses while preserving the correct scaling laws in
the logarithmic region.
Our results highlight that the inclusion of spanwise meandering and hierarchical vortex
arrangements enables the model to effectively capture the characteristic streaky patterns of
