This is computed by taking into account the Zel’dovich approximation for the nonlinear
evolution of density perturbations, Thorne’s hoop conjecture, and the probability distri-
bution for nonspherical perturbations derived by Doroshkevich; see [26] for details. The
original analysis [21] gave β(k) ≃0.02σ5
k, which was also later refined in [26] to obtain
the semi-analytical formula β(k) ≃0.056σ5
k, which is valid for σk ≲10−2. Two important
remarks are worth mentioning here (1) These estimations for β(k) are based on analytical
fits of full numerical computations under the assumption of small perturbations, so in this
sense, they do not capture the physics of scenarios with amplified perturbations. Thus,
since in this work, we consider amplified perturbations, we have derived in App. A, and for
the first time, an improved semi-analytical formula for β(k) valid for σk up to O(1) that
recovers the previous one for σk ≲10−2. This is given by:
β(k) =
A1 σ5
k + A2 σ6
k
1 + A1 σ5
k + A3 σ6
k
,
(3.1)
where the constants A1, A2, and A3 are defined in App. A. This is the formula for the mass
fraction that we are using in our computations. (2) the mass fraction must be computed,
for each k, at the time tk when the mode enters the horizon. This is obtained by assuming
that when a mode crosses the horizon the relation k = a(tk)H(tk) is satisfied, which during
a matter-dominated phase is given in terms of k by
tk ≃tend
kend
k
3
,
(3.2)
where we have used eqns. (2.4) and (2.5), and defined kend = a(tend)H(tend). Thus, using
(3.1), we can compute the mass fraction as a function of time and then relate it to the
fractional energy density in the form of PBH as follows [18, 20]
β(Mf) ≡dΩPBH(Mf)
d ln(Mf)
→
ΩPBH(Mf) =
Z Mf
Mend
H
β( ˜
Mf)d ln( ˜
Mf),
(3.3)
where Mf is the PBH mass at the moment of formation and the lower limit of the integral
is the horizon mass at the end of inflation, which corresponds to the smallest possible PBH
mass. As explained above, to not to overestimate ΩPBH, we must take into account the
time at which each perturbation enters the horizon and collapses. To do this, we relate the
mass of the PBH at formation, Mf, with the wavenumber k at the moment it crosses the
horizon using equation (3.2) as follows
Mf(k) ≃
4πγ
H(tk) ≃γMend
H
kend
k
3
,
(3.4)
where γ determines the fraction of the horizon mass that goes into the PBH (we assume
γ = 1 for simplicity) and Mend
H
is the horizon mass at the end of inflation. Using (3.4), the
wavenumber k can be seen as a “measure of time” and the integral in (3.3) is rewritten as
ΩPBH(k) = 3
Z kend
k
β(˜k)d ln(˜k),
(3.5)
– 7 –
