We also sought to determine if changing the frequency of the alternating current would alter the 
reaction. As such, we varied the frequency from 500 Hz to 10 kHz but kept the voltage and time 
constant (4 Vrms, 250 V/m, 3 h), and measured the resulting storage modulus of the gel. The 
resulting gels had a peak G’ at a frequency of 2 kHz and the modulus varied with the frequency of 
the electric field (Fig. 2c). This may be due to larger deformations when the structural resonance 
of the test samples coincides with the driving frequency. Previous literature on ZnO micro- and 
nanoparticles also showed a decreasing trend in both effective dielectric permittivity εr and 
effective piezoelectric coefficient d33 while  frequency increases26,35.  
To further explore the effect of the electric field on the organo-gel, we used a laser to measure the 
vibrational velocity of two thiol-ene organo-gels: one loaded with ZnO (piezoelectric semi-
conductor) and another one loaded with TiO2 (non-piezoelectric semiconductor) to serve as control. 
The results (Supplementary Fig. 18) showed no significant difference between the displacement 
of both samples. In the case of ZnO organo-gel, we theorize that the contribution to the 
displacement coming from the nanoparticles may be overshadowed by the displacement of the 
polymer matrix itself due to the dielectric elastomer effect or electrostriction. Additionally, both 
samples may have different structural resonances which means comparing excitation amplitudes 
between the two structures may lose meaning depending how close the excitation frequency of 2 
kHz is to its own natural frequency. 
To explore how gelation would vary with time, we evaluated the gels’ storage moduli in the 
gelation time window. The samples were exposed to a higher AC electric field (16 Vrms, 500 Hz, 
1000 V/m), and we tested their modulus every 30 mins. As expected, as the field was applied, the 
longer the reaction proceeded, the more crosslinking and a higher resulting storage modulus (Fig. 
2d) was observed. The gel stiffness progressively rises throughout the gelation time window, 
ranging from 330 to 764 kPa in modulus. This trend indicates that such a method could be applied 
to a kinetically controlled crosslinking network formation. 
We also explored how various ZnO concentrations affect the thiol-ene crosslinking reaction. First, 
we evaluated the gels’ storage moduli under electric field curing (16 Vrms, 500 Hz, 3 h). As 
expected, the modulus of the resulting organo-gels increased steadily with ZnO concentration, 
suggesting that ZnO enhances radical generation through the piezoelectric effect, promoting 
efficient crosslinking (Supplementary Figure 25). To rule out the possibility of ZnO acting as a 
mechanical filler, we subjected the thiol-ene mixture with varying ZnO concentrations to heat 
curing (100 ℃, 24 h) until the organo-gel got fully crosslinked. Data from Supplementary Figure 
26 show that the modulus plateaus beyond 1.5 wt.% ZnO, indicating limited mechanical 
enhancement from additional ZnO usage. These findings confirm that ZnO’s primary role is to 
facilitate crosslinking under electric fields through radical generation rather than serving as a filler 
material. 
We conclude from the above experiments that voltage, reaction time, frequency and ZnO 
concentration all play critical roles in the modulus-adapting via thiol-ene crosslinking reaction. 
Each of these parameters alters the modulus of the gel, indicating that the forming material 
responds to a range of electric input parameters. Taken together, we conclude that by manipulating 
