0.1
0.2
0.5
2.0
102
103
104
0.2
0.5
1
2
-4
-2
0
2
4
×103
Figure 5.
Left: n as a function of x = kτ with xR = 0.1 for the free theory (blue), the interaction theory
without regulator (green), and the interaction theory with the regulator γ (red dashed). The parameter ϵ is
set to 1. Right: The evolution of n (red), ξ (blue), η (green) for the free theory (dashed) and the interaction
theory with regulator γ (solid), here parameters ϵ = 1 and xR = 0.1.
modes and higher temperatures. Unlike in QED, however, the soft graviton mode is unconstrained in
this context. In particular, the inflationary paradigm predicts a scale-invariant primordial graviton
spectrum as the initial condition.
Although we used a scalar field as a toy model of thermal radiation for simplicity, this situation
is ubiquitous in the early universe, which was dominated by radiation. Therefore, our setup is quite
general. We found that superhorizon gravitons are resonantly amplified in the present analysis,
which contradicts the current observational status of primordial gravitational waves [3]. A potential
issue with this approach is the robustness of perturbation theory in the superhorizon regime, as
well as the subtlety of superhorizon gravitons.
To explore the physical picture, we first considered the same setup in the Minkowski back-
ground, where these issues do not arise. We confirmed similar stimulated emission effects in this
case. We also confirmed that our new calculations reproduce the perturbative results for small
interactions, and we observed deviation from the 1-loop perturbation theory as we increase the
thermal bath temperature. However, in the parameter space where stimulated emission is signifi-
cant, the backreaction to spacetime dynamics cannot be neglected. Thus, the FLRW background
is essential for discussing these effects.
As a conservative scenario, we considered a radiation-dominated universe just after instanta-
neous reheating, focusing on the graviton modes inside the horizon at that time. These modes
cannot be gauged away, and the system remains in the perturbative regime. We confirmed that
stimulated emission significantly alters the initial graviton spectrum in this context.
Regarding the secular growth of superhorizon modes 3, there may be mechanisms to suppress
the effect or schemes to find a reasonable resummed value consistent with the current non-detection
of primordial B-modes.
A promising direction could involve considering the treatment of soft
gravitons in an FLRW background. Free soft gravitons are considered an artifact of large gauge
symmetry for the exact k = 0 mode.
For finite-momentum modes in a decelerating universe,
these gravitons eventually reenter the horizon and generate an observable signature in the sky.
Hence, the role of large gauge transformations is more subtle for finite-momentum modes. Based
on this perspective, we propose a regularization prescription from a symmetry-based viewpoint.
3Similar secular growth is reported in Refs. [41–43] in other contexts of cosmological loop analysis.
– 18 –
