 
5
before and after filling with the ScannerPro app on an iPad Pro (6th generation). A horizontal 
“fill line” was placed along the inside of the regolith bin using white tape, in order to maintain a 
consistent volume and separation from the pipe exit. For PSI measurements at higher bulk 
densities, the regolith simulant was evenly sprinkled above the “fill line” and bulk density was 
then increased using a 12V electronic vibration motor affixed to the side of the aluminum 
regolith bin, opposite the clear acrylic splitter plate. With the entire regolith bin shaking, 
mechanical vibrations at rates between 20-40 Hz were used for various durations between 5 – 
300 seconds, in order to compact the regolith simulants so that the surface was even with the 
horizontal “fill line”, resulting in higher bulk densities.  
The density of each regolith simulant was directly measured inside the regolith bin, prior 
to PSI flow measurements, using gamma-ray spectroscopy. Adapting the techniques developed 
by Santo & Tsuji (1977), a custom, removable, gamma-ray spectroscopy setup was used to non-
destructively measure the attenuation of gamma-rays through the regolith bin and regolith 
sample prior to each run. This setup used a 10 μCi sample of radioactive Cesium-137 to emit 
gamma-rays that could be measured using a 3.8 cm x 3.8 cm NaI(Tl) crystal gamma ray 
scintillation detector (with a detectable range up to 10,000 keV), separated by a vertical 
translation stage (with 0.1 cm markings). Before taking sample measurements, background 
gamma ray spectra were taken at a fixed separation distance (without the sample or regolith 
bin), as well as with the empty aluminum regolith bin and regolith bin with regolith simulant 
inside. Gamma-ray spectra were recorded using an observation time of 600 seconds and bin 
width of 0.0001 keV, before being analyzed using the Pulse Recorder and Analyzer (PRA) 
software, and curve fitting with a 3-5 term gaussian applied to the characteristic monatomic 
spectral feature near 662 keV for radioactive Cesium-137 in Matlab. This removable, gamma-
ray, density measuring setup was calibrated by measuring samples of LHS-1, LMS-1, LHS-1D, 
and 40-80 µm glass beads at known densities (from mass and volume) in both a small-scale 
regolith container, as well as an aluminum regolith bin of identical scale and design. For all 
measurements, a minimum of 3 separate spectra, with observation times of 600s, were taken 
for each density and averaged. 
After sample preparation and density measurements, non-reacting flow of compressed 
air was initiated using a 12V switch, connected to the electronic solenoid valve, with 
corresponding pressure and mass flow measurements measured in-line. The exhaust flow was 
then split by the clear acrylic splitter plate so the side profile of PSI crater development could 
be recorded using a GoPro Hero 7 camera with a frame rate set to 60 and 240 fps. The splitter 
plate has a 2.5 cm beveled edge, which angles away from the regolith bin at a 45 deg angle, and 
a straight edge on opposite side as shown in Figure 2, to reduce any disturbances to the 
impinged surface flow as much as possible. Monitoring crater formation with various regolith 
simulants at a set bulk density, video tracking of the crater shape and ejected material was 
completed using image analysis techniques developed in Python to determine the crater depth 
(H), crater width (w), and crater volume (V) as a function of time throughout the PSI event. This 
image analysis technique leveraged edge detection for extracted frames to trace the outline of 
the crater shape and depth over time, as shown in Figure 3. Similar crater depth tracing was 
performed manually using Engauge Digitizer software for each run, examining frames every 0.5 
seconds, to confirm the correct output of the automated Python edge detection analysis. By 
placing scale bars and a grid pattern on the front of the regolith box, crater depth was 
