6
property of not expanding upon release of the trapping
potential V (r) [13, 72, 77].
Beyond their defining self-binding character, droplet
states exhibit other outstanding features: They have an
unusual shape, being highly elongated along the dipole
direction. Droplets containing a sufficiently large num-
ber of atoms, N, present a broad central region of uni-
form density, and increasing N further does not raise
the central density but instead causes the droplet to ex-
tend along the dipole orientation [75]. This underlies the
state’s weak compressibility and has significant implica-
tions for its collective excitations [12, 76, 77, 79], see later
discussion in V A. These features are likewise reminiscent
of a liquid behavior.
Soon after the first observation of quantum stabiliza-
tion in Ref. [11] (see III C), the investigation of unmodu-
lated droplets became a focus of interest. The motivation
is twofold: (i) in a fully trapped system, the transition
from MF-stable BEC to droplet occurs through a smooth
crossover [72, 77], thereby limiting the introduction of ex-
citations into the system, and (ii) the quantitative study
of the droplet properties allows to test that quantum fluc-
tuations drive the stabilization [12, 13, 67, 80].
2.
Roton-driven MF instabilities and modulated states
Roton-driven MF instabilities instead underlie the
formation of crystallized states,
i.e. states with a
spontaneous modulation in their density,
as previ-
ously suggested for superfluid helium and discussed in
III B, III C [36, 37].
Two types of quantum-stabilized
modulated states should be distinguished. In one case,
the transition from an unmodulated superfluid to a mod-
ulated state through roton softening may allow the mod-
ulated state to retain its global superfluidity, forming a
supersolid [5, 26, 47–50]. Supersolids are thus a special
case of modulated states combining seemingly antithet-
ical properties – those of a superfluid, where atoms are
delocalized, and those of a solid, where atoms tend to
be localized at fixed positions of space. That underlies
the spontaneous breaking of two continuous symmetries,
translational and gauge. In a second scenario, the modu-
lated state does not retain the initial superfluidity and
instead forms an insulating crystal.
In this case, the
atoms are delocalized only on one crystal site and are
prevented from flowing between the different sites.
The superfluid character of a modulated state inti-
mately connects to the contrast C > 0 of its density
modulation (C = 0 is the uniform state).
For a low-
enough C , the density peaks associated with the crystal
sites have significant overlap.
This enables the atoms
to tunnel from one site to the next, and global super-
fluidity is preserved.
Conversely, a high C indicates a
reduced overlap between peaks and yields a low tun-
neling rate, insufficient to maintain global superfluidity.
The superfluid fraction of modulated states is always re-
duced compared to unity, and its value can be quantita-
tively related to the density patterns through the Leggett
bounds [81, 82]. We note that the distinction between
supersolid and insulating solid is not captured by a stan-
dard eGPE treatment, which inherently assumes phase
coherence (therefore global superfluidity). Nevertheless,
an empirical threshold on the contrast is typically used
to distinguish between these two situations, see e.g. [83].
Returning to our first point:
roton softening and
quantum-stabilized modulated states are interlinked. As
introduced in III B 2 b, the occurrence of a roton re-
quires stronger confinement along the dipole direction
than in other direction(s), along which instead the roton-
maxon dispersion arises, see Fig. 2(f).
The trap ge-
ometry, particularly the number of tightly confined di-
rections, strongly influences the structure of both the
roton modes and the underlying stabilized modulated
states. In tubular geometries, roton modes develop along
the single weakly confined direction, and the underlying
modulated states acquire a linear crystal structure along
this axis [15–17, 31, 84]. In pancake geometries, where
two spatial directions are weakly confined, roton modes
emerge in both these directions, allowing for more com-
plex two-dimensional crystal arrangements of the stabi-
lized states [54, 85, 86]. The resulting crystal structure
further depends on factors such as density, interaction
strength, and confinement.
As discussed in III B 2 c, in a full 3D trap, the nature
of mode driving the instability may be altered. Nonethe-
less, if the instability arises from non-phononic modes,
density-modulated ground states may still form. This is
in particular the case when the instability stems from the
softening of modes with high angular momentum, known
as angular rotons [5, 40, 41, 43, 87].
The remainder of this section reviews the wealth of
modulated ground states observed and predicted depend-
ing on the trap and gas parameters.
B.
Experimental observations of modulated states
The
first
experimental
observations
of
quantum-
stabilized states were realized in pancake traps with
transverse dipole orientation and displayed crystal struc-
tures [11, 14, 67], see III C. However, these were highly ex-
cited states, while the ground state was unmodulated due
to the low atom number and shallow trap employed [71],
see also later discussion in IV D. Later experiments real-
ized multi-droplet states close to the ground-state config-
uration using tighter pancake traps, but no global phase
coherence was observed in such settings [14]. Refs. [11]
([14]) used pancake traps with a radial frequency of ap-
proximately 50 Hz, axial frequencies of 133 Hz (varying
from 250 Hz to 1700 Hz), and 15 000 (5 000) atoms.
The search for globally phase-coherent crystal ground
states was revived following the work of Ref. [31], which
demonstrated the coherent population of the roton mode
after an interaction quench in a weakly confined cigar-
shaped gas of
166Er.
In 2019, using a similar trap-
