boundaries are identiﬁed), we get to Figure 6d simply by moving the previous
ﬁgure’s leftmost TPO farther left, wrapping it around the cycle. The transition
from Figure 6d to Figure 6e is the most important, as it involves pulling the σe2m2
operator across the vertical m line. Alternatively, we could get the same result by
pulling the vertical m line slightly oﬀthe boundary, moving the e2m2 line past it,
and then putting it back. That makes it clear that whatever phase is generated
here comes from the braiding of the anyons labeled by m and e2m2. For anyons in
the Drinfeld center of an abelian group, braiding is given simply by characters, so
we can immediately get the phase incurred by this swap as χe2(m) = −1 (regarding
m as generating Z4 and e as generating ˆZ4). Finally, Figure 6f follows simply by
fusing the lines once again. The remaining identity operators can be erased and
we are left with the partial trace Zm,m. Taking into account the braiding phase
that we accrued along the way, we conclude that Zm,m3 is equal to −Zm,m, exactly
as we claimed based on pure boundary calculations earlier.
Note as well that
the other possible boundary condition which would have given the Z4 a trivially-
acting Z2 center, Bphys. = 1 ⊕m2, would have led to the non-trivial Z2 TPO on the
symmetry boundary being connected to the m2 anyon. Since all of the m lines
braid trivially with each other, we would not have found any additional phases
entering the partial traces here, consistent with the fact that the eﬀectively-acting
Z2 in this case is not anomalous.
6.3
Incorporating trivial symmetries directly in SymTFT
In the previous subsection we presented a realization of anomaly resolution in
SymTFT, in which two bulk phases, for the anomalous eﬀective symmetry and
for the non-anomalous extended symmetry, are separated by a topological inter-
face. The extended symmetry lines which end on the interface, i.e. which don’t
correspond to anything in the eﬀective symmetry phase, represent trivially acting
symmetries. Nothing that is attached to the physical boundary will be charged
under them.
There is an alternative approach one can take [11], which is a bit of a departure
from the usual SymTFT, in which we have just a single bulk phase incorporating
the extended symmetry, and the trivially acting symmetries are implemented by
ensuring that those lines can end on topological point operators. Such lines can
always be opened up to separate from any linking with other lines, which means
that nothing can be charged under them; they are trivially acting.
Note that in this subsection we use a description in terms of continuous diﬀer-
ential forms rather than the discrete forms which appear in the last subsection.
Recall that the 3d SymTFT associated with a 2d QFT T possessing a Z2e
26
