8
FIG. S.2. Non-classicality analysis of the gravity-induced channel in the (ωB, Q) parameter space according to Eq. (S.47) and to the non-
classicality criteria A, B and C, defined in the main text in Eqs. (5-7). This figure only assumes a linearized Newtonian force and quantum
theory, without further experimental limitations apart from the gravitational and environmental critical frequencies reported in Eqs. (S.44) and
(S.46). In principle, there are two non-classical regions: one at very low frequencies (strong gravitational coupling) and one at very high
frequencies (negligible thermal noise). However, as shown in Fig. S.3, the transmissivity η of the effective channel is ≈1 in the low-frequency
region, but it is extremely small (≲10−23) in the high-frequency region. This fact makes the high-frequency region theoretically valid but
experimentally problematic. The red star corresponds to the parameters of Fig. S.1.
FIG. S.3. Effective optimal transmissivity ηopt of the gravity-induced optical channel in the (ωB, Q) parameter space. This figure assumes
a linearized Newtonian force and an experimental apparatus characterized by the gravitational critical frequency reported in Eq. (S.44).
The transmissivity is ≈1 in the low-frequency region, but it becomes extremely small in the high-frequency region, limiting experimental
accessibility. The red star corresponds to the parameters of Fig. S.1. The black dotted lines are the borders between the quantum and classical
regions analyzed in Fig. S.2.
D.
Minimum time duration of the experiment to resolve the GIT peak
The gravity-induced transparency discussed in the main text is only achievable in a narrow frequency window of the order of
γ(eff)
opt estimated in (S.22). As a consequence, one must consider a further practical experimental requirement: the overall duration
τ of any experiment must be long enough to resolve the transparency bandwidth, i.e., we must have
τ ≳τmin ≈
1
γ(eff)
opt
=
1
γ +
p
γ2 + 4λ2 =
Q/ωB
1 +
q
1 + 4Q2w4
G/ω4
B
.
(S.49)
