arXiv:2504.06109v1  [quant-ph]  8 Apr 2025
Fundamental Limits on Clock Precision from Spacetime Uncertainty in Quantum
Collapse Models
Nicola Bortolotti,1, 2, 3, ∗Catalina Curceanu,3, 4, † Lajos Di´osi,5, 6 Simone Manti,3 and Kristian Piscicchia1, 3
1Centro Ricerche Enrico Fermi - Museo Storico della Fisica e Centro Studi
e Ricerche “Enrico Fermi”, Via Panisperna 89 A, 00184, Rome, Italy.
2Physics Department, “Sapienza” University of Rome, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185, Rome, Italy.
3Laboratori Nazionali di Frascati, Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Via Enrico Fermi 54, 00044, Frascati, Italy.
4IFIN-HH, Institutul National pentru Fizica si Inginerie Nucleara Horia Hulubei, 30 Reactorului, 077125, M˘agurele, Romania.
5Wigner Research Center for Physics, H-1525 Budapest 114 , P.O.Box 49, Hungary.
6E¨otv¨os Lor´and University, H-1117 Budapest, P´azm´any P´eter stny, 1/A, Hungary.
(Dated: April 9, 2025)
Models of spontaneous wavefunction collapse explain the quantum-to-classical transition with-
out invoking the von Neumann measurement postulate. Prominent frameworks, such as the Di´osi-
Penrose (DP) and Continuous Spontaneous Localization (CSL) models, propose a continuous, spon-
taneous measurement of the mass density ﬁeld of quantized matter. We show that this mechanism
could link both models - not just DP - to fundamental uncertainties in Newtonian gravity. Despite
their non-relativistic nature, these models suggest an induced uncertainty in the ﬂow of time due
to ﬂuctuations in the Newtonian potential. We calculate the ultimate limit on time uncertainty
and demonstrate that the resulting clock-time uncertainty remains negligible for all contemporary
time-keeping devices, including atomic clocks.
Introduction−Despite the remarkable experimental
success of quantum mechanics, its standard formula-
tion retains a somewhat ad hoc character.
Within
this framework, the quantum-to-classical transition is
explained through quantum measurements that induce
abrupt wavefunction collapses, requiring measurement
devices and, in some interpretations, even a human ob-
server [1–4].
The debate over the correct interpretation of quan-
tum mechanics has persisted throughout the last century
and remains unresolved. Among the various proposals,
Spontaneous Collapse Models (SCMs) - also referred to
as Dynamical or Objective - oﬀer a compelling alterna-
tive [5–12]. These models not only provide a consistent
interpretation of quantum mechanics that aligns with ex-
isting experimental observations, they also predict novel,
testable eﬀects that are currently under intense experi-
mental investigation [13].
Models of spontaneous wavefunction collapse assume
that quantum measurements occur continuously and ev-
erywhere in nature.
The associated wavefunction col-
lapses - often referred to as dynamical, spontaneous,
or objective - provide an alternative explanation for
the quantum-to-classical transition without invoking the
standard quantum measurement postulate. The price to
pay is the presence of a certain universal irreversibility
that modiﬁes the unitary dynamics of the wavefunction.
This irreversibility may stem from the intrinsic un-
certainty in the structure of spacetime [14, 15].
Over
the past decades, two non-relativistic proposals of SCMs,
known as Di´osi-Penrose (DP) model [7, 8] and Contin-
uous Spontaneous Localization (CSL) model [10], have
attracted growing interest. Although these models share
several key features, it is commonly believed that the
nature of this uncertainty diﬀers, as the DP model ex-
plicitly relies on the hypothesis of spacetime ﬂuctuations,
whereas CSL does not. Here we point out, for the ﬁrst
time, that CSL too can be related to spacetime uncer-
tainties.
The latency of CSL’s gravity-relatedness is of reason.
The DP model corresponds to the spontaneous measure-
ment of the mass density ﬁeld, which assumes the uncer-
tainty of the Newtonian ﬁeld [7, 8] and even generates it
[16, 17]. In contrast, CSL originated from the Ghirardi-
Rimini-Weber (GRW) model [5], which posits that each
particle in the universe undergoes spontaneous localiza-
tion processes, randomly in time and independently of
one another. The original version of CSL involved the
spontaneous measurement of the number density ﬁeld,
occurring continuously in both space and time, in accor-
dance with the GRW framework. Eventually, the number
density was replaced by the mass density to better align
with experimental constraints [18], making the GRW col-
lapse rate mass-proportional [19]. However, the stochas-
tic ﬁeld responsible for irreversibility in CSL has never
been connected to gravity.
Both DP and CSL models are non-relativistic, hence by
spacetime uncertainties we mean a stochastic ﬂuctuating
component of the Newtonian potential. While heuristic
extensions of these models towards relativistic regimes
are being explored [20–22], a fully relativistic theory is
still missing. Recently, a general relativistic postquan-
tum theory of gravity has been proposed [23], though its
renormalizability remains an open question [24]. In our
work, we explore a novel relativistic eﬀect. According to
general relativity, an uncertainty in the Newtonian po-
tential leads to an uncertainty in the ﬂow of time. We
study for the ﬁrst time the impact of such an eﬀect on the
