12
V.
CONCLUSION
In conclusion, we have derived the linear magnon spin
(energy) photoconductivity in two-dimensional collinear
ferromagnetic systems. To investigate the method of con-
trolling the linear magnon spin (energy) photoconduc-
tivity, we take a model calculation in two-dimensional
collinear ferromagnetic Kagome lattice and Hexagonal
lattice.
After the model calculation, we find that the
linear magnon spin (energy) photoconductivity can be
controlled by changing the optical frequency and the re-
laxation time.
Then we also find that under the con-
dition of low optical frequency and infinite relaxation
time, the magnon spin (energy) photoconductivity can
be controlled by DM interaction through the topological
property of the magnon system. Under this condition,
when we apply a LP light, the direction of longitudinal
MSPC and MEPC can be controlled by the sign of D,
and the magnitude of longitudinal MSPC and MEPC can
be controlled by the magnitude of D in two-dimensional
collinear ferromagnetic Hexagonal lattice.
And in the
two-dimensional collinear ferromagnetic Kagome lattice,
the magnon spin photoconductivity changes with the
Chern number set.
To sum up, our work mainly focused on the meth-
ods of controlling the magnon transport through light
in two-dimensional ferromagnetic materials, providing a
new idea for the development of new devices.
VI.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This paper is supported by the 111 Project (B16009).
National Frontiers Science Center for Industrial Intelli-
gence and Systems Optimization, Northeastern Univer-
sity, China. Key Laboratory of Data Analytics and Op-
timization for Smart Industry (Northeastern University),
Ministry of Education, China.
Appendix A: The perturbative magnon Hamiltonian induced by electromagnetic field
When we take a time-dependent electric field on the magnon, the AC effect on magnon is66
θij = gJµB
ℏc2
lv
[E(t) × ez] · lij,
(A1)
in which lij = rj −ri and ez is the unit vector along z axis. Under the action of time-dependent electric field, the
single-magnon Hamiltonian can be expressed as65,66
ˆH(k) = ˆH0

k + gJµB
clv
AE(t)

(A2)
in which ˆH(k) = e−ik·r ˆHeik·r, ˆH0(k) is the single-magnon Hamiltonian without electric field. And AE(t) = 1
cE(t)×ez
is ”electric” vector potential.
Under a gauge transformation ei gJ µB
ℏc
AE(t)·r, the single-magnon Hamiltonian with
electric field can be expressed as65,66
ˆH = ˆH0 + gJµB
clv
˜E(t) · r.
(A3)
in which ˜E(t) = −∂tAE(t) = −1
c∂tE(t) × ez is the effective electric field. We apply a plane wave perpendicular
to a two-dimensional collinear ferromagnet, so the direction of electric field vector of light is parallel to the two-
dimensional ferromagnet. (We take the direction of light propagation as the negative direction of the z axis.) On the
two-dimensional ferromagnet, the electric field vector of monochromatic plane wave is64
E0,x cos(−ωt + ϕx)ex + E0,y cos(−ωt + ϕy)ey = E(ω)e−iωt + E(−ω)eiωt.
(A4)
Here, E(ω) = 1
2|E0|ϵ is the complex amplitude of the electric field, in which |E0| =
q
E2
0,x + E2
0,y, ϵ = E0,xeiϕx
|E0|
ex +
E0,yeiϕy
|E0|
ey is complex unit polarization vector and E(−ω) = E∗(ω)64,70. Because we consider plane wave that is
superimposed by different monochromatic plane waves, the plane wave can be expressed as
E(t) =
X
i
E(ωi)e−iωit
(A5)
in which ωi contain positive frequency and negative frequency. Therefore, effective electric field of the plane wave is
˜E(t) = −1
clv
∂tE(t) × ez = 1
clv
X
i
iωiE(ωi)e−iωit × ez.
(A6)
