2
algebraic order, meaning that all the correlation functions have power-law decay in this
phase.
Recently the Lifshitz transitions have been reported in the IC gapless phases of
several spin and fermionic models [15–17]. These transitions are related to the change of
number of the Fermi points in chains or ladders, and they do not contradict the plateau
theorem, as far as the system remains gapless. Restructuring of the Fermi surface (points
in one spatial dimensions) is the Lifshitz transition [18].
The question we want to address in this work: what could be said beyond the statement
that a change of the topology of the Fermi surface (FS) is a phase transition? Can we
quantify its measure, and even to attribute a certain order parameter to the mere existence
of such a surface, beyond counting the Fermi points and/or calculating the topological
winding numbers? The appearance of the FS constitutes a quantum phase transition by
itself, as has being emphasized by Volovik for some time [19, 20].
Probably the most fundamental and unbiased rigorous approach to detect a phase tran-
sition is to analyse zeros (or poles) of the partition function.
This approach, pioneered
by Yang and Lee [21], was proven to be very successful for studies of various models at
equilibrium and even out of it. For a short list of references, see, e.g., [22–29], and more
references in there. We show for several d-dimensional free fermionic models (d = 1, 2, 3)
with different spectra that a phase transition can occur only at T = 0, signalled by zeros
of the partition function in the real range of parameters. Those Lee-Yang zeros coincide
with zeros of specrum of the inverse Matsubara single-particle Green’s function operator.
The manifold of those zeros at T = 0 defines the (d −1)-dimensional FS which separates
the occupied and empty fermionic states. The Fermi energy defines the surface of quantum
criticality, and its restructuring or even an appearance is a quantum phase transition. See
also [19, 20] and [30]. Appearance of a (d −1)-dimensional membrane in the momentum
space [30] breaks the initial symmetry of the latter, and as a consequence gapless excitations
around the FS appear as well, which is a hallmark of metallic phase.
To quantify this transition we propose to introduce the order parameter P for the gap-
less metallic phase relating it to the measure (d-dimensional volume) of the Fermi sea in
the momentum space. We demonstrate that this proposal is consistent with the scaling
properties of other physical parameters, like the correlation length, the wavelength of the
IC oscillations, the compressibility, and the entanglement. In particular, all the scaling and
hyperscaling relations for corresponding critical indices, known from the theory of quantum
phase transitions [31, 32], are shown to be satisfied. From analysis of two paradigmatic
examples of interacting metallic states – the Fermi and the Tomonaga-Luttinger liquids, we
show that the interactions do not alter the essence of those results, and the universality class
of those liquids is as of the free Fermi gas.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II we introduce the exactly-solvable
fermionic two-leg ladder model and study its critical properties. In Sec. III we propose
the order parameter for a generic gapless (metallic) phase. The consistency of the scaling,
order parameters, and the relations between critical indices are verified for the ladder model
and d-dimensional fermions with different spectra. The Fermi and the Tomonaga-Luttinger
liquids are also analysed in that section. Two Appendices contain derivations and most of
analytical results for the ladder model and d-dimensional fermions with the non-relativistic
and Dirac spectra. The results are summarized and discussed in the concluding Sec. IV.
