76
Evidence for Intrinsic charm in the proton
charm radiatively generated at such large values of x: in fact, a very similar valence-like peak is
already found in the 4FNS calculation.
Because at the charm mass scale the strong coupling αs is rather large, the perturbative ex-
pansion converges slowly. In order to estimate the effect of missing higher order uncertainties
(MHOU), we have also performed the transformation from the 4FNS NNLO charm PDF deter-
mined from the data to the 3FNS charm PDF at one order higher, namely at N3LO. The result is
also shown Fig. 3.7 (left). Reassuringly, the intrinsic valence-like structure is unchanged. On
the other hand, it is clear that for x <∼0.2 perturbative uncertainties become very large. We can
estimate the total uncertainty on our determination of intrinsic charm by adding in quadrature
the PDF uncertainty and a MHOU estimated from the shift between the result found using
NNLO and N3LO matching.
This procedure leads to our final result for intrinsic charm and its total uncertainty, shown
in Fig. 3.7 (right). The intrinsic charm PDF is found to be compatible with zero for x <∼0.2:
the negative trend seen in Fig. 3.7 with PDF uncertainties only becomes compatible with
zero upon inclusion of theoretical uncertainties. However, at larger x even with theoretical
uncertainties the intrinsic charm PDF differs from zero by about 2.5 standard deviations (2.5σ)
in the peak region. This result is stable upon variations of dataset, methodology (in particular
the PDF parametrization basis) and Standard Model parameters (specifically the charm mass),
as demonstrated in the Section 3.1.3.
Our determination of intrinsic charm can be compared to theoretical expectations. Subsequent
to the original intrinsic charm model of [239] (BHPS model), a variety of other models were
proposed [250, 251, 252, 253, 247], see [128] for a review. Irrespective of their specific details,
most models predict a valence-like structure at large x with a maximum located between
x ≃0.2 and x ≃0.5, and a vanishing intrinsic component for x <∼0.1. In Fig. 3.7 (right) we
compare our result to the original BHPS model and to the more recent meson/baryon cloud
model of [247].
As these models predict only the shape of the intrinsic charm distribution, but not its overall
normalization, we have normalized them by requiring them to reproduce the same charm
momentum fraction as our determination. We find agreement between the shape of our determi-
nation and the model predictions. In particular, we reproduce the presence and location of the
large-x valence-like peak structure (with better agreement, of marginal statistical significance,
with the meson/baryon cloud calculation), the vanishing of intrinsic charm at small-x. The
fraction of the proton momentum carried by charm quarks that we obtain from our analysis,
used in this comparison to models, is (0.62 ± 0.28) % including PDF uncertainties only (see
Section 3.2.3 for details). However, the uncertainty upon inclusion of MHOU greatly increases,
and we obtain (0.62 ± 0.61) %, due to the contribution from the small-x region, x <∼0.2, where
the MHOU is very large, see Fig. 3.7 (right). Note that in most previous analyses [241] intrinsic
charm models (such as the BHPS model) are fitted to the data, with only the momentum
