Yu. V. Dumin : Topological ignition of the stealth CME
Fig. 2. Left panels: magnetic skeletons (red and blue curves) and trajectories of eruption of the null points (yellow curves) in the region of
topological instability. Right panels: respective arrangements of the magnetic sources in the plane of photosphere before (solid circles) and after
(dotted circumferences) development of the instability. The spots of emergence of the null points (i.e., onset of the eruption) are designated by the
yellow stars.
Earth
Sun
stealth
CME
Fig. 3. Sketch of the strongly-bended trajectory of CME, facilitating its
observation from the Earth.
3. Discussion
As follows from the above consideration, there are three strong
arguments—one energetic and two geometrical—why the topo-
logical mechanism is a promising explanation of the stealth
CMEs; and the observational findings are well in agreement with
our simulations.
Really, as was mentioned by Nitta et al. (2021), the stealth
CMEs are faint and slow, which assumes that they involve less
energy than normal CMEs. However, this feature was attributed
by the above-cited authors just to the empirical fact that the mag-
netic energy available for an eruption above a quiet-Sun or de-
cayed active region should be substantially less than the energy


*
*
Fig. 4. Two types of eruption of the null point: (top panel) the out-
ward eruption, when X-type configuration transforms into the T-type
one; and (bottom panel) the inward eruption, when T-type configuration
transforms into the X-type one. Blue and red circles are the point-like
magnetic sources of opposite signs, and the straight arrows show the
directions of their motion. Yellow curves with arrows designate trajec-
tories of the null points, and the spots of their origin are marked by black
stars. The dashed grey lines are drown just for the visual aid. (These pic-
tures are rotated by 90o with respect to the right panels in Fig. 2.)
from a volume above a strong-field active region. On the other
hand, the topological model suggests a much more profound ba-
sis for explanation of the low energy.
Article number, page 3 of 4
