3
Figure 2. An illustration of the workflow adapted in our work, consisting of optimizations carried out at the wavefunction level
(left panel) and at the Hamiltonian level (right panel). Left panel: eˆτ(1) is the UCC operator acting on the first determinant, |Φ1⟩,
whereas eˆτ(2) acts on the second determinant, |Φ2⟩. Upon using point group symmetry, the number of non-zero amplitudes are
reduced. Thus, ⃗θ′
1, for example, is ⃗θ1 with several elements in the latter zeroed out. ˆ˜τ refers to the UCC operator that contains
only the linearly independent amplitudes upon removing redundancies. In the energy sort VQE sub-panel, the dominant optimized
parameter that we pick is expressed as ˜Θ∗. The reduced state, |Ψ(˜Θ∗)⟩, is passed through a pipeline optimization routine. Right
panel: the Hamiltonian, ˆH, is partitioned into qubit-wise mutually commuting sets called cliques (denoted as Cl0 for the 0th clique,
etc). The cliques giving the same energy are grouped under supercliques. We pick the top three supercliques. The expectation
value is then calculated (with error mitigation) using quantum hardware for the reduced Hamiltonian, with respect to this pipeline
optimized wavefunction to obtain the counts. We then pass the counts obtained from clique 0 through a post-selection step to
obtain the final set of counts, and thus the final energy. We note that IXZZX· · · I is a shorthand for ˆI ⊗ˆX ⊗ˆZ ⊗ˆZ ⊗ˆX ⊗· · · ⊗ˆI.
of the molecular orbital (MO); the indexing of MOs is fol-
lowing the big-endian convention) were generated following
a multiconfiguration self-consistent field (MCSCF) calcula-
tion with two MOs (HOMO and LUMO) and two electrons,
using the GAMESS-US quantum chemistry software [38].
The one- and two-electron integrals were fetched from the
DIRAC22 program [39].
We developed our own code to
remove redundancies by comparing the output states that
result from the action of excitation operators on the con-
sidered reference determinants. The VQE simulations are
carried out using Qiskit 0.39.5 [40].
We now briefly comment on the input state prepara-
tion.
We found an isometry to prepare the input state,
C1 |220000⟩+ C2 |202000⟩with C1 = 0.911174 and C2 =
−0.412020 (rounded off to six decimal places), which hap-
pens to be simple and involves only three two-qubit gates
(Figure 1(b); we note that this is a many-fold reduction over
Qiskit’s in-built isometry routine for the same state), how-
ever it is not easy in general to prepare an entangled state
built as a linear combination of many determinants, and
thus preparing a multideterminantal state for an MRUCC-
VQE (or for that matter, quantum phase estimation [3, 4]
or the HHL algorithms [41, 42]) computation is an open
problem in the field.
C.
Resource reduction
The MRUCC-VQE quantum circuit for our problem has
12515 two-qubit gates. On the other hand, the Hamiltonian
has 551 Pauli terms upon Jordan-Wigner transformation.
In order to execute our problem on quantum hardware and
get reliable results, we need to carry out extensive resource
reduction both on the wave function as well as the Hamilto-
nian fronts, as illustrated in Figure 2. The resource reduc-
tion procedure involves several routines, all of which are car-
ried out on a classical computer. The need for reducing the
number of two-qubit gates in a circuit on a NISQ era com-
puter can be seen using a back-of-the-envelope calculation,
where with a two-qubit gate fidelity of 99.28% (the fidelity
