144
The Path to aN3LO Parton Distributions
where the agreement is similar at all orders. Indeed, in all cases MSHT20 and NNPDF4.0 results
agree within uncertainties at aN3LO, while they do not at NLO for VBF, nor at NLO and NNLO
for associated production. The impact of using aN3LO PDFs instead of NNLO PDFs at N3LO
for NNPDF4.0 is very moderate for gluon fusion, somewhat more significant for associated
production, and more significant for VBF, in which it is comparable to the PDF uncertainty. For
MSHT20 instead a significant change from using aN3LO instead of NNLO PDFs is also observed
for gluon fusion, where suppression of the cross-sections is seen when replacing NNLO with
aN3LO PDFs. This follows from the behavior of the gluon luminosity seen in Fig. B.3. The
impact of MHOUs on the PDFs is generally quite small on the scale of the PDF uncertainty
at all perturbative orders, and essentially absent for gluon fusion. For associated production
it marginally improves perturbative convergence. Interestingly, for NNPDF4.0, for all Higgs
production processes considered, and especially for gluon fusion, the estimate of Eq. (4.30)
is a substantial underestimate of the actual error which is made using NNLO PDFs at N3LO.
This follows from the fact that for mX ∼100 GeV the NNLO gluon-gluon luminosity is actually
closer to the NLO than to the aN3LO (see Fig. 4.19), which in turn appears to be an accidental
consequence of the behavior of the gluon PDF for x ∼10−2.
4.5. Summary
In this chapter we have presented the first aN3LO PDF sets within the NNPDF framework, by
constructing a full set of approximate N3LO splitting functions based on available partial results
and known limits, approximate massive DIS coefficient functions, and extending to this order
the FONLL general-mass scheme for DIS coefficient functions.
The NNPDF4.0 aN3LO PDF sets are available via the LHAPDF interface,
http://lhapdf.hepforge.org/
and on the NNPDF Collaboration website,
https://nnpdf.mi.infn.it/nnpdf4-0-n3lo/ .
In addition to the LHAPDF grids themselves, all the results obtained in this chapter are re-
producible by means of the open-source NNPDF code [324] and the related suite of theory
tools.
We have provided a first assessment of these PDF sets by comparing them to their NLO and
NNLO counterparts with and without MHOUs. Our main conclusions are the following
• For all PDFs good perturbative convergence is observed, with differences decreasing as
the perturbative order increases, and the aN3LO result always compatible with the NNLO
within uncertainties.
• For quark PDFs the difference between NNLO and aN3LO results is tiny, suggesting that
with current data and methodology the effect of yet higher orders is negligible.
