2
eters and observables.
In combination with an acqui-
sition function to find the next point to evaluate, this
process is repeated until convergence is achieved. Adjust-
ing the balance between exploration and exploitation can
effectively maximize the optimal parameter space while
searching for better results in new regions. With an aug-
mented data set after each iteration, the result is a global
optimum with the least number of iterative processes.
Early successes applying ML in the form of BO [18–24]
has proven the effectiveness of this method. This tech-
nique has been chosen over others such as Reinforcement
Learning (RL) [25] due to its non-parametric nature. GP
does not require pre-training a Neural Network (NN) on
either simulated or historical data. The learning is in real
time from current samples and the model estimations im-
prove with each iteration. Although digital-twins of the
system could be useful as a testbed for new algorithms,
they fail to account for the underlying changing dynamics
and fringe behaviors. Likewise, historical data is unable
to accurately represent current parameters. Thus, BO
is the most straightforward method to automate a com-
plex system – like the transport of radioactive beams –
without a priori knowledge.
At RIB facilities, the successful transport of radioac-
tive beams depends on the synchronized performance of
numerous devices operating in optimum conditions to en-
sure maximum transport efficiency. In Fig. 1, we show a
diagram of the key elements involved in the transport of
radioactive beams produced at CARIBU. After extrac-
tion from the ion source (bottom of the figure), electro-
static quadrupoles and steerers transport and focus ions
into a set of dipole magnets and slits (labeled “Isobar
separator”) that act as a filter, only letting through ions
with a particular mass-to-charge ratio. Quadrupoles fo-
cus ions vertically (Y) or horizontally (X), while steerers
adjust beam direction in these planes. The beamline is
divided into sections to facilitate the application of the
method presented here. Fission produces multiple species
with different mass numbers (A), but experiments typi-
cally target isotopes with a specific A. Transporting all
species can create background noise, complicating the ion
identification. To filter unwanted fission products, the
isobar separator is positioned early in the beamline for
initial separation. Due to hysteresis in the magnets gen-
erating magnetic fields, this device is set to a specific field
and does not require live tuning like other beam elements.
Given the potential effectiveness of BO for these sys-
tems, the recently launched Badger optimizer [26] was
selected for this work. This framework combines modern
algorithms from the Xopt package [27] with a graphi-
cal user interface (GUI) for customizing run parameters
and tracking optimization progress. Additionally, a plu-
gin mode facilitates communication with devices and in-
struments, allowing exploration of tailored operation se-
quences. A centralized directory for archiving optimiza-
tion routines and past results enhances the platform’s
CARIBU source
Steer1-X 
Steer1-Y
Quad1-X
Quad1-Y
QH-control
QS-Y
Elements
Elements
Elements
Feedback
Monitor
Elements
RFQ
Cooler/
Buncher
MR-TOF
Feedback
Monitor
HV 
Elevator
Elements
Elements
Feedback
Monitor
Elements
Elements
Elements
Elements
Feedback
Monitor
Section 1
Section 2
Section 3
Section 4
Section 5
Feedback
Monitor
FIG. 1. Key beam elements at CARIBU. Radioactive ions are
produced at the source and transported through various ele-
ments, with arrows indicating the transport direction. Feed-
back monitors along the beamline measure rates, and BO is
applied sequentially to each section.
suitability for daily operations.
To integrate this optimization framework into the fa-
cility, beam elements and feedback monitors must be re-
motely accessible via a web server, a connection typically
managed by the Accelerator Controls Group for secu-
rity. However, due to safety concerns, the server must be
enabled and disabled by an accelerator operator to act
as the human-in-the-loop. Figure 2 describes the basic
workflow of our approach. Once the server is enabled and
a secure connection is established, we use the developed
functions to read (get) and write (set) values from and
to the devices.
As described in Ref. [26], variables, variable ranges,
and the observables are specified in an abstract element
called Environment. Variables, such as DC voltages con-
trolling steerers, quadrupoles, and focusing elements, are
set within operational limits. Historical “good-tune” val-
ues are loaded at initialization. The observable, defined
as the optimization target (labeled “Feedback” in Fig. 2),
uses signals from particle detectors. In the case of RIBs
produced by CARIBU, we used Silicon detectors to ob-
serve electrons from the beta-decay of the isotope of in-
terest. Three high-level class methods facilitate commu-
nication with devices: reading current values, setting new
values from optimization, and obtaining feedback for op-
timization. A second abstract element, called Interface,
contains the instructions for device communication.
This approach offers extensive flexibility in designing
procedural steps for machine communication. In case of
a beam-down event, the optimizer can be re-started using
the most recent optimal parameters. This approach uses
parameters that reflect the current beamline dynamics,
rather than outdated historical data. The same interface
can be applied to different beamline sections without al-
