 
13
generally result in smaller volumetric erosion rates overall. This can be seen in Figure 6, where 
increasing the bulk density for uncompacted regolith simulants by roughly 50% results in a 
~50% reduction of observed volumetric erosion rates for all mass flow rates considered. 
However, while increasing the bulk density of the granular surface material generally reduces 
viscous erosion rate, the overall effect from viscous erosion is most prominent for initially 
uncompacted surfaces, with less of an impact at higher bulk densities. Nevertheless, when 
building landing or launch pads on granular material such as lunar or Martian regolith, the 
observed behavior suggests that surface compaction will be beneficial to help mitigate viscous 
erosion.   
It is important to note the limitations of measurements, particularly as this study 
assumes a homogeneous level of compaction throughout the regolith bin, even as a function of 
depth. This is especially true when taking bulk density measurements via gamma ray 
attenuation vertically through the sample, as well as when estimating bulk density from known 
mass and volume. Assuming homogeneity is likely suitable for determining first order 
relationships with respect to bulk density and erosion rate, given the sample is only 10.0 cm 
deep. Nevertheless, density undoubtedly changes as a function of depth, as layers apply a 
compacting normal load on subsequent deeper layers. Studies are already underway that 
leverage cone penetrometers and collimated gamma ray beams to better understand the 
relationship between sample density and depth. 
As shown in Figure 6, there are large error bars associated with runs with mass flow 
rates of 215 slpm, as this material often clumped together and became liberated explosively, 
lofting large chunks sporadically, before eventually achieving a steady-state erosion rate. This 
effect was more common with LHS-1D, owing to large uncertainties in the observed erosion 
rate calculations for bulk densities less than 1.2 g/cm3. While the general relationship between 
volumetric erosion rate and bulk density appears to be the same for all observed mass flow 
rates, this behavior may suggest a slightly different erosion behavior for fine-grained particles 
with higher levels of compaction, where electrostatic charging may affect particle behavior, 
especially under lunar gravity conditions. Future studies should examine different particle size 
distributions, bulk densities, and electrostatic charging effects to better understand their 
impact on erosion rate and effective cohesion. 
 
4.4 Cohesion 
As shown in Figure 7, for samples with cohesion less than 1,000 Pa, additional cohesion 
results in a decrease in the observed volumetric erosion rates of granular material from viscous 
erosion which is generally consistent with the theory presented by Metzger (2024a). While 
Metzger (2024a) introduces the variable ğ›¼ as the cohesive energy density of a soil, the results 
of this study suggest that sample cohesion provides a good approximation for ğ›¼, particularly 
when cohesion is less than 1,000 Pa. More specifically, the results in Figure 7 demonstrate that 
volumetric erosion rate from viscous erosion is inversely proportional to cohesion, C, as shown 
in eq. 5 below, where a and b are constants. 
 
ğ‘‰Ì‡  âˆ  
1
ğ‘+ğ‘âˆ™ğ¶    
   
 
              
(5) 
 
