5
An instructive historical note
After the discovery of special relativity and quantum mechanics, it was believed more than once
that a new revolution was necessary to make progress in fundamental physics. However, it turned
out that no revolution was actually needed, but simply a deeper understanding of what was
already available, namely QFT and renormalizability. These two have faced various challenges in
the last century, but ultimately overcome them all. Nowadays it seems that the QFT framework
and the strict renormalizability paradigm are going through a new phase of challenges related to
understanding gravity at a more fundamental level.
Before concluding, we want to recall some of the past challenges, often forgotten or even
unknown to the young generation (as it was for this author), and see if we can learn new lessons
that can help us overcome the current “gravitational” challenge. We do not aim or pretend to
be able to present a complete historical account, but we will simply highlight those aspects that
we feel are important for the main message we wish to convey at the end. For more detailed
historical accounts of the developments of QFT and SM we refer readers to [1,168–176].
“Electromagnetic” challenge
In the 1930s and most of the 1940s, physicists were struggling to unify special relativity and
quantum mechanics into the same framework, especially because of the puzzling UV infinities of
QFT. The older generation (especially the founders of quantum mechanics) believed that a new
revolution was needed and/or that a more suitable framework needed to be found [177,178].
Alternative approaches. In 1938 Werner Heisenberg considered the existence of a universal
minimal length to cutoff the infinities [179]. In 1943 he was the first to propose the “S-matrix
theory” [180] (whose concept was introduced by John Wheeler in 1937 [181]) as an alternative
framework that does not involve fields and Lagrangians, but instead deals only with directly-
measurable quantities. In 1942 Paul Dirac considered a generalization of quantum mechanics that
included additional intermediate states with negative norms, which could give rise to cancellations
in loop diagrams and make the theory finite [182]. Furthermore, Max Born believed that the laws
of nature should be invariant under reciprocity [183], i.e. roughly under x →1/p, and was led
to propose a non-local theory of electrodynamics through which he wanted to obtain a finite
self-energy for the electron [184–186]. Hideki Yukawa followed a similar path [187,188].
QFT and strict renormalizability. All these alternative attempts failed, in particular none
of them could explain the measurement of the Lamb shift [189], first presented by Willis Lamb
at the Shelter Island conference in 1947. During the same conference, Hans Kramers proposed
the idea of renormalization that eventually turned out to be the key to making sense of the
UV infinities [171]. Soon after, Hans Bethe made a non-relativistic computation implementing
the renormalization method and could obtain a quantitative result for the Lamb shift that was
19
