29
can be reduced (likely at the level of the accuracy of the
BES-III measurements). We postpone this task to future
work on the subject. Indeed, our results open a brilliant
perspective for future lattice calculations of inclusive B
mesons decays.
We have already started a project in
which we will compute the inclusive semileptonic decay
rates of the B(s) mesons by extrapolating the results ob-
tained at increasingly heavier quark masses. This will
also give us the chance to reduce the errors on the Ds
inclusive observables computed in this work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge the Gauss Centre
for Supercomputing e.V. (www.gauss-centre.eu) for fund-
ing this project by providing computing time on the
GCS Supercomputer JUWELS [49] at J¨ulich Supercom-
puting Centre (JSC) and on the GCS Supercomputers
SuperMUC-NG at Leibniz Supercomputing Centre, and
the granted access to the Marvin cluster hosted by the
University of Bonn. The authors acknowledge the Texas
Advanced Computing Center (TACC) at The Univer-
sity of Texas at Austin for providing HPC resources
(Project ID PHY21001). The authors gratefully acknowl-
edge PRACE for awarding access to HAWK at HLRS
within the project with Id Acid 4886.
We acknowl-
edge the Swiss National Supercomputing Centre (CSCS)
and the EuroHPC Joint Undertaking for awarding this
project access to the LUMI supercomputer, owned by
the EuroHPC Joint Undertaking, hosted by CSC (Fin-
land) and the LUMI consortium through the Chronos
programme under project IDs CH17-CSCS-CYP. We ac-
knowledge EuroHPC Joint Undertaking for awarding the
project ID EHPC-EXT-2023E02-052 access to MareNos-
trum5 hosted by at the Barcelona Supercomputing Cen-
ter, Spain.
This work has been supported by the MKW NRW un-
der the funding code NW21-024-A as part of NRW-FAIR
and by the Italian Ministry of University and Research
(MUR) and the European Union (EU) – Next Gener-
ation EU, Mission 4, Component 1, PRIN 2022, CUP
F53D23001480006 and CUP D53D23002830006. We ac-
knowledge support from the ENP, LQCD123, SFT, and
SPIF Scientific Initiatives of the Italian Nuclear Physics
Institute (INFN). F.S. is supported by ICSC-Centro
Nazionale di Ricerca in High Performance Computing,
Big Data and Quantum Computing, funded by Euro-
pean Union-NextGenerationEU and by Italian Ministry
of University and Research (MUR) projects FIS 0000155.
A.S. is supported by STFC grant ST/X000648/1.
We
thank Paolo Garbarino for helpful discussions.
Appendix A: Analysis of the lepton-energy moments
In this appendix we present aggregated information,
analogous to that discussed for the decay rate, from the
analysis of the first and second lepton-energy moment.
The analysis is carried out in a equivalent way to that ex-
tensively discussed for the decay rate. We have computed
the lepton-energy moments for the (quark-connected) ¯cs
and ¯cd channels and neglected the further contributions.
Where not specified, the pull variables are obtained by
collecting together the data from the two channels.
The pull variable P(p)
HLT(ω, σ) for the first and second
lepton-energy moment is shown in Figure 34 and Fig-
ure 35 respectively. The plots show that |P(p)
HLT(ω, σ)| < 2
in the majority of the cases and always |P(p)
HLT(ω, σ)| < 3
meaning that the stability analysis are dominated by
statistics. The pull variables P(p)
FSE(ω, σ) are shown re-
spectively in Figure 36 and Figure 37.
In almost all
the cases |P(p)
FSE(ω, σ)| < 1 and always |P(p)
FSE(ω, σ)| < 2.
The finite size effects are therefore subdominant for the
two lepton-energy moments as well.
The histograms
for the variables Pa, χ2/d.o.f. and Nparams, providing a
global quantitative measure of the goodness for the con-
tinuum limits, are shown in the top- and bottom-panel
of Figure 38 respectively for the first and second lepton-
energy moment. Similarly to the decay rate, the figure
shows that lattice artifacts are almost completely absent
(Pa < 1), the quality of the fits are good (χ2/d.o.f. < 1
in more than half of the cases and χ2/d.o.f. > 2 only in
less than 10% of the cases for the second lepton-energy
moment) and dominated by constant and linear ansatze.
Concerning the σ 7→0 limit, the first lepton-energy mo-
ment has an additional contribution labeled by p = 3 and
the second lepton-energy moment has two more labeled
by p = 3, 4. According to the asymptotic expansion for
small σ done in section V, for these new contributions we
consider the following polynomial fits,
dM (3),I
1,2 (σ)
dω2
= C(3),I
0
+ C(3),I
1
σ4 + C(3),I
2
σ6
(A1)
and
dM (4),I
2
(σ)
dω2
= C(4),I
0
+ C(4),I
1
σ6 + C(4),I
2
σ8.
(A2)
Figure 39 shows the σ 7→0 extrapolation for the quantity
dM (p)
1,¯cs/dω2 in correspondence of |ω| = 0.28. Figure 40
shows instead the σ 7→0 extrapolation for the quantity
dM (p)
2,¯cs/dω2 for |ω| = 0.42. As it can be appreciated in
both the figures, the fit ansatz proposed above excellently
reproduces the trend of the data points. The pull vari-
