+
0
→
+
0
Neutron
Pion
Data Source
0.97
0.971
0.972
0.973
0.974
0.975
0.976
0.977
ud
V
PIONEER Phase II
PIONEER Phase III
Existing Measurements
 = 0.2233[5] (Kl3 average)
us
 from unitarity with V
ud
V
| meas.)
ud
/V
us
 = 0.2250[4] (|V
us
 from unitarity with V
ud
V
(a) PIONEER Phase II-III goal
(b) Comparison of Vud probes
Figure 2: (a) In Phase II-III, we plan to measure Rπβ = Γ(π+ →π0e+νe)/Γ(π+ →all). A factor of
3-, then 6-fold improvement in Rπβ will provide an independent and theoretically clean extraction
of Vud in the CKM matrix. The current world-average experimental value and its error bar are
reported in blue; the theoretical prediction is in purple; the projected PIONEER uncertainty is the
red band. (b) Comparison of the current measurements of Vud with the estimate from CKM first
row unitarity and the PIONEER Phase II and III projected precisions. PIONEER projections are
preliminary and still under evaluation.
[17] and PEN/PiBeta [18–20] experiments. Generically, the detector will have the features sketched
out in Fig. 3. An intense pion beam is brought to rest in an instrumented (active) target (ATAR)
and an electromagnetic calorimeter (CALO) surrounds the stopping target. A cylindrical tracker
surrounding the ATAR is used to link the locations of pions stopping in the target to showers in
the calorimeter. Features of the PIONEER approach will include improved time and energy resolu-
tions, greatly increased calorimeter depth, high-speed detector and electronic response, large solid
angle coverage, and complete event reconstruction. The proposed detector will include a 3π sr, 19
radiation length (X0) electromagnetic calorimeter, an advanced design segmented stopping target,
and beam and positron trackers.
Requirements for measuring Re/µ
Phase I of PIONEER aims to measure Re/µ with precision of 0.01 %, where the uncertainty budget
is equally allocated to statistics and systematics; 2 × 108 π+ →e+ν events are required.
At rest, the pion lifetime is 26 ns and the muon lifetime is 2197 ns. The monoenergetic positron
from π →eν has an energy of 69.3 MeV. Positrons from ordinary muon decay form the Michel
spectrum from 0 to an endpoint of 52.3 MeV. In principle, the monoenergetic e+ from π →eν is well
isolated above the Michel endpoint and can be easily identified using a high-resolution, hermetic
calorimeter. To determine Re/µ, we measure the ratio of positrons emitted from π →eν
and
π →µ →e decays for which many systematic effects, such as solid angle acceptance, cancel to first
order. However, counting all π →eν events with a precision of one part in 104 requires determining
the low-energy tail of the electromagnetic shower and radiative decays that hide under the Michel
spectrum from the π →µ →e chain, which has four orders of magnitude higher rate.
Figure 3 (right) illustrates the relationship between the two channels and their respective
positron energy spectra.
Here, we have modeled the spectrum from both channels assuming a
3
