a Rayleigh number that is dependent on moisture and radiation. Third, we document
the model’s equilibrium (basic state) solutions and their stability, by calculation of
both the basic state’s convective available potential energy and its linear stability.
Finally, we discuss the linear response of the model to radiative and thermal climate
change.
Convection is in general characterised by highly non-linear behaviour. However,
linear theory has been used to understand the non-linear regimes of classical dry
Rayleigh-Be´nard convection (Christopher et al. 2023), and therefore, we perform
a linear analysis of the (moist) Rainy-B´enard model to gain an initial insight of
the behaviour underpinning the non-linear regimes of the model. The study by
Agasthya et al. (2025) used non-linear simulations of radiatively cooled Rainy-Benard
convection, found similar scalings to those found in previous CRM studies, indicating
that the Rainy-B´enard model can provide relevant results despite its simplicity. A
linear analysis of the Rainy-Be´nard model has been conducted in the Oishi and
Brown (2024) study, which examined the convective onset (critical Rayleigh number),
convective instability and moist internal gravity waves for the Rainy-Be´nard model.
We present a similar linear analysis here, however we use alternative boundary
conditions and include a radiative cooling term as required for a climate change
study. We also conduct a more detailed analytical treatment of the basic state
solution, use a different approach to solving the linear stability eigenvalue problem,
and provide a different dispersion relationship for the (linear) internal gravity waves,
and use conditional instability and moisture diagnostics to interpret the results. The
linear results presented in this paper provides the basis for a future investigation
into the non-linear behaviour of moist convection under climate change, as has been
successfully demonstrated for the “dry” classical Rayleigh-Be´nard problem over many
years (Chandrasekhar 1961; Christopher et al. 2023).
The paper starts with setting up the Rainy-B´enard model for a climate change study,
discussing boundary conditions, radiative cooling, different non-dimensionalisations
and key parameters (Section 2). The analytical basic state solution is calculated
across the climate parameter space, then some key diagnostics are presented (Section
3). We then analyse the stability of the basic state and its dependence on the climate
parameters, using (i) CAPE calculations and (ii) a linear stability analysis (Section 4).
The main findings and future research involving non-linear simulations are discussed
in the conclusion (Section 5).
2.
Model Set Up for Climate-Forcing Simulations
We use a radiatively extended Rainy-Benard model for this study. The model equations
are the same as those in Agasthya et al. (2025), but different boundary conditions are
applied. The model set up differs from Oishi and Brown (2024) both in the inclusion
of radiative cooling, and in the boundary conditions. The Boussinesq, radiative moist
3
