PHILOSOPHICAL TRANSACTIONS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY A, VOLUME 383, ISSUE 2289, 2025, DOI:10.1098/RSTA.2024.0146
12
this work requires a coordinated optimization sequence to be performed among the agents, which can potentially limit its
applicability with large teams. Another limitation of the proposed technique is the dependence of the results on the agents’
order of execution. This issue arises from the way the centralized problem was broken down and approximated with a distributed
formulation. Essentially, by evaluating all possible permutations of the agents’ execution order, the centralized solution can be
recovered. However, this is computationally intractable, which is why we proposed this distributed approach. Future research
should explore whether, in certain scenarios, there is an opportunity to adopt an intelligent strategy to determine the optimal
sequence of agent execution, and prioritize the development of algorithms that are inherently scalable and capable of handling
large numbers of UAVs without sacrificing performance. There are several avenues to explore here including learning-based
techniques [30], as well as planning without coordination by allowing some degree of work duplication as shown in our
previous work [31].
b) Autonomy and Decision Making: A crucial aspect of future UAV swarms is their ability to operate autonomously in
complex and unknown environments while making intelligent and optimal decisions. This involves not only navigating through
unfamiliar terrain but also determining the most efficient way to accomplish a given task while rapidly adapting to new
information and changing conditions. One of the limitations of the proposed approach is the requirement of a known world
model, which is essential for designing optimal coverage plans using the current methodology. Specifically, the proposed
method requires prior knowledge of the 3D environment and points of interest, as well as pre-computed light-path propagation
constraints. However, this information may not be available in many scenarios where UAV-based search is needed, such as search
and rescue in natural disaster zones or inside collapsed buildings. Currently, state-of-the-art swarm systems are divided between
model-based and model-free planning methodologies [27]. Model-based methodologies [28] rely on predefined environmental
models for optimized planning, offering efficiency but lacking adaptability to changes. In contrast, model-free techniques like
sampling-based approaches [15] adapt to unknown or dynamic environments, providing flexibility but lacking optimality. The
proposed methodology can be extended to handle dynamic and unknown environments by employing a two-stage approach: first,
building a world model through environmental mapping and scene reconstruction, and then utilizing this model for planning.
This two-stage approach has been explored in our previous work [32] with a swarm of heterogeneous agents, demonstrating
promising results. However, to enhance swarm system performance, future research should focus on creating more integrated or
hierarchical planning techniques that can synergistically leverage the benefits of both model-based and model-free approaches.
Additionally, integrating machine learning techniques [33] and other artificial intelligence methodologies [34], [35] can enhance
the swarm’s ability to learn from experience, improve its performance over time, and handle complex decision-making.
c) Robustness and Fault Tolerance: Robustness with respect to modelling errors and measurement noise, as well as fault
tolerance with respect to hardware malfunctions is paramount for UAV swarm systems.. To operate effectively in real-world
environments, swarms must be resilient to unpredictable conditions, varying weather, and hardware malfunctions. Future
research should focus on developing advanced robust and fault-tolerant algorithms that enable the swarm to dynamically adapt
to UAV losses, malfunctions, and uncertainty. Additionally, incorporating machine learning techniques could allow UAVs to
predict potential failures and proactively adjust their behavior to prevent mission-critical consequences. While this work did not
study robustness and fault tolerance, our previous research on fault-tolerant coverage planning under non-Gaussian disturbances
[36] can provide valuable insights for future directions. Additionally, recent advancements in these fields, as highlighted in
[37], offer further potential avenues for exploration.
Swarm systems, with their potential to revolutionize various fields, offer a promising solution to complex challenges that
traditional centralized systems struggle to address. While significant strides have been made, numerous challenges remain to
fully harness their potential. By addressing the challenges discussed above, swarm systems can become indispensable tools for
solving a wide range of real-world problems.
VII. CONCLUSION
This study introduces a coverage control framework that allows a group of distributed autonomous agents to collaboratively
plan look-ahead coverage plans over a rolling finite planning horizon, targeting the coverage of designated areas on a 3D
object’s surface. Formulated as a distributed model predictive control problem, the proposed approach optimizes the movement
and visual control inputs of each agent, incorporating constraints to minimize overlapping work among agents. By integrating
visibility determination through light-path propagation constraints, the controller can anticipate which areas of the object will
be visible based on projected future positions of the agents. This is achieved by transforming non-linear visibility assessments
constraints into logical constraints using binary variables within a mixed-integer programming framework. The effectiveness of
this approach is validated both in simulation environments and through real-world UAV inspections of architectural structures.
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is supported by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement
No 739551 (KIOS CoE), and from the Government of the Republic of Cyprus through the Cyprus Deputy Ministry of Research,
Innovation and Digital Policy.
