4
D.
Algorithmic implementation
Below is the pseudocode of the algorithm used
for the iterative solution of the self-consistent equa-
tions, employing nested relaxations.
We typically
set Ncycles = 100, ϵ = 10−15, Niter = 50, 000.
Algorithm 1: Pseudocode of the iterative
method
Initialize ⃗W (0);
Compute ⃗Z(0) from ⃗W (0) ;
// eq. S5
⃗Zdamp ←⃗Z(0);
i ←1;
for cycle ←1 to Ncycles do
c ←1;
repeat
for each E in energy range num ←0;
denom ←0;
for each j in histograms that include E
r ←1 −W (i−1)(E)
Z(i−1)
j
;
num ←num + nj(E)
gj · r ;
denom ←denom +
Nj
Zdamp
j
· gj · r
;
W (i)(E) ←α · num
denom + (1 −α) · W (i−1)(E);
Normalize ⃗W (i) ;
// eq. S3
Compute ⃗Z(i) from ⃗W (i) ;
// eq. S5
i ←i + 1;
c ←c + 1;
δ ←0;
for each E in energy range
δ ←δ +
W (i)(E) −W (i−1)(E)

W (i−1)(E)
;
until δ < ϵ or c ≥Niter;
⃗Zdamp ←α⃗Z(i) + (1 −α)⃗Zdamp;
To avoid loss of numerical precision due to round-
off errors, it is advisable to perform the numeri-
cal summations after sorting the summands in as-
cending numerical order, thus adding elements from
the smallest to the largest. For energy levels (bins)
where no entries were observed in any on the inter-
vals, the corresponding W array elements are always
kept equal to zero.
The iterative method can also be used to solve
the approximate self-consistent equations S14, which
converge significantly faster than the full ones. To
this end, it suffices to modify the algorithm at lines
6, 12, and 26 of the pseudocode by removing the re-
peat and until statements, which makes variable c
unnecessary, and setting r ←1. The W array ob-
tained at convergence closely approximates the so-
lution of the full set of self-consistent equations and
is then used to initialize the latter for the final re-
finement.
Fig. S2 illustrates the convergence of the two-
step procedure for the 12 × 12 Ising model dis-
cussed in the main text Appendix A. For this ap-
plication, we covered the admissible energy range
with ∼150 intervals of width 8, corresponding to
m = 3 slack variables, and used a sampling depth
of 1000 for each histogrammed interval. The result-
ing density of states profile, W(E), was compared
with the one calculated exactly, W exact(E). Consid-
ering the wide dynamic range of W of the system,
which spans ∼40 orders of magnitude, we measured
the convergence as the relative difference to the ex-
act solution, averaged over all distinct energy levels:
⟨erel⟩= ⟨|W(E) −W exact(E)|/W exact(E)⟩E.
The top panel of Fig. S2 illustrates the conver-
gence of the iterative algorithm based on the approx-
imate equations S14, initialized from a uniform (flat)
W profile. Because the exact profile spans ∼40 or-
ders of magnitude, the flat initial profile implies a
very large initial error. In spite of this, the iterative
procedure converges rapidly within few percents of
W exact(E). The converged solution of the approxi-
mate equations is then refined by using it to initialize
the iterative solution of the full equations.
2.
SOLVING QUBO PROBLEMS WITH
PARALLEL TEMPERING METHODS
Classical parallel tempering (PT) methods, also
termed replica exchange methods (REMs) guaran-
tee that the ground state manifold of QUBO Hamil-
tonians is sampled uniformly. Thus, we resorted to
PT/REMs as the ideal tools to carry out a stringent
and transparent validation of our framework for re-
constructing density-of-states.
The PT/REM-based optimization of a given
QUBO Hamiltonian, H(σ1, . . . , σn), was set up as
follows.
The largest reduced temperature of the
replicas, kB Tmax, was picked by computing the root-
mean-squared fluctuation of the QUBO energy for
random spin configurations and then setting kB Tmax
to be between 2 and 3 orders of magnitude larger
than this characteristic energy fluctuation. The low-
est reduced temperature, kB Tmin, was picked by
computing the root-mean-squared fluctuation of the
QUBO energy for single-spin flips over random con-
formations and then setting kB Tmin to be at least
three orders of magnitude smaller than this char-
acteristic single-spin energy fluctuation. The tem-
perature range was then tentatively covered with
Nr replicas, where Nr was customarily set equal to
twice the square root of the number of degrees of
freedom, Nr = 2√n and spread across the entire
