APS/XX
Decoherence effects in entangled fermion pairs at colliders
Rafael Aoude,1, ∗Alan J. Barr,2, † Fabio Maltoni,3, 4, ‡ and Leonardo Satrioni3, 1, §
1Higgs Centre for Theoretical Physics, School of Physics and Astronomy,
The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3JZ, Scotland, UK
2Department of Physics, Keble Road, University of Oxford,
OX1 3RH Merton College, Merton Street, Oxford, OX1 4JD
3Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Universit`a di Bologna, Via Irnerio 46, 40126 Bologna, Italy
4Centre for Cosmology, Particle Physics and Phenomenology (CP3),
Universit´e Catholique de Louvain, B-1348 Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
Recent measurements at the Large Hadron Collider have observed entanglement in the spins of t¯t
pairs. The effects of radiation, which are expected to lead to quantum decoherence and a reduction
of entanglement, are generally neglected in such measurements. In this letter we calculate the effects
of decoherence from various different types of radiation for a maximally entangled pair of fermions
— a bipartite system of qubits in a Bell state.
We identify the Kraus operators describing the
evolution of the open quantum system with the integrated Altarelli-Parisi splitting functions.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Entanglement is a defining feature of quantum me-
chanics, and a central concept and resource in quan-
tum information theory and quantum computing [1]. Re-
cently, it has been recognized that the entanglement of
their spins can be measured when pairs of massive par-
ticles decay via the chiral weak force [2–23].1 The first
observations of entanglement between the spins of top
quarks and their anti-quark partners have recently been
made by the ATLAS [25] and CMS [26, 27] experiments.
In these first measurements, the t¯t system was mod-
eled as a closed system at the point of the quark decays.
However, top quarks may radiate gluons or photons in
the short period of time before decaying, leading to a re-
duction in quantum spin information, i.e., decoherence.
It is generally been expected that next-to-leading (NLO)
and next-to-next-to-leading (NNLO) order corrections to
spin correlations in QCD are small [28–30] and therefore
have therefore been assumed to have a negligible effect in
entanglement measures. Similarly, NLO QED effects in
the quantum information studies of h, Z →τ +τ −have
not been included. With an increasing program of future
quantum measurements planned at high-energy colliders
it is timely to revisit these assumptions.
Decoherence can be studied by recognizing that real-
istic quantum systems are always embedded in some en-
vironment. This interaction with the system results in
‘leakage of information’ to the environment, decreasing
the entanglement between the components of the system
under test [31–35]. In particle physics, decoherence has
been explored in the context of flavour entanglement for
∗rafael.aoude@ed.ac.uk
† alan.barr@physics.ox.ac.uk
‡ fabio.maltoni@unibo.it
§ leonardo.satrioni@studio.unibo.it
1 A recent review of such proposals to measure quantum entangle-
ment and related quantities at colliders may be found in Ref. [24].
Kaon systems [36], effective field theory [37–39] and soft
radiation [40–44].2
In this paper we formalize the effects of decoherence
from radiation at high-energy colliders and calculate the
size of the expected loss of entanglement. Our approach
is general and can be applied to any fermion-antifermion
pair in any quantum state. As a case study we consider
a fermion-antifermion pair, e.g., t¯t or τ +τ −, in a maxi-
mally entangled state, such as that originating from the
decay of a scalar state. We treat the f ¯f pair as an open
quantum system – a bipartite system of spin qubits – and
the additional radiation is interpreted as an interaction
with the unobserved ‘environment’. We calculate change
in the concurrence due to the radiation, allowing for var-
ious different coupling strengths and Lorentz structures.
Finally, we identify a correspondence between Kraus op-
erators in spin space and Altarelli-Parisi splitting func-
tions.
II.
QUANTUM MAPS FOR OPEN SYSTEMS
Let us first review some of the properties of quantum
maps that will be useful in describing decoherence.3 The
evolution of a non-closed system can represented by a
map E which acts on the space of density matrices ρ and
satisfies the following properties: convex linearity, trace
preservation, and complete positivity. Such maps admit
an operator-sum representation,
E[ρ] =
X
j
KjρK†
j ,
X
j
K†
j Kj = 1,
(1)
where Kj are known as the Kraus operators.
2 The reader is referred to e.g. [45] for a more complete overview
of decoherence in general.
3 See e.g. [46] for a review.
arXiv:2504.07030v1  [quant-ph]  9 Apr 2025
