These equations were studied in [1]: in particular, we refer to eqn. (A.3) there for (4.20) and
the last two lines in eqn. (3.13) for (4.21) (in both cases, the indices B′, C in [1] have to be put
to unity). The connection to the U(1) index theorem was not emphasized there, and instead
these equations were treated as equations for the zero modes of the “off-diagonal components”
of the adjoint fermion. To summarize, it was shown there that ¯D has r zero modes while D
has no zero modes. The conclusion from these computations, phrased in terms of the abelian
operators defined above, is that dimker(D ¯D) −dimker( ¯DD) = r. The index is determined
by the second Chern classes (quantized nonzero fluxes) of the abelian background 2πNAω
µ
through the various two-planes of T4. Finally, going back to T, T † via the maps (4.20, 4.21),
we arrive at eqn. (4.18), for S = 0.
Thus, the index (4.18) is 2r, determined by the fluxes of the U(1) gauge field through
the various T4 planes, and, further, the operator TT † has no zero modes for Sµ = 0. Thus,
for Sµ = 0, the index determines the number of normalizable zero modes of Wµ, which is
thus 2r. This introduces 4r real coefficients determining the solution of the self-duality and
gauge conditions (4.14), as in eqn. (4.22) below. Now, turning on an arbitrary periodic x-
dependent background Sµ ̸= 0 should not change the index, as the periodic abelian field
does not introduce any nonzero fluxes through the T4 planes. We have not studied TT † for
arbitrary Sµ and have not shown that there are no zero modes of TT † from (4.17).30 However,
perturbation theory suffices to argue that a small x-dependent periodic background Sµ does
not lead to the appearance of zero modes of the Hermitean operator TT †|S=0, which has a
nonzero gap in the spectrum.
Thus, we argue that the solutions of the self-duality conditions (4.14) for Wµ take the
form
Wµ[C, S] =
2r
X
A=1
CAΦA
µ [S] ,
(4.22)
where C = {CA} are 2r complex coefficients and the functions ΦA
µ are orthogonal in the
metric introduced after eqn. (4.15); these functions have been worked out for Sµ = 0 (they
can be read off Appendix A), but for general periodic Sµ are expected to have complicated
dependence on S, as indicated above.
Now, given (4.22), we come to the self-duality condition for the diagonal components of
(4.12). They take a particularly simple form when written using the quaternionic notation
introduced after (2.17). Reducing (2.18) to SU(2) and explicitly including the unit quaternion
σ4, we find
2π ¯∂S = iWµW∗
µσ4 −i ¯
WW† .
(4.23)
Since S is periodic on the T4 this quaternionic equation only has a solution if the integral of
the r.h.s. over T4 vanishes (or equivalently, the r.h.s. is orthogonal to the zero modes of the
30Admittedly, we have not shown that no zero modes of TT † appear for any normalizable periodic Sµ; hence,
this is the weakest point of our argument. To study this, in future work, the operator TT † for general Sµ ̸= 0
should be studied, in the form of eqn. (4.17), where it does not map to the Dirac operators discussed above.
– 33 –
