2.1
Data structure
In this study, data are organized in the form of a multidimensional array (snapshot tensor)
to capture the temporal dynamics of fluid flow fields. This data is arranged in the snapshot
matrix as [1]:
X = V K
1 = [V 1, V 2, . . . , V k, V k+1, . . . , V K−1, V K],
(1)
where V k represents the variable of the flow field at time instant tk, and K is the
total number of snapshots. The snapshot tensor is structured to include both spatial and
temporal information, ensuring a comprehensive representation of the flow field dynamics.
The data dimensions are given by J × K, where J denotes the total number of spatial
grid points along the streamwise, spanwise, and normal directions, respectively.
The data sets used in this study include velocity components for two and three-
dimensional flow fields. For two-dimensional flow fields, the data sets include the stream-
wise and normal velocity components (vx and vy), while for three-dimensional flow fields,
the datasets include the streamwise, normal, and spanwise velocity components (vx, vy,
and vz).
The generalized snapshot tensor for three-dimensional flow data with T var = 3 physical
variables (velocity components) can be represented as follows [33]:
V 1j2j3j4k = vx(xj2, yj3, zj4, tk),
V 2j2j3j4k = vy(xj2, yj3, zj4, tk),
V 3j2j3j4k = vz(xj2, yj3, zj4, tk),
(2)
where:
• j1 = 1, 2, 3 indexes the three velocity components (vx, vy, vz),
• j2, j3, j4 index the discrete spatial grid points in the x, y, and z directions, respect-
ively,
• k indexes the temporal snapshots.
For two-dimensional flow fields, the datasets are represented by a fourth-order tensor
since the spanwise (z) direction is not included. This organization allows for the applic-
ation of SVD/HOSVD, which extracts dominant temporal modes. These are then used
to train the LSTM network for temporal predictions. Depending on the specific case, the
shape of the tensor can vary significantly, ranging from tensors that incorporate only one
velocity component to those that account for all three velocity components (streamwise,
spanwise, and vertical) or even some including several variables (i.e., pressure, several
species in reactive flows, several pollutants in air pollution modeling, etc.). Predictions
are generated for both two-dimensional and three-dimensional flow fields, ensuring that
the methodology is comprehensive across distinct spatial configurations. The tensors are
8
