EDP convergence for nonlinear RDS
April 10, 2025
G. Heinze, A. Mielke, A. Stephan
For simplicity, we consider the system on the d-dimensional torus Td, though an extension to
bounded domains with homogeneous Neumann boundary conditions should not pose a signiﬁ-
cant diﬃculty.
The well-posedness, the long-time behavior, and approximations of systems of the form (1.1)
have been studied with diﬀerent methods for a long time. We refer to [Ali79, Rot06, Mor89,
DF∗07] and references therein for the study of classical solutions, i.e., solutions that are globally
uniformly bounded in L∞([0, ∞) × Td; RI). In this context, two often used strategies are to
obtain bounds for the full reaction-diﬀusion system by exploiting global a priori bounds for a
lower order functional such as mass conservation or entropy bounds (cf. [Ali79, Mor89]) or by
studying the space-independent reaction ODE system, which is applicable when all the species
ρi, i ∈I diﬀuse with the same speed δ = δi.
However, to the surprise of many, in [PiS00] it was shown that in the case where species
diﬀuse with diﬀerent diﬀusion constants δi, there may exist no classical solutions to the reaction-
diﬀusion system even when the involved reactions behave nicely. This furthered the interest in
weaker notions of solutions, like renormalized solutions studied e.g. in [Fis15].
In recent years, entropy methods became an important tool for the study of reaction-
diﬀusion systems [DeF06, DF∗07, DeF15, MHM15, DFT17].
Here, the idea is to use the
non-increasing relative Boltzmann entropy (also called free energy) as an a priori bound to
control solutions and study their long-time behavior. Moreover, entropy methods are a useful
tool for deriving convergence results for the spatial discretization of linear reaction-diﬀusion
systems, see [HPS24]; and it is the purpose of this work to generalize these results to nonlinear
reaction kinetics.
We stress that our works main focus is not on the regularity of the spatial discretization
nor of the model (like data or coeﬃcients), but instead the variational nature of our approach,
which is based on the theory of generalized gradient ﬂows (see e.g. [Mie23] for an introduction).
To be more precise, we are interested in reaction-diﬀusion systems, where not only the free
energy is decaying, but where the system is a gradient ﬂow of the free energy. Starting with the
pioneering work of Otto [JKO98, Ott01], it is known that many diﬀusion-type problems can
be understood as gradient ﬂows driven by a suitable free energy. Later, this was extended to
reaction-diﬀusion systems satisfying detailed balance in [Mie11] for quadratic dissipations and
in [MP∗17] for cosh-type dissipations, which we also use here. The fundamental assumption
here, is that the system satisﬁes the detailed balance (or reversibility) condition. This means
that there exist reference concentrations ω = (ωi)i∈I such that ωi := exp(−Vi) and such that
for all r ∈R it holds
kfw
r
Y
¯ı∈I
ωαr
¯ı
¯ı
= kbw
r
Y
¯ı∈I
ωβr
¯ı
¯ı
=: κr
Y
¯ı∈I
ω
αr¯ı +βr¯ı
2
¯ı
.
We observe that the detailed balance assumption ensures that the reaction-diﬀusion system
(1.1) can now be written in the symmetric form
∂tρi = δi div

ρi∇log
 ρi
ωi

+
X
r∈R
κrω
αr+βr
2
 ρ
ω
αr
−
 ρ
ω
βr
(βr
i −αr
i ),
(1.2)
where we introduced the notation
ραr :=
Y
i∈I
ρ
αr
i
i ,
2
