and then deducing the topological invariants of a geometric interpretation by studying the
monodromies of the corresponding periods.
Providing new geometric interpretations for such diﬀerential operators is in fact one of
the motivations for our work. The genus zero topological string free energy associated to the
Calabi-Yau background (X, α) is related to the variation of Hodge structure of the mirror
Calabi-Yau Wα. The periods of the holomorphic 3-form on Wα are annihilated by a diﬀerential
operator, the so-called Picard-Fuchs operator. 3
Diﬀerential operators that have certain
characteristic properties of such Picard-Fuchs operators are called Calabi-Yau operators [26,
27].
A large number of Calabi-Yau operators have been constructed independently of an
underlying geometry, see for example [26–29], and in many cases a geometric realization is
still not known. The operators that have been constructed in [28] are referred to as AESZ
operators, while more operators can be found in the corresponding online database [30]. In
some of the cases, it is clear that the operator does not admit an integral period basis that
is compatible with the usual expressions for the prepotential in terms of the topological
invariants of a smooth Calabi-Yau X with b2(X) = 1. 4 Using a modiﬁed expression for the
integral structure, that will be discussed in Section 3.2, for cases when X is almost generic
and carries a ﬂat but topologically non-trivial B-ﬁeld, we will resolve this puzzle and provide
a new geometric interpretation for several Calabi-Yau operators.
In cases where the torsion is Z5, the modiﬁed structure of the periods also allows to
understand the underlying integrality and to give a geometric interpretation to certain Picard-
Fuchs operators with irrational coeﬃcients. Inhomogeneous irrational Picard-Fuchs operators,
related to open topological strings, have appeared in the literature already in [31–33]. More
generally, the integrality properties of irrational Picard-Fuchs operators have subsequently
been studied for example in [34–36]. 5 However, a clear enumerative interpretation in the
homogeneous case, that also extends to higher genus, has long been missing.
One such
interpretation was provided in [14], where an almost generic Calabi-Yau threefold that is
torus ﬁbered and exhibits Z5-torsion has been constructed, building on the study of genus one
ﬁbrations with 5-sections in [38]. In that example, the periods of the mirror are annihilated by
a system of Picard-Fuchs operators with coeﬃcients in Q[
√
5]. Nevertheless, the corresponding
torsion reﬁned Gopakumar-Vafa invariants turned out to be integral.
3For cases with b2(X) > 1 one has to consider Picard-Fuchs ideals that are generated by multiple operators
but we are focusing on examples with b2(X) = 1.
4This is because the coeﬃcient of the term ζ(3)/(2πi)3, that can often be ﬁxed by demanding that the
imaginary part of the monodromy around the nearest conifold point vanishes, is positive and can therefore
not be the Euler characteristic of a smooth Calabi-Yau with Picard rank one. We observe this for the mirror
periods of our examples (Y2, [1]2), (X3, [±1]3) and (Y4, [1]2), with the respective Picard-Fuchs operators being
AESZ 225∗, AESZ 199 and 4.70∗, see Appendix B.4, B.5 and B.8.
5As was pointed out to us by Johannes Walcher, after we have presented our results at the workshop
“The Arithmetic of Calabi-Yau Manifolds” in Mainz 2025, March 17–28, examples of irrational Picard-Fuchs
operators with coeﬃcients in Q[
√
5] have also been presented by him in previous talks and will be discussed
in [37]. To our knowledge, both the interpretation of the integral structure and the concrete examples are
diﬀerent from the one discussed in Section 6.
– 3 –
