7 
 
the χ(2) part resulting from the incoming oscillating laser fields and Estatic field resulting from the 
oscillating laser fields and the static electric field on the surface. 
 
 
 
Esig = χ(2) + χ(3)Φ(0) 
(1) 
 
 
Esig = Eoscillating + Estatic 
(2) 
 
The static (DC) electric field EDC, the reorientation, and the polarization of the solvent molecules 
contribute to the interface-dependent χ(3) term. Where the Φ0 is the surface potential. In those 
initial works EDC contribution was assumed to be due to the zero plane and the optical fields were 
considered to be independent of the depth of solvent from the surface. 
Now, when a nanoparticle with the charged interface is immersed in an electrolyte solution, 
the ions in the solution interact and orient accordingly.45–48 The static electric field due to charge 
interfaces is screened by the oriented counter ions in the solutions. Often these kinds of systems 
are modeled as electrical double layers (EDL).46 Where the first layer of ions is adsorbed to the ob- 
ject and the next layer is formed by the Coulomb attractions of the counter ions which are loosely 
bound and diffusible. A typical Schematic of EDL is shown in Figure 1 a). Where the surface 
charge is often represented as the Surface potential.49,50 Now the oriented solvent molecules near 
the interface are highly polarizable, and the effective potential decays depending on the length 
scale of the orientation of those molecules. The interfacial double layer has been described using 
different models such as the Helmholtz model, Gouy Chapman model, Stern model, etc.51,52 The 
electrostatic effect is often considered to decrease exponentially. The charge distributions are gen- 
erally described by the Poisson-Boltzmann equation. In the Gouy Chapman model, the Poisson 
Boltzmann equation is solved for the planar surface and the surface potential varies with the ionic 
strength of the electrolyte in the solution, as given by (equation 3). Gouy Chapman model can be 
used for bigger sizes of quantum dots as it will be valid to charged curve surface when κr > 15, 
