of freedom. For instance, BOMD simulations cannot qualitatively capture how electrons may transition
from one set of electronic states (known as a BO surface) to another as the ions move – critical for simulat-
ing many catalysts, and necessary for even qualitatively describing photocatalytic processes [14, 15, 16, 17].
Tools for studying coupled ion and electron dynamics, such as real-time time-dependent DFT (RT-TDDFT),
have been recently developed and are under investigation, but suffer nonetheless from significant drawbacks
such as the incorrect prediction of thermalization, the inherit inaccuracies given typical approximations to
the exchange-correlation functionals employed, and large computational costs, which limits such methods to
small systems [18, 19, 20].
In summary, the construction of a physically consistent, multi-scale model, from atomic scale to macro-
scopic flow, to accelerate research and development of new catalysts presents several formidable challenges.
A major one, at its atomistic foundation, is that we lack a satisfactory techniques to capture the electronic
system including its environment-dependent correlations, that treats ions and electrons on the same footing,
does not use uncontrolled approximations, retains all correlations up to finite discretization effects, and can
study the dynamics (and hence excited states) in real-time. Here, we put forth a quantum computational
framework for this atomistic foundation.
1.2
Quantum computing for chemical dynamics
Exact simulation of chemical dynamics on classical computers incurs exponential computational costs with
the number of constituents and/or the target simulation time. Hence such simulations are currently in-
accessible, and most likely will remain out of reach for the foreseeable future. In contrast, fault-tolerant
quantum computers (FTQC) present a novel computing paradigm that can efficiently and exactly time-
evolve wavefunctions present within an exponentially large Hilbert space. Significant prior work has focused
on increasingly efficient methods for this problem [21, 22, 23, 24, 25]. Among other techniques, quantum
signal processing (QSP) [23, 24, 26, 27] applied to Hamiltonian evolution efficiently outputs a quantum state
encoding the solution to the Schrödinger equation at a final time t, given an efficient unitary encoding of the
Hamiltonian and an efficient protocol to prepare an initial state. For example, evolution up to precision ϵ of
an initial state of η particles under a molecular Hamiltonian in first quantization, discretized with N plane
waves per particle,2 may be performed with ˜O(η log N) qubits and ˜O(N 1/3η8/3|t| log 1
ϵ ) elementary quantum
operations (gates) – using the algorithm of Ref. [28] – or ˜O((N 2/3η4/3 + N 1/3η8/3)(|t| + log 1
ϵ )) elementary
quantum operations – using QSP and the encoding in Ref. [29]. Nonetheless, quantum algorithms for quan-
tum chemistry and materials science have mostly focused on the electronic structure problem under the BO
approximation, proposing algorithms to compute ground state energies (and sometimes a few excited states,
see [30]) with controlled precision using quantum phase estimation (QPE) [31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38].
Ground state energy computations using FTQC circumvent many of the heuristics and approximations used
in DFT and other conventional techniques. While valuable and conceptually straightforward to integrate
as a reliable, high-precision replacement for (static) electronic structure calculations in the aforementioned
computational pipeline for catalyst design, this quantum computational paradigm can address dynamical
properties only indirectly via a costly reconstruction of potential energy surfaces/force-fields, and is still
limited to the BO approximation.
Performing time-evolution of quantum systems which is exact up to
a user-specified precision and finite basis size is particularly efficient with an FTQC. The question then
becomes, how do we make use of this capability of FTQC to study chemical dynamics?
Several prior works have considered using FTQC to simulate quantum dynamics in a chemical setting.
Chan et al. [39] classically emulated a short (variant of) Trotterized quantum time-evolution in a few sce-
narios, including single electron ionization under an applied field in 2D, two-electron collision in 2D, and the
evolution of two electrons in a He atom (with no nuclear dynamics) in 3D. Kale and Kais [40] developed a
time-dependent formulation of quantum scattering of wavepackets based on the Møller operator formulation
to compute scattering matrix elements, which requires one to specify the molecular scattering channel, i.e.
the reactant and product of interest. Closer to the present work, Kassal et al. [41] first suggested the possi-
bility to use FTQC for direct grid-based simulation of non-BO chemical dynamics via a first-order Trotter
method. Ideas were sketched for how to initialize appropriate molecular states and compute reaction prob-
abilities. Following that, Schleich et al. [42] outlined a “molecular factory” approach using time-evolution
2The simulation cell is assumed to have volume scaling linearly with η.
4
