for convective onset for a range of climate change parameter values, examining the
action of the most unstable mode (Section 4.1) and the waves associated with the
highest frequency mode. The most unstable mode has a moistening action on the
updraft (w′ > 0) regions of the domain, and a drying action on the subsiding regions
(w′ < 0) of the domain, with a circulation from the moister updraft regions to the
drier subsiding regions (Figures 8, 9 and 10). In terms of conditional instability, we
find that the most unstable mode causes a reduction of both the convective inhibition
(CIN) below the LFC, and the pCAPE above the LFC, in the updraft regions. We
find damped oscillatory modes associated with dry internal gravity waves trapped in
the lower unsaturated region of the domain, as in Oishi and Brown 2025. We derived
an approximate dispersion relationship for the dry internal gravity waves in equation
(43), which differs from that given in Oishi and Brown 2025, but shows qualitative
agreement with the numerically calculated results (Figure 13).
A key result is the derivation of non-dimensional parameters which correctly
capture the relationship between moist instability and diffusion (Section 2.5 and
Appendix B). We used the positive convective available potential energy (pCAPE)
as a scale for the kinetic energy in the system, and its associated length scale (the
difference between the level of neutral buoyancy (LNB) and the level of free convection
(LFC)) to construct a moist Rayleigh number, called the Rainy number:
Ry = pCAPE × (LNB −LFC)2
νκ
The Rainy number represents the ratio of (moist) conditional instability (quantified
by pCAPE) to diffusion. We find that Ry changes in response to changes in moist
instability; Ra does not (Figures 1 and 12). By using conditional instability (quantified
by pCAPE) to set the scales in the system, the Rainy number is a better control
parameter for our model: across the climate parameter space, Ry varies less at
criticality than Ra.
Due to the relationship between radiative cooling and pCAPE in our solutions,
we are also able to define a radiatively-based Rainy number (see Appendix B).
The Radiative Rainy number, which uses a different measure of moist conditional
instability, also varies less than Ra at criticality as a result. In fact the use of the
CAPE-based or radiatively-based Rainy number is probably an open choice according
to the scientific question at hand. CAPE-based Ry would naturally be appropriate
for studies of convection and the water cycle; radiatively-based Ry would be a natural
control for the system when studying sensitivity to boundary fluxes and radiative
forcing.
Under the typical climate change scenario, the basic state analysis results indi-
cate that we expect more intense moist convection, with more rainfall. There is more
moisture in the system (associated with warmer surface temperatures) and this leads
to a mid-domain profile which is warmer, following a profile which is more “bowed”
(Figure 4), so despite the warmer and humid surface air, the warmer mid-levels lead
to increased CIN under climate change. For the onset of convection to occur in a
system with more CIN, the available potential energy (pCAPE) must increase, and
as a result the critical Rainy number increases. The increase in the critical Rainy
number is associated with an intensification of the water cycle (as found in Kendon
29
