depth to the complexity of the flow regime, striking a balance between computational
simplicity and model expressiveness to achieve optimal performance.
The integration of HOSVD and LSTM architectures provides a flexible and scal-
able framework for modeling fluid dynamics, enabling applications beyond the test cases
presented in this study. While the current architectures have performed well for the cyl-
inder flow cases, future studies can be conducted to further improve these models and
test them on more complicated data sets, such as transitory flow regimes. For more in-
tricate and higher-dimensional flow regimes, such as those involving multiphase systems
or significantly higher Reynolds numbers, it may be necessary to employ more complex
and deeper architectures.
Future research can build on these findings by extending the proposed methodologies to
study complex fluid flow phenomena and other multi-physics problems, exploring the role
of additional hyperparameter tuning, and integrating more advanced LSTM variants such
as attention-based mechanisms. As the need for accurate and efficient ROMs continues to
grow, the methods developed in this work offer a robust pathway to advancing predictive
modeling capabilities in fluid dynamics, with implications for both scientific research and
industrial applications.
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare that they have no known financial or personal interests that could
have influenced the work reported in this paper.
Code Availability
The code developed for this study is available at: https://modelflows.github.io/
modelflowsapp/deeplearning/.
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the MODELAIR project that has received funding from the
European Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation programme under the Marie
Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 101072559. S.L.C. acknowledges the ENCOD-
ING project that has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon Europe re-
search and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement
No. 101072779. The results of this publication reflect only the author’s view and do
not necessarily reflect those of the European Union. The European Union can not be
held responsible for them. The authors acknowledge the grant PLEC2022-009235 fun-
ded by MCIN/AEI/ 10.13039/501100011033 and by the European Union “NextGener-
ationEU”/PRTR and the grant PID2023-147790OB-I00 funded by MCIU/AEI/10.13039
46
