through lifting 1-body pseudopotentials to 2-body electron-pseudoion interactions. We may also expect that
pseudoion interactions better suited to describe dynamical problems may be introduced in the future. The
plan ahead is as follows:
• Prepare a suitable initial state for reactants and catalyst, justified by appropriate physical and chemical
arguments, as well as considerations of algorithmic efficiency (Sec. 4).
• Describe the algorithm for the evolution under the pseudoion Hamiltonian in Eq. (3) (Sec. 5).
• Describe the molecular identification algorithm to be used to extract information about the reaction
products (Sec. 6).
Remark on cutoffs
We have introduced three different momentum cutoffs: Λ, Λ for the electrons, pseudoions, and Λtrunc < Λ
only for the pseudoion-pseudoion interaction V PI
ion.
The first two cutoffs determine the size of the qubit
registers associated to each electron and pseudoion and hence appear in all the Hamiltonian terms except
V PI
ion. For this latter case, we replace the naive Λ with Λtrunc which functionally truncates the momentum
sums to exclude unphysical parts of the Hamiltonian (that would never be relevant in physical situations)
in order to reduce the resources. As is the convention in quantum-chemistry simulations with plane waves,
one may associate an energy, in Hartree, to the electron cutoff EΛ = 1
2Λ2. Typically, electronic structure
problems converge well with EΛ ∼50Ha, and so Λ ∼10 [71]. For pseudoion wavefunctions to be resolved
spatially, since they are significantly more massive than electrons (and hence more localized), we estimate
– by approximating low-lying quantum harmonic oscillator states with plane waves as a rough surrogate
model for bound ions (not shown) – that Λ ∼3Λ is required as a conservative estimate to ensure critical
nuclear phenomena, such as proton delocalization, are not missed in the dynamics.
Finally, in physical
situations we expect pseudoions to be separated ≳2a0. Inspired by this, we choose to resolve interactions
between pseudoions up to ≲1a0, although a different choice could be made based on the desired resolution.
Converting to a momentum cutoff, this gives Λtrunc ∼1. These cutoff considerations are used to define our
problem instances in Sec. 2.4.
In this work, the hard cutoffs abruptly truncate the momentum set for the Coulomb interactions (Vel, V PI
ion).
There is no fundamental obstacle in alternatively considering replacing 1/r with a softened interaction.12
Consider for example erf(r/a)/r where a determines the scale where the short-distance divergence is soft-
ened, just as is seen in the s = −1 term of V PI
loc. In effect, the hard cutoff Λtrunc is replaced by the softened
interaction with parameter a while keeping Λ as the momentum set for pseudoions. Intuition suggests that
numerical convergence for physical scenarios might be easier with such a softened interaction as well. This
investigation is left for future work.
4
Initial state construction
We construct an initial state that is both physically representative in the chemical context of interest (e.g.
understanding bond reconfiguration/reaction mechanism) and efficient to construct on an quantum computer.
Towards this end, we will be inspired by a Hamiltonian constructed by following the standard approach that
incorporates the BO approximation. However, we will evolve the initial state under the fully quantum-
mechanical pseudoion Hamiltonian in Eq. (3) for all t > 0. We leave exploring settings where the initial
state preparation requires inclusion of some non-BO terms to future work. We shall also follow the guideline
drawn in Sec. 2.2 (and App. B). With this premise, we start with the full Hamiltonian in Eq. (1).
H = −1
2
ηel
X
i=1
∇2
i −
ηion
X
I=1
1
2MI
∇2
I+1
2
ηel
X
i̸=j
1
|ri −rj|+1
2
ηion
X
I̸=J
ZIZJ
|RI −RJ|−
ηel
X
i=1
ηion
X
I=1
ZI
|ri −RI|.
(42)
12Any radially-symmetric interaction f(r), can be moved into the plane-wave basis with a 3d Fourier transformation, which,
for computational ease, can be expressed as a Hankel transform of order 1/2 denoted H1/2{·}(k) with k = |k|, f(k) =
4π
q
π
2
1
√
k H1/2{f(r)√r}(k).
20
