7 
 
state emerges at νh > 2/3, separated from the superconducting state by a resistive state. 
All of these observations are reproducible with another pair of contacts (Extended Data 
Fig. 7). 
 
As illustrated in Fig. 3f, the superconducting transition is relatively broad, with a 
maximum onset transition temperature Tonset of approximately 1.2 K, eventually 
reaching the zero-resistance state at about 300 mK. Extended Data Fig. 8 shows the 
measured dV/dI-Idc under different B at 100 mK. Obvious non-linearity can be observed 
until the superconducting critical magnetic field Bc is reached. The dV/dI-Idc does not 
exhibit sharp coherence peaks even at B = 0, which is likely related to the broad 
superconducting transition. As shown in the B-dependent and T-dependent νh-D maps 
of ρxx and ρxy (Extended Data Fig. 4 and 9), superconductivity is the most pronounced 
at D = 0 but extends into finite D, surrounded by the anomalous Hall metal and RIQAH 
phases.  
 
Figure 4a-4g shows the B-field scan data (within ±75 mT) of ρxx and ρxy in the 
superconducting region at D = 0 and νh = 0.74. At low temperatures, the zero-resistance 
state persists within a small magnetic field range, approximately ± 6 mT at 75 mK. 
Beyond this range, ρxx begins to increase slowly with increasing B, but it remains 
significantly lower than the normal-state resistivity ρN within the scanned B-field range. 
Magnetic switching behavior is observed, featured by two sharp peaks. In the same B-
field range, ρxy stays at zero, except at the magnetic switch peaks (Fig. 4b and 4c). At 
higher temperatures, both ρxx and ρxy deviate from zero resistance, and clear magnetic 
hysteresis loops, along with anomalous Hall effects at B = 0, can be observed (Fig. 4d-
4g). Figure 4i illustrates ρxx as a function of T under different B, showing that strong 
magneto-resistance occurs only below Tonset. As for ρxy, it exhibits strong T-dependence 
but weak B-dependence in the small magnetic field limit, while becomes nearly 
temperature-independent when B > Bc, as shown in Fig. 4j. 
 
The above observations are consistent with the characteristic behaviors of a 2D 
superconductor. In the two-dimensional limit, due to enhanced thermal and quantum 
fluctuations, a true superconducting state with quasi-long-range order exists only below 
the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition temperature TBKT. Although 
electron pairing initiates at higher temperatures (characterized by Tonset), electronic 
transport between TBKT and Tonset is dissipative due to the unbinding vortices, resulting 
in finite resistance. Moreover, an anomalous metallic (or “failed superconductor”) 
phase has been observed in 2D superconducting systems [54,55], typically under a 
small magnetic field but still well below the Bc. This phase is characterized by a nonzero 
ρxx and vanishing ρxy, as what we observed and shown in Fig. 4. The Ginzburg-Landau 
