PAGIONO
An ionospheric activity index
Dr.Paul.Kinsler@physics.org
some time period and some spatial region, albeit subject to the
sensitivity offered by GNSS observations.
VIII.
CONCLUSION
An important aspect of the ionospheric plasma behaviour is
the occurrence of irregularities in the electron density distri-
bution that form in conjunction of plasma instability mecha-
nisms initiated under specific space weather conditions. Prop-
agation disturbances associated with ionospheric irregularities
have an immediate consequence for application and services
reliant upon satellite radio signals that propagate through the
ionosphere (e.g. GNSS). It is the occurrence of propagation
disturbances (e.g. phase fluctuations and scintillation) that can
adversely impact applications reliant upon satellite position-
ing, navigation, and timing, as a result of the degradation in
positioning quality [14, 15, 20, 21, 24].
Various experimental techniques for the observation of the
ionospheric plasma are possible: these range from direct tech-
niques such as the measurement of the altitude variation of
the plasma frequency (through ionosondes) or of the alti-
tude/range variation of the electron density (through incoher-
ent scatter radars), to indirect techniques based on the de-
duction of properties of the ionospheric plasma from prop-
agation effects induced by the ionosphere (e.g., Total Elec-
tron Content from dual-frequency GNSS observations, phase
fluctuations and scintillation on GNSS signals). The latter
GNSS group, when based on a globally distributed network
of ground GNSS receivers, allows us to describe the spatial
and temporal behaviour of the ionospheric plasma over a large
fraction of the globe, whilst the former group provides sparse
but more targetted observations.
Here we introduced a method to describe the spatial distri-
bution and temporal evolution of ionospheric irregularities on
a global scale, based on the rate of change of TEC, and us-
ing an analysis of the distribtion of those changes, rather than
immediately reducing the data to a simple variance.
The first part of the method estimates uncalibrated slant
TEC and its rate of change by using geometry-free combi-
nations of the carrier phases from all the dual-frequency com-
binations available at each ground station. Our method and
metric differs from existing proposals such as ROTI maps,
as it calculates the variability of the rate of change of TEC
from all available links intersecting a given ionospheric pixel
over any given hour, instead of utilising the average of link-
specific ROTI values [3, 5–15, 21]. Our approach is sensi-
tive to the presence of large-scale ionospheric irregularities,
and it informs on the spatial and temporal changes in iono-
spheric properties. Some of these changes are part of a rela-
tively regular or seasonal behaviour – such as the higher oc-
currence of irregularities and scintillation in the equinoctial
post-sunset equatorial ionosphere, but some are due to exter-
nal solar-origian space weather forcing. Both types are cap-
tured equally well by our analysis.
The second part of the method estimates an ionospheric
scale LdT that summarises and encapsulates the state of the
ionosphere under varying solar and geomagnetic conditions.
In contrast to indices such as KP and Dst, our ionospheric
scale can be – and is – easily estimated for different regions,
so that it can retain sensitivity to spatial and temporal depen-
dencies such as in the case of geoeffective active conditions.
Further, since our index is defined in terms of a process and
is not tied to any specific dataset, there is no impediment to
defining new regions or sub-regions of particular interest, or
using either UTC ordering or local time ordering, and com-
puting an LdT index as needed from whatever set of ground
station data that is most applicable.
Our method was tested on quiet and active case studies, and
it demonstrates the ability to distinguish between day-to-day
variability, more persistent patterns, and the response to storm
conditions. The proposed ionospheric scale could be utilised
by service providers aimed at conveying information in an in-
tuitive fashion, informing about the state of the ionosphere,
for example, in relation to possible impacts on applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work at the University of Bath was supported by the
UK Natural Environment Research Council (Grant number
NE/V002597/1 and Grant number NE/X019004/1). The KP
index data were obtained from the GFZ International KP
index Service (ftp://ftp.gfz-potsdam.de/pub/home/obs/); Dst
data were obtained from the WDC for Geomagnetism ser-
vice (https://wdc.kugi.kyoto-u.ac.jp); and RINEX data were
accessed through the International GNSS Service (IGS)
(https://cddis.nasa.gov/archive/gnss/products/) [39, 42].
[1] M. C. Kelley, ed.,
The Earth’s ionosphere: plasma physics and electrodynamics,
International Geophysics, Vol. 96
(Elsevier Academic Press, 2009) p. 556.
[2] X. Pi, A. J. Mannucci, U. J. Lindqwister, and C. M. Ho,
Monitoring of global ionospheric irregularities using the world-
wide gps network,
Geophysical Research Letters 24, 2283 (1997).
[3] N. Jakowski, S. Stankov, S. Schlueter, and D. Klaehn,
On developing a new ionospheric perturbation index for space
weather operations,
Advances in Space Research 38, 2596 (2006).
[4] T. L. Gulyaeva and I. Stanislawska,
Derivation of a planetary ionospheric storm index,
Ann. Geophys. 26, 2645 (2008).
[5] N. Jakowski, C. Borries, and V. Wilken,
Introducing a disturbance ionosphere index,
Radio Science 47, RS0L14 (2012).
[6] I. Cherniak, A. Krankowski, and I. Zakharenkova, Observation
of the ionospheric irregularities over the northern hemisphere:
Methodology and service,
Radio Science 49, 653 (2014).
[7] I. Cherniak and I. Zakharenkova,
High-latitude ionospheric irregularities: differences between
ground- and space-based GPS measurements during the 2015
St. Patrick’s day storm,
Earth Planets and Space 68, 136 (2016).
[8] I. Cherniak, A. Krankowski, and I. Zakharenkova,
ROTI maps: a new IGS ionospheric product characterizing the
ionospheric irregularities occurrence,
Eye on the Ionosphere 22, 69 (2018).
[9] V. Wilken, M. Kriegel, N. Jakowski, and J. Berdermann,
An ionospheric index suitable for estimating the degree of iono-
spheric perturbations,
12
