During each pass scene (step 2), motion of the players and the ball is described by the system of ordinary
differential equations (ODEs). That is, the state vector during the n-th pass scene ⃗un(tn), which consists of
positions ⃗xj and velocities ⃗vj of agent j, evolves according to the following ODE system:
T d⃗xB
dtn
=⃗dn
B −⃗sn
B,
(1a)
T d⃗xR
dtn
=⃗dn
B −⃗sn
R,
(1b)
τ d⃗xD
dtn
=
h
ζn ⃗dD,chase(tn) + (1 −ζn)⃗dD,wait(tn)
i
−⃗xD,
(1c)
and for i ∈{P, M},
d⃗xi
dtn
=⃗vi,
(1d)
m d⃗vi
dtn
=⃗F return(⃗xi) + ⃗F viscous(⃗xi,⃗vi) + ⃗G(tn, ⃗un; ⃗θ,⃗λn),
(1e)
where tn ∈[0, T] denotes time within the n-th pass scene, ⃗sn
B and ⃗sn
R are the starting position of the ball and
Receiver respectively, ⃗dn
B is the destination of the ball, ζn ∈{0, 1} is an indicator of DF’s motion mode (either
‘chase’ or ‘wait’), and ⃗dD,mode(tn) determines the velocity of DF at time tn according to its motion mode. Model
parameters including T, τ and m are described in table 1. The dynamics of Passer and Mover [eqs. (1d) and
(1e)] involve social forces ⃗F return(⃗xi), ⃗F viscous(⃗xi,⃗vi) and ⃗G(tn, ⃗un; ⃗θ,⃗λn). The returning force ⃗F return and the
viscous force ⃗F viscous constitute the confinement mechanism to keep players inside the court. The remaining
part ⃗G expresses hypotheses about players’ behaviour and interactions. For conciseness, we also denote the
ODE system (1) as d⃗un/dtn = ⃗f(tn, un; ⃗θ,⃗λn). We highlight that ⃗f takes two types of parameters: constant
model parameters ⃗θ and pass-specific parameters ⃗λn. The vector of model parameters ⃗θ, which includes T, τ
and m, is constant throughout a game. In contrast, parameters in ⃗λn, such as ⃗sn
B, ⃗dn
B and ζn, may assume
different values across pass scenes.
Numerical integration of the ODE system [eq. (1)] in step 2 generates a time series of ⃗un(tn) for tn ∈[0, T].
In step 3, termination conditions are checked, and the simulation is stopped if one of the conditions has been
satisfied during the last pass scene. A game ends in one of three situations: DF intercepts the ball, the ball
goes out of the court, or the maximum number of passes, which is 20, is reached. When no condition is fulfilled,
the transition to the next pass scene takes place (step 4). Pass-specific parameters of the (n + 1)-th pass scene,
such as the destination of the ball ⃗dn+1
B
and the DF’s motion mode ζn+1, are determined stochastically based on
the state ⃗un and parameters ⃗λn of the n-th, i.e. preceding, pass scene. The initial condition for the (n + 1)-th
pass scene also stochastically depends on the preceding pass scene. These steps from 2 to 4 are repeated until
one of the termination conditions is satisfied. We refer readers to ‘Details on the dynamical model’ in Methods
section for details on the model.
Plausibility of the model
To examine the plausibility of the model, we conducted a large number of simulations and compared their
results with the empirical data. We sampled 15, 000 sets of parameter values randomly, and simulated 500
games for each set of parameter values. As in the experiments, for each game, the temporal average of OF area
was calculated to characterise the motion of the offensive team, and the number of successful passes was also
recorded to measure the team performance. Their ensemble averages over 500 trials are depicted as black points
in Fig. 3. We refer readers to ‘Generating simulated dataset’ in Methods section for details on data generation.
The red and blue cross markers in the figure denote the empirical values of the high- and low-level teams. The
simulation results covered the empirical values in terms of both the number of passes and the average OF area.
Therefore, we argue that the simulation results suggest the plausibility of our model in terms of both the motion
and the performance of a team. It is worth mentioning that not only the quantities measured here but also
the dynamics during a simulated game (Supplementary Videos S1, S2, S3, and S4) visually resembled empirical
tracking data (Supplementary Video S5).
Effects of model parameters on the number of passes
Taking advantage of the modelling approach, we examined determinants of strong performance, namely the
larger number of passes, in our model. To analyse the influence of each model parameter on the number of
passes, we conducted sensitivity analysis using the dataset visualised in Fig. 3. To be precise, we performed
7
