Uncovering influence of football players’ behaviour on team
performance in ball possession through dynamical modelling
Hidemasa Ishii1,*, Yohei Takai2, Yuichiro Marui1, Yoshihiro Yamazaki3, Yusuke Kato1, and
Hiroshi Kori1
1Department of Complexity Science and Engineering, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, the University of Tokyo,
Chiba 277-8561, Japan
2National Institute of Fitness and Sports in Kanoya, Kagoshima 891-2393, Japan
3Faculty of Science and Engineering, School of Advanced Science and Engineering, Waseda University, Tokyo 169-8555,
Japan
*hidemasaishii1997@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract
A quest for uncovering influence of behaviour on team performance involves understanding individual
behaviour, interactions with others and environment, variations across groups, and effects of interventions.
Although insights into each of these areas have accumulated in sports science literature on football, it
remains unclear how one can enhance team performance. We analyse influence of football players’ behaviour
on team performance in three-versus-one ball possession game by constructing and analysing a dynamical
model. We developed a model for the motion of the players and the ball, which mathematically represented
our hypotheses on players’ behaviour and interactions. The model’s plausibility was examined by comparing
simulated outcomes with our experimental result. Possible influences of interventions were analysed through
sensitivity analysis, where causal effects of several aspects of behaviour such as pass speed and accuracy were
found. Our research highlights the potential of dynamical modelling for uncovering influence of behaviour
on team effectiveness.
Introduction
Groups of humans coordinate their behaviour to achieve shared objectives.
We encounter teams of people
coordinating for common causes in every aspect of our lives: people work together to raise families, serve
dishes at restaurants, treat patients at hospitals, and publish scholarly articles. Accordingly, team effectiveness
has drawn significant attention, particularly in psychology, with a primary focus on approaches to enhancing
team performance [1, 2]. Team sports including football are prominent cases where team effectiveness carries
significance.
In sports, team performance, e.g.
win-loss or scores, would be an obvious outcome of team
effectiveness at the group level [3]. While studies on ‘team effectiveness’ in the context of sports remain scarce [3],
large literature in sports science has studied evaluation and enhancement of team performance in football. A full
football match is highly complex, involving diverse situational variables — such as match location and league —
and interactions among 22 players, referees, coaches, and possibly the audience. Moreover, a number of diverse
events take place during a match, including passes, free kicks, and fouls, each of which may require a distinct
description. We therefore concentrate on a specific aspect of football: ball possession. In particular, our study
concerns three-versus-one (3v1) ball possession game, where three offensive players (OFs) possess the ball and
one defensive player (DF) tries to intercept it. In this game, OFs try to maximise the number of consecutive
passes, while DF tries to minimise it. Therefore the number of passes is the measure for performance. Ball
possession game, also known as rondo drill, is widely used in practice, although scarcely investigated [4,5]. Ball
possession is one of fundamental elements in football, since a match consists of alternating periods of possessions
by two opposing teams. Among the literature on performance analysis, it has been one of the most studied
indicators of team performance [6,7], and its relationship with situational variables [8–12] and other performance
indicators [7,13,14] has been extensively analysed. Recently, it also attracts attention in physics and computer
science [15, 16]. The accumulated insights suggest that ball possession is strongly associated with aggregated
team performance, while it is not necessarily predictive of individual match results [6,17].
Regarding football, research in sports performance analysis has accumulated insights into players’ behaviour,
aiming to enhance individual and team performance [18,19]. The literature has repeatedly highlighted the sig-
nificance of clarifying the relationship between players’ behaviour and team performance [18, 20–22]. A quest
for uncovering influence of players’ behaviour on performance involves four key areas of focus: (1) individual
1
arXiv:2504.06574v1  [physics.soc-ph]  9 Apr 2025
