25
FIG. 17. Neuromorphic computing in ASI via spin-wave microstate fingerprinting. (a-f) Three ASI arrays with different microstate and
magnon dynamics are fabricated (a,c,e) and their spin-wave spectra evaluated while driven through a time-series of repeated minor global
magnetic field loops of varying amplitude (b,d,f). ‘MS’: Square ASI where nanoislands only assume macrospin textures (a,b). ‘WM’: Square
bicomponent ‘width modified’ array with nanoislands of wide and thin width. Islands are bistable between macrospin and vortex textures (c,d).
‘PW’: Pinwheel ASI where nanoislands are bistable between macrospin and vortex textures (e,f). (g) Pipeline schematic of the neuromorphic
computing process. Input time-series data is scaled to a series of minor global magnetic field loops where the field amplitude encodes the
analogue input data values. The field loops are then applied to the ASI, with FMR spectra measured after each loop to form a set of FMR
spectra, one for every point in the input dataset. Linear regression is then performed on the FMR spectra and a training set of desired
computational output data to obtain a single fixed weight value for each FMR frequency channel. These weights are then used to produce
computational output from previously unseen test data, for instance on future prediction of chaotic time-series data such as the Mackey-
Glass dataset shown here. (h,i) ASI computational performance is assessed through task-agnostic metrics (h) including nonlinearity (NL)
and memory-capacity (MC), and performance on specific tasks including future prediction of Mackey-Glass chaotic time-series (i) with
performance assessed by mean squared error (MSE) where lower is better. The task-agnostic metrics and task-specific MSE performance
show strong differences in computational performance for different ASI arrays. (j,k) Multiple ASI arrays may be networked together, with the
output of one array feeding the input of others or multiple arrays being measured in parallel. Metric performance enhances substantially for
3-layer deep ASI configurations, shown by diamonds in (j), and MSE reduces across all future prediction steps for the interconnected networks
(k), with the physical neural network (PNN) where the three ASI arrays are combined in an interconnected multilayer architecture providing
much stronger performance than any single array. Adapted from Ref. [28].
output channels, such as electrical magneto-resistance current
paths or frequency channels within an FMR spectrum).
The reservoir must possess two key properties, nonlinearity
and ‘fading memory’. Nonlinearity describes the reservoirs
ability to perform a nonlinear transformation on the input data,
which cannot be described by a simple y = mx+c relationship.
It is this ability that allows the reservoir computer to solve
nonlinear tasks using simple linear regression methods, as the
reservoir nonlinearly transforms and projects input data into
a higher-dimensional output space where computational data
