5
around the z-axis instead:
U(θ) = Rx
π
2

Rz(2θ)Rx

−π
2

.
(13)
As explained below, the point of maximal magic corre-
sponds to a value of the interatomic distance ℓ⋆for which
the angle θ is equal to −π/8. The key observation is the
following: for θ = −π/8, the unitary U(−π/8) is precisely
conjugate to the T-gate (more precisely to its Hermitian
conjugate in our conventions), and the conjugation ma-
trix belongs to the Pauli group. The T-gate is precisely
known to be a non-Clifford gate which once adjoined to
the group of Clifford operations allows for universal quan-
tum computation. Morevover, conjugation by an element
of the Pauli group does not impact non-stabilizerness,
and therefore the adiabatic stretching of the bond from
the equilibrium position of the dimer to the point of max-
imal extrinsic curvature of the FCI binding energy can
indeed be interpreted as implementing a highly non Clif-
ford gate. Conversely, the process of relaxing from the
point of maximal extrinsic curvature towards the point
of equilibrium of the dimer can be understood as imple-
menting a T-gate. We push this reasoning further at the
end of the outlook section.
The confluence of these perspectives reinforces a re-
markable insight: the process of chemical bond forma-
tion is not solely an energetic or structural rearrangement
but is also accompanied by a non-trivial transformation
in the quantum informational character of the state. At
large distances, the electrons are described by nearly in-
dependent, stabilizer-like states, whereas in the bonding
formation region the superposition of covalent and ionic
contributions requires an injection of magic into the sys-
tem. This observation opens a conceptual bridge between
quantum resource theories and chemical reactivity, sug-
gesting that the cost of forming a bond can be viewed
through the lens of quantum computational resources.
Remark concerning generalizability of the results to re-
alistic basis sets, and analytical expression of the magic
proxies—One can of course question whether the results
observed above in the case of a minimal basis set gen-
eralize to richer, more expressive and realistic basis sets.
Without entering into the technical details, let us show
the results we obtain still in the case of the hydrogen
dimer, but when employing the larger 6-31g basis set.
The reader will find in Fig. 3 the depiction of the FCI
binding energy curve and of the filtered 2-stabilizer Renyi
entropy.
We still observe a neat pick in the magic proxy, but
which appears slightly shifted to a larger interatomic dis-
tance with respect to the point of maximal extrinsic cur-
vature of the binding energy curve. In the case of the
hydrogen dimer, the use of a minimal basis set can al-
ready be considered relatively accurate, and as we saw
leads to a perfect correlation between the point of max-
imal sensitivity, as characterized by the curvature data
FIG. 3. FCI binding energy Efci and filtered stabilizer Renyi
entropy. One observes a slight shift to the right with respect
to the point of maximal extrinsic curvature.
of the potential energy surface, and the maximality of
non-stabilizerness. This points towards a deep connec-
tion between the non-classicality of molecular systems
and the Riemannian geometry of their potential energy
surface. We will comment more in the outlook section on
the observed slight correction brought to this statement
by the use of a larger basis set, i.e. by a more physically
realistic setup.
Let us also mention that in the case of a minimal basis
set for H2, the curse of dimensionality that plagues quan-
tum chemistry for larger systems is absent, allowing for
an analytic expression if the fermionic Wigner function,
and therefore of the magic proxies. One can indeed eas-
ily see that among the 32 possible Majorana strings, 16
of them act diagonally in the space spanned by the two
determinants, and 16 are off-diagonal and contribute to
the cross term. Among the diagonal strings, depending
on the relative contribution of the two determinants, 8
of them contribute cos2(θ) + sin2(θ) = 1 and 8 of them
contribute cos2(θ) −sin2(θ) = cos(2θ). Concerning the
off-diagonal strings, 8 of them give a zero contribution,
and the other 8 contribute 2 sin(θ) cos(θ) = sin(2θ). One
can then extract the various magic proxies. For the sta-
bilizer 2-Renyi entropy one obtains:
S2(θ) = −log

1 −sin2(4θ)
4

,
(14)
and for the mana:
M(θ) = log
1 + | cos(2θ)| + | sin(2θ)|
2

.
(15)
We indeed check that at their common maximum
θ(ℓ⋆) = −π/8, these two quantities take respective val-
ues log(4/3) ≃0.227(6) and log

1
2 +
1
√
2

≃0.188(2),
