7 
 
To show the composition and structural evolution process of FAPbBr3 and MAPbBr3 single 
crystals under the X-ray beam radiation, Figures 3c and 3d present changes in the intensity ratio 
between PbBr2 (111) peak and APbBr3 (100) peak (A = FA or MA) over radiation time. 
Comparable to the crack density changes under the e-beam radiation, the changes of the X-ray 
beam-induced peak intensity ratios are also categorized into three stages. In Stage I, no new peaks 
appear. For example, at a low X-ray beam energy of 11 keV, Stage I lasts for ~500 seconds in 
FAPbBr3 and ~1000 seconds in MAPbBr3. At 14 keV and 17 keV, Stage I almost disappears for 
both crystals. In Stage II, the peak intensity ratio increases at fast and constant rates, and in Stage 
III, the intensity ratio of MAPbBr3 increases slowly, while the intensity ratio of FAPbBr3 almost 
remains constant. The fit slopes of intensity ratio over radiation time for Stage II and Stage III are 
listed in Table S2 (Supplementary material). For FAPbBr3, the rate of increase in peak intensity 
ratio rises with increasing beam energy, whereas for MAPbBr3, the opposite trend is observed, 
suggesting that the X-ray radiation may induce different processes of composition evolutions. In 
general, changes in the intensity ratio for MAPbBr3 are much larger than those for FAPbBr3, 
consistent with the variation in crack density under the e-beam radiation. 
 
2.3. Mechanical stability 
Figures 4a and 4b show the SEM images of FAPbBr3 and MAPbBr3 single crystals within and 
beyond the radiation area after an e-beam exposure of 180 seconds, indicating that cracks only 
appear in the region exposed to the e-beam. To investigate the influence of e-beam-induced 
cracking on the mechanical stability of OIHP single crystals, nanoindentation tests are conducted 
to measure E and H on both the as-growth surface and the radiated surface areas of the two crystals, 
and representative images of indents are shown in Figure S4 (Supplementary material).  
 
As shown in Figures 4c and 4d, the radiated area exhibits lower E and higher H values compared 
to the as-growth area in both crystals. The decreased E values could be attributed to reduced 
stiffness and strength in the radiated area, because the indent size encompasses numerous cracks, 
and the accumulation of cracks disrupts the continuity of the crystal lattice. In contrast, the 
increased H values might be due to the loss of organic components and changes of the bonding 
types which reduces the flexibility of the crystal structure [37-39]. In addition, the changes of E 
and H values are more pronounced in MAPbBr3 (16% decrease in E and 17% increase in H) 
compared to FAPbBr3 (2% decrease in E and 11% increase in H). This discrepancy arises from the 
more extensive crack formation on the surface of MAPbBr3, where the cracks are significantly 
longer, wider, and more irregular, even leading to surface wrapping and increased roughness. The 
mechanical integrity of OIHP single crystals is compromised under radiation exposure, which may 
impact their long-term reliability in practical applications. 
 
