Orb-v3: atomistic simulation at scale
Benjamin Rhodes*, Sander Vandenhaute*, Vaidotas Šimkus, James Gin,
Jonathan Godwin, Tim Duignan, Mark Neumann
{ben,mark}@orbitalmaterials.com
Orbital Materials
We introduce Orb-v3, the next generation of the Orb family of universal interatomic
potentials. Models in this family expand the performance-speed-memory Pareto frontier,
offering near SoTA performance across a range of evaluations with a ≥10× reduction
in latency and ≥8× reduction in memory. Our experiments systematically traverse this
frontier, charting the trade-off induced by roto-equivariance, conservatism and graph sparsity.
Contrary to recent literature, we find that non-equivariant, non-conservative architectures
can accurately model physical properties, including those which require higher-order
derivatives of the potential energy surface.
This model release is guided by the principle that the most valuable foundation models for
atomic simulation will excel on all fronts: accuracy, latency and system size scalability. The
reward for doing so is a new era of computational chemistry driven by high-throughput
and mesoscale all-atom simulations.
*equal contribution
Simulation-based computational chemistry is undergoing a remarkable transition. For several
decades, the field has relied on the success of density functional theory (DFT) [1] and other
approximate solutions to the Schrödinger equation—a framework that has unlocked unprece-
dented insights into the electronic structure and physical properties of matter. However, the
computational cost, typically scaling as 𝑂(𝑁3) or more, is prohibitive for large systems and has
become a bottleneck that limits the use of DFT in high-throughput predictive simulations. Uni-
versal Machine Learning Interatomic Potentials (MLIPs) represent a new paradigm, promising
ab initio accuracy for a wide range of chemistries at enlarged spatio-temporal scales.
MLIP design is broadly composed of two tracks. The first track is concerned with universality;
how can we learn an accurate single potential for all chemical systems? This requires large-scale
dataset creation efforts [5, 16, 20, 41, 43], model-building [12, 11, 34, 29, 28, 20, 23, 40, 37] and
rigorous evaluations [32, 26, 33, 48, 41, 43]. The second track is concerned with scalability; how
can we model realistic systems in some of the most important applications - bio-materials,
chemical reactions or enzymatic processes? This requires more efficient all-atom architectures
[28, 30, 41] and coarse-grained potentials [15, 19]. A grand challenge for the field is to unite these
two tracks, and deliver a universal model, usable by material scientists and biochemists alike,
that can accurately simulate novel systems across several orders of spatio-temporal magnitude.
In this technical report, we introduce the Orb-v3 series of models: universal and scalable all-atom
models at various points on the performance-speed-memory Pareto frontier. At one end of
this spectrum are smooth, conservative potentials with a high degree of roto-equivariance
induced by a new gradient-based regularization scheme called equigrad. Such models excel
in performance, predicting vibrational, thermodynamic and mechanical properties with high
precision. At the other end of the spectrum are non-conservative models with a sparser atomic
1
arXiv:2504.06231v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  8 Apr 2025
