group [BR97]. For such systems, tools from the theory of operator algebras turned out to be
often useful in understanding the algebraic structures behind localized excitations and their
interaction with observables.
Motivated by recent developments in quantum many-body physics, the third-named author
introduced the notion of abstract spin chains [Jon24]. These are formally deﬁned as nets A•
of ﬁnite dimensional C∗-algebras over Z, viewed as a discrete metric space.
These objects
mathematically characterize the algebras of local observables that emerge under symmetry
constraints [LDOV23,Kaw23,Hol23], or as holographic duals of topologically ordered spin sys-
tems [JNPW23]. Unlike concrete spin chains, abstract spin chains can exhibit algebraic entan-
glement, meaning that the algebra of observables localized in some region does not necessarily
factorize into the tensor product of algebras localized at points. This leads to the emergence of
categorical structures which provide new algebraic tools for studying topological spin systems
through holography and dualities.
There are some obvious similarities to the local operator algebraic approach to the 1+1D
chiral conformal ﬁeld theory, based on nets of inﬁnite-dimensional von Neumann algebras over
the real line R (or the compactiﬁed circle S1) [GF93]. However, in contrast to the more purely
algebraic situation described above, conformal nets have full diﬀeomorphism group symmetries
which lead to intricate interactions between the analytic structure of inﬁnite-dimensional op-
erator algebras and the underlying topological structure of space(time). Nevertheless, there
appear to be deeper structural similarities between the discrete and continuous settings. In
particular, if A is an abstract spin chain, we can associate the braided tensor category of bi-
modules DHR(A•) [Jon24], in direct analogy with the braided category of superselection sectors
of conformal nets [GF93]. This structure is essential in the applications of abstract spin chains in
2+1D topological holography [IW23,CW23,JNPW23], and the Kramers–Wannier type dualities
for spin chains with (fusion categorical) symmetries [AMF16,LDOV23,Jon24].
There are many general results about 1+1D chiral conformal ﬁeld theories, and it is natural
to ask which of these might have analogues in the setting of abstract spin chains. Our goal in
this paper is to investigate tensor categorical properties of DHR(A•) beyond this ﬁrst step, in
parallel to foundational results of conformal ﬁeld theory. In particular, one motivating result is
the modularity of the braided category associated with rational conformal nets [KLM01]. Based
on the analogy with this theory, we can ask the following questions on abstract spin chains.
(1) When is DHR(A•) a fusion category?
(2) When is DHR(A•) modular?
(3) When is DHR(A•) Witt trivial, or in other words, when is DHR(A•) a Drinfeld center
of a fusion category?
We provide natural suﬃcient conditions for all of these to hold.
In fact, the main examples of abstract spin chains are fusion spin chains, which can be
constructed from algebraic data arising from unitary fusion categories.
In these cases, the
category of DHR bimodules are manifestly the Drinfeld center of the input fusion category, and
such close coupling with general unitary fusion categories is one nice feature of abstract spin
systems which makes them more accessible than the usual algebraic quantum ﬁeld theories. In
view of our structural results, we can conclude that the fusion spin chains are (in some sense)
universal examples of abstract spin chains up to categorical equivalence.
Let us turn to the main ideas behind our analysis. We look at the inclusion of C∗-algebras
B0 ⊂A, where B0 is the subalgebra of observables supported on the half lines (−∞, −1] and
[0, ∞), and A is the algebra of quasi-local observables. The theory of subfactors suggest that
we should look at the basic construction A ⊂B1 associated with this inclusion, where B1 is the
algebra generated by A and the Jones projection e, that satisﬁes eae = E(a)e for a ∈A, where
E denotes a conditional expectation from A to the subalgebra B0.
A tensor categorical analogue of this construction is AC = L
i Ui ⊗U ∗
i , where (Ui)i is a choice
of representatives of the irreducible classes in some tensor category C. This has a structure of
algebra object in the Drinfeld center of (the ind-completion of) C, and plays an important role in
2
