At present we do not see a way to theoretically single out one of the two scenarios. On the
side of numerical simulations, on the other hand, the issue of universality at the ﬁxed point
G is still debated [49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54]. The most accurate measurement to date is that of
[54] for the domain wall fractal dimension on the square lattice, which gave 1.27319(9) for
the Gaussian disorder distribution and 1.279(2) for the bimodal distribution. These authors
considered the two results as “marginally consistent” with each other and concluded that
they leave open the question of universality at the spin glass ﬁxed point G. Our results now
allow for the possibility that the two distributions renormalize on close but distinct points on
the line A+. Additional interesting insight comes from the numerical conclusion of [55] that
the square lattice model with the disorder (2) and p = 1/2 behaves “almost but not quite” as
a free boson. Since solution A+|Y1=0 is a free boson (pure transmission with amplitude +1),
A+|Y1≪1 is almost a free boson. Solution C, instead, is quite far from free bosonic behavior.
5
Conclusion
Scale invariant scattering theory has been used in the last years to obtain the ﬁrst exact results
for renormalization group ﬁxed points of two-dimensional statistical systems with quenched
disorder. So far, the results had concerned the magnetic ﬁxed points, namely the ﬁxed points
located on the ferromagnetic-paramagnetic phase boundary. In this paper we showed how
the theory can be extended to include the overlap variables which characterize the spin glass
behavior. The overlaps account for the correlations among independent copies (real replicas)
of the system with the same disorder realization. Quite remarkably, the theory explicitly
shows how the initial set of ﬁxed point equations produced by the symmetry constraints
simpliﬁes under the requirement that the diﬀerent copies are correlated only by the disorder
average. The space of solutions of this ﬁnal set of exact equations contains both the magnetic
and the spin glass renormalization group ﬁxed points. The magnetic ﬁxed points coincide
with those obtained within the theory which does not detect the overlaps [6, 14], as they
should. The exact access to the spin glass sector, on the other hand, is obtained here for the
ﬁrst time.
For the random bond Ising model, on which we focused, we showed that the subspace
of spin glass solutions contains an exact line of ﬁxed points. This is a remarkable ﬁnding
in view of the fact that it implies the rarely fulﬁlled renormalization group condition of
“true marginality”. We discussed the scenarios allowed by these results for Ising spin glass
critical behavior, for which strong frustration makes the issue of universality particularly
nontrivial. We then observed that the available numerical results are consistent with the
solution corresponding to the line of ﬁxed points.
10
