1
Introduction
High-precision tests of the Standard Model (SM) are a promising and important area in
elementary particle physics. They call for high-precision theoretical predictions involving
multi-loop perturbative calculations. Dimensional Regularization (DReg) is a particularly
convenient regularization since it manifestly preserves Lorentz invariance and allows for
eﬃcient computational techniques. It also preserves gauge and BRST invariance, albeit
only in vector-like gauge theories such as QED or QCD.
For the high-precision calculations required today and in the future, taking into ac-
count electroweak corrections is of increasing importance [1]. Unlike QED and QCD,
the electroweak sector of the SM (EWSM) is a chiral gauge theory, where left- and right-
handed fermions couple diﬀerently to the gauge bosons. In this context, DReg leads to the
well known γ5 problem [2], which implies that couplings of chiral fermions to gauge ﬁelds
cannot be consistently continued to formally D dimensions without giving up important
properties. Many proposals for treatments exists [3–9], but the scheme deﬁned by ’t Hooft,
Veltman and Breitenlohner, Maison (BMHV) [2, 10–12] stands out as rigorous, with es-
tablished all-order theorems on its renormalization properties and internal consistency.
In the BMHV scheme, the anticommutativity of γ5 is given up; γ5 only anticommutes
with ¯γµ matrices corresponding to the original 4-dimensional space, while it commutes
with the evanescent ˆγµ matrices corresponding to the remaining (D −4) dimensions. It
turns out that as a result BRST symmetry of chiral gauge theories is necessarily broken
in D dimensions, and it is required to add appropriate symmetry-restoring counterterms
which restore the symmetry after renormalization in the 4-dimensional limit, for early
results see Refs. [13–16], for a recent review see e.g. [17] and for a compact summary of
recent progress see [18, 19].
In recent years, the BMHV scheme has gained in popularity and progress has been
achieved in the context of renormalizable gauge theories [15, 16, 20–26] and eﬀective ﬁeld
theories [27–32]. Speciﬁcally in the case of renormalizable gauge theories Refs. [15, 16, 20–
26] have evaluated the spurious symmetry breaking and determined required symmetry-
restoring counterterms in various models.
The complexity of the studies depends on
three kinds of properties: the loop order, the gauge group, and the types of allowed
interactions. Earlier studies [15, 16, 20–23] have allowed only interactions that do not
mix left- and right-handed fermions on the evanescent level; Refs. [24–26] have success-
ively allowed for more general interaction structures and studied the resulting impact
on symmetry-restoring counterterms. Out of the mentioned works, only Refs. [21, 23]
study renormalization and symmetry restoration at the two-loop and three-loop level, re-
spectively. They show that, despite the additional complication caused by subdivergences
and subrenormalization, symmetry restoration works by adding counterterms of a similar
structure as at the 1-loop level.
However, so far all multi-loop studies of BRST symmetry restoration were restricted
to Abelian gauge theories. In the present paper we present a ﬁrst two-loop study for a
non-Abelian gauge theory. To be concrete and motivated by the EWSM, we focus on an
SU(2) gauge theory with a set of chiral, right-handed fermions that are allowed to form an
arbitrary reducible representation. We carry out the complete two-loop renormalization
procedure and determine the symmetry-restoring counterterms that restore the validity of
the Slavnov-Taylor identity, and the UV divergent counterterms that render the theory
ﬁnite. A key novel feature consists in the plethora of non-Abelian structures such as
2
