3
The stokes’ theorem is used again because C1 −C2 forms a closed loop,
∆Sgeo =
ZZ
s
Fµνdλµ ∧dλν
(S22)
where S is the closed surrounding region. Consider the variational method:
δSgeo =
Z T
0
(∂µAν −∂νAµ) ˙λνδλµdt
(S23)
further simplified to a curvature integral:
δSgeo =
Z T
0
Fµν ˙λνδλµdt
(S24)
If the modified Berry curvature near the endpoint is constant, it can be found that the variation of the geometric
action is zero, indicating that the evolution path of the boundary state at the energy gap position will make the
geometric response robust.
3
A STRICT DEFINITION OF QUASI-OPOLOGY THEORY
3.1
Relative Quasi-Topological Number
For the geometric action Sgeo =
R
C Aµdλµ for the non-closed path, define the relative quasi-topological number:
νqua = 1
2π (Sgeo(C) −Sgeo(Cref))
(S25)
where Cref is some reference path, such as the direct line connecting the initial and final states. If the curvature
integral within the region enclosed by the two curves satisfies
ZZ
S
Fµνdλµ ∧dλν = 2πn (n ∈Z)
(S26)
then the relative quasi-topological number is an integer. When the phase of the wave function at both ends of the
path is fixed, meaning the phase difference between the two is fixed, then the property of the quasi-topological gauge
remains unchanged. When the path is closed, νweak = n automatically degenerates to a Chern number. Under the
gauge transformation
|ψ(λ)⟩→eiθ(λ) |ψ(λ)⟩
(S27)
the connection transformation is Aµ →Aµ +∂µθ and the geometric action changes synchronously, thus νweak is gauge
invariant.
3.2
Homotopy Equivalence Class
Two curves are called homotopy that the two curves can be continuously transformed by fixed endpoints without
being destroyed in the parameter space. The νqua of the homotopy class is the same, thus the relative quasi-topological
number of any non-closed trajectories equals the Chern number within a closed region. We find that the geometric
action is well quantized through the above calculations, and the curvature tensor Fµν has odd parity if the system
has time-reversal symmetry.
3.3
K-theory and Lie Group Gauge
Relative K-groups are introduced for non-closed path and boundaries with parameters.
K−1(X, ∂X) ≃Z
(S28)
where X is the parameter space, ∂X is the path endpoint, and νweak is the generator of the group.
The geo-
metric structure of the parameter space is described by the principal fiber bundle P(M, G)(G is the Chern class
