7
ηopt =
2Q2(wG/ωB)4
1 +
p
1 + 4Q2(wG/ωB)4 + 2Q2(wG/ωB)4 ,
Nopt = NT =
"
exp
 ℏωB
kBT
!
−1
#−1
=
"
exp
 ωB
wT
!
−1
#−1
,
(S.45)
where we introduced the environmental critical frequency wT := kBT/ℏ, that only depends on the environmental temperature T.
The physical interpretation of wT is given by the Bose-Einstein statistics: For ωB ≪wT, environmental noise obeys the classical
law N ≃wT/ωB; for ωB ≫wT, environmental noise is exponentially suppressed by phonon quantization N ≃exp(−ωB/wT).
For example, at T = 1mK, the environmental critical frequency is
wT = kB(1mK)/ℏ≃1.3 × 108Hz .
(S.46)
The gravitational and environmental critical frequencies wG and wT, introduced in Eq. (S.44) and (S.46) respectively, provide
a compact way of parametrizing the practical limitations of most experimental devices. We derived their values assuming the
idealized and simple model of two gold spheres at T = 1mK. Ideally, we would like to have wG as large as possible (strong
gravitational coupling) and ωT as small as possible (low noise). For different experimental devices, wG and wT can change but
their order of magnitude is likely to be similar to (S.44) and (S.46) or worse. For example, by increasing the mass density as
much as possible (e.g. using osmium instead of gold) and by using different geometrical shapes, one may only increase wG by
a small factor (≲3). In the same way, it is hard to imagine an optomechanical experiment at a temperature below the already
optimistic hypothesis of 1mK and, therefore, it is hard to reduce wG below the value reported in (S.46).
Given that we have little hope for significant improvements in wG and wT, we can fix them at the values estimated in Eq.
(S.44) and (S.46), respectively. In this way, we are left with just two non-trivial experimental parameters: the quality factor Q
and the mechanical frequency ωB. In the next subsection, we will explore potential experimental implementations over such a
2-dimensional parameter space.
C.
Non-classicality analysis in the (ωB, Q) parameter space
We can finally explore the 2-dimensional parameter space (ωB, Q) to identify what are the potentially good regions for im-
plementing the protocol proposed in this work, i.e., the regions in which gravity can induce a non-classical quantum channel
according to the criteria A, B and C, defined in the main text in Eqs. (5-7). According to the simple criterion derived in (S.16)
and reported in the main text in (13), the non-classical region is identified by the points (ωB, Q) where
λ2
γ2NT(ωB)(NT(ωB) + 1) = Q2 w4
G
ω4
B
1
NT(ωB)(NT(ωB) + 1) = 4Q2 w4
G
ω4
B
[sinh
 ωB
2wT
!
]2 > 1 ⇔2Qw2
G
ω2
B
sinh
 ωB
2wT
!
> 1 .
(S.47)
All the points in which the above condition is not satisfied correspond to the classical region in which the associated gravity-
induced quantum channel is entanglement breaking and therefore unsuitable for the falsification protocol proposed in this work.
The results are reported in Fig. S.2, where two quantum regions are identified at very low or very high frequencies. In the low
frequency regime ωB ≪wT, Eq. (S.47) can be approximated to the simple condition
Q w2
G
wTωB
= w2
G
γwT
≳1,
(S.48)
corresponding to a linear boundary in the logarithmic plot of Fig. S.2. Interestingly, Eq. (S.48) also implies that, at fixed critical
frequencies wG and wT, the only mechanical parameter that determines the non-classicality condition is the mechanical decay
rate γ. In the opposite limit of large frequencies ωB ≈wT, Eq. (S.47) is dominated by the exponentially exploding hyperbolic
sine function, producing the approximately vertical boundary in the right part of Fig. S.2.
In the same parameter space used for Fig. S.2, we can also plot the corresponding optimal transmissivity ηopt of the GIT
channel, i.e., Eq. (S.45). The result is shown in Fig. S.3.
