moments of the integral equation. For this we use the so-called running coupling variable [17]
that eliminates unwanted logarithms in the series expansions. Next, we introduce another set
of observables in Section 3 that were useful in solving this problem for the relativistic models
[18, 21, 22] and relate them to the non-relativistic moments mentioned above via differential
equations. Further, we discuss the solution of these ODEs and a way to fix the yet undeter-
mined integration constants. In Section 4 we present the trans-series solution developed for the
relativistic observables and argue that their structure and the differential relations of Section 3
together can be used to deduce a similar trans-series solution for the non-relativistic moments.
Although our argument does not constitute as an analytic proof, we rigorously show in Sub-
section 4.2 (relegating the technical details to Appendix A) that the non-perturbative structure
of our solutions is fully compatible with the system of ODEs in Section 3. Further, it leads
to resurgence relations similar to those found in the relativistic case (see Subsection 4.3). At
this point we leave the mathematical treatment and turn to the physical applications. First,
as a by-product, in Section 5 we connect the trans-series solution of the lowest moment to a
related historical problem in classical electrostatics, namely the capacity of the circular parallel
plate capacitor. To our best knowledge, it is our work alongside [22] that provides the com-
plete analytic expansion of this quantity for small separation of the disks. After this detour
we re-express the energy density and higher moments of the Lieb–Liniger model in terms of an
appropriately chosen and measurable expansion variable g in Section 6. The latter is related
to the number density of the particles and is commonly used in the literature. We validate our
results numerically up to high precision in Section 7. We first confirm the resurgence relation
obtained in Subsection 4.3 from the asymptotics of the coefficients in the perturbative series for
the energy density. We then compare the resummation of the trans-series of this observable to
a high precision direct solution of the Lieb–Liniger integral equation as a reference. Finally, we
repeat a similar, but more elaborate analysis in terms of the physical expansion variable g, and
also for the higher conserved charges. In the end we discuss the results in Section 8 and draw
our conclusions.
2
Perturbative solution of the Lieb–Liniger model
In this section we review the perturbative solution of the Lieb–Liniger model based on [4]. The
Hamiltonian of this model is given by
H = −
N
X
k=1
∂2
∂x2
k
+ 2c
X
1≤j<k≤N
δ(xj −xk) ,
(1)
with a repulsive interaction c > 0. The system contains N bosonic particles and is of size L
with periodic boundary conditions. Choosing an attractive interaction c < 0 instead would lead
to an integral equation, which is equivalent to that of the Gaudin–Yang model. That model is
of fermionic type, which requires a separate study. See [22] for details. We are interested in the
thermodynamic limit in which the number of particles and the size become large L, N →∞,
while the density n = N/L is fixed. The integral equation which describes the density of Bethe
roots f(x) in the ground-state is given by
f(x)
2
−1
2π
Z B
−B
f(y) dy
(x −y)2 + 1 = 1 .
(2)
The physical coupling is related to the density as g2 =
c
4π2n, which is dimensionless, and can be
written as
1
πg2 =
Z B
−B
f(x) dx .
(3)
3
