arXiv:2504.06625v1  [physics.bio-ph]  9 Apr 2025
UDC: 537.631, 577.352, 530.145, 57.086
Decoupling spin relaxation and chemical kinetics in
radical pair magnetism: A master equation study
Vladimir N. Binhi*
Prokhorov General Physics Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences
38 Vavilov St., Moscow, Russian Federation
Abstract
A leading theory for the biological eﬀects of low-intensity magnetic
ﬁelds is the spin-chemical Radical Pair Mechanism. This mechanism is
best described by the master equation for the density matrix of an open
quantum system, which includes terms for Hamiltonian evolution, thermal
spin relaxation, and chemical kinetics.
In this study, we have found a
solution to this equation for a simpliﬁed radical pair model and shown
that a signiﬁcant magnetic eﬀect occurs when the following condition is
met: γHτ ≳1 + κτ, where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio of the electron, H
is the magnetic ﬁeld strength, τ is the relaxation time, and κ is the rate
of chemical kinetics.
Keywords: magnetic ﬁeld eﬀects in biology, Radical Pair Mechanism, spin
chemistry, open quantum system, spin decoherence
Like a compass needle, the spin state of radical pairs in proteins can be
aﬀected by the magnetic ﬁeld (MF) [e.g., 1, 2].
This is thought to be the
quantum basis for numerous observed magnetic eﬀects in organisms [3]. The
radical pair mechanism (RPM) [e.g., 4, 5] describes an intermediate complex
formed in certain chemical reactions. This complex consists of a spin-correlated
radical pair ˙A ˙B, existing in a quantum superposition of singlet ( ˙A ˙B)S and triplet
( ˙A ˙B)T states.
In such spin-chemical reactions, MFs — whether external or
internal — induce singlet-triplet transitions, altering the relative populations
of singlet and triplet states. Consequently, the product yields of these spin-
selective reactions become MF-dependent. This MF dependence underpins the
RPM role in spin chemistry and biological magneto-responsiveness.
In the absence of chemical kinetics and with some idealizations formulated
below, the equation for a spin system in a dimensionless form is
∂t ρ = −i[ ˆH, ρ] −g(ρ −ρ∞)
(1)
where ρ is the density matrix, ∂t is the time derivative operator, ˆH is the Hamil-
tonian, g is the thermal relaxation rate due to interaction with a thermostat,
and [ , ] denotes the commutator. We assume that thermal ﬂuctuations are much
faster than the spin dynamics. Therefore, it is reasonable to approximate the
action of the thermal bath as a series of short pulses, between which the system
evolves undisturbed. Then eq. (1) is a special case of the Lindblad equation for
*vnbin@mail.ru
1
