the optimization of the log-likelihood function,
ℓ(a, b, w; Y , X) =
X
i∈D
log ϕi −
X
i∈D

αiξi + 1
2βiξ2
i −1
4ξ4
i ,

(7)
with data D (i ∈D), provides estimates concerning the variables that explain
the number of pregnancies during a fertility crisis and amidst fertility catas-
trophes. The likelihood function of equation 7 does not necessarily have to
integrate to one, as the likelihood is proportional to the probability distribution
of the data given the parameters, but the normalization constants ϕi ensure
that the probabilities integrate to one over the parameter space (Grasman
et al., 2010).
If the null hypothesis H0 : b = 0 cannot be rejected at conventional
significance levels, and the parameters a in α = Xa are statistically significant,
then the fertility dynamics can be analyzed solely with traditional fertility
models, without the nonlinear dynamics introduced by a catastrophic fertility
shock. The statistical significance of the parameters b in Zb is a way to
empirically test if catastrophes affected the number of pregnancies, since the
parameters b are associated with catastrophic shocks Z that affect the dynamics
of fertility through the control parameter β = Zb in the catastrophe model.
In practice, catastrophic events are not limited to negative shocks, but
can also capture positive effects—when the control parameters are equal to
ˆβ > 0, ˆα > 0—, such as increases in fertility rates in a population explosion.
Positive control parameters generate catastrophic distributions with support
in the zero-to-infinite positive region (R[0,∞+)), adjacent to the right tail of
the distribution of the number of pregnancies. Understanding the potential
positive and negative impacts of catastrophic events can improve stakeholder
coordination, guide stress testing exercises, and inform policymakers’ decisions
on emergency actions.
When the bifurcation parameter is positive (β > 0), catastrophic events
Z affecting pregnancy rates lead to either (i) a sudden and sharp decrease in
the number of pregnancies if β > 0 and α < 0, or (ii) an abrupt increase in
pregnancies when β > 0 and α > 0. Through the parameters α and β, the
fertility catastrophe model captures the multifactorial nature of fertility rate
changes, with latent factors reflecting the varying importance of each factor
across different regions and contexts.
Among these factors, previous studies have linked fertility changes to in-
creased female education, greater labor force participation by women, economic
development, rising living standards, and urbanization. For instance, Hesketh
and Xing (2020) highlighted the strong negative correlation between female
6
