CAMulator
Figure 8: Global climatological distributions of daily rainfall from CAM6 (teal), CAMulator (purple), and GPCP
observations (dotted black). (Top) Rain amount (mm day−1) as a function of rain rate. (Bottom) Rain frequency
distribution (%) as a function of rain rate. The dry-day frequency is indicated in the top left of the bottom panel, with
values for CAM6 (teal), CAMulator (purple), and GPCP (black). GPCP serves as an observational reference dataset
and is coarsened prior to computing distributions.
3.5
Rain Amount Distribution
In this section we look at the similarities of the modeled rain amount and rain frequency distributions [e.g., Pendergrass
and Hartmann, 2014], using logarithmically distributed rain-rate bins following Watterson and Dix [2003]. See the
appendix section A.3 for the exact form of the calculation. The global distributions of CAM6 and CAMulator, along
with the distribution observed in the daily GPCP dataset spanning years 1997-2012 are shown in Figure 8. The rain
amounts in CAM6 and CAMulator are nearly identical, each peaking at around 10 mm day−1 and are in agreement for
all rain rates (Fig 8a). However, the biases in CAM6 when compared to the GPCP product (i.e. narrower distribution
focused on a higher rain rate) persist in CAMulator. This is expected as CAMulator was trained as a CAM6 emulator.
At larger rain rates (> 10 mm day−1) the rain frequency distributions align fairly well (Fig 8b). However, at lighter rain
rates, between 0.1 and 3 mm day−1, there is a noted reduction in CAMulator rain frequency, bringing the distribution
closer the the GPCP. Additionally, the dry-day frequency is nearly double that of CAM, and much more similar to
GPCP. These are known biases in CAM6 that have persisted through most of the generations of the CAM models
[e.g., Pendergrass and Hartmann, 2014, Pendergrass et al., 2017]. As discussed in [Sha et al., 2025a], the reduction in
drizzle bias is primarily a consequence of our global conservation schemes. In our moisture budget framework, the
global sum of total precipitation is required to be consistent with conserved quantities such as water, mass, and energy.
When CAMulator overestimates drizzle—characterized by relatively low precipitation amounts—and underestimates
precipitation in drier regions, the resulting global precipitation sum deviates from these conservation constraints. To
enforce global consistency, a multiplicative correction is applied. However, because drizzle values are small, even minor
absolute adjustments result in large relative changes. This disproportionate correction significantly increases the MSE
during training, effectively penalizing the drizzle bias to meet the physical conservation laws.
3.6
+2K and +4K runs
Before evaluating the CAMulator’s response to SST perturbations beyond its training distribution, we impose clima-
tological SSTs for the year 2000 as a baseline forcing (+0K). Figure 9 presents the global mean temperature at the
lowest model level (Fig. 9a), along with the vertically integrated heat content for the lower (850–1000 hPa; Fig. 9b) and
12
