Entropy 2025, 27, 395
8 of 14
has to move left by two positions to 2k −1, for all k. Similarly, according to Equation (11),
the intermediate result at even-numbered longitudinal position 2k has to move right by two
positions to 2k + 2, for all k, cf. Figure A2 (top). These moves complete the one-step update:
|Ψ⟩n
|Ψ⟩′n)
−→|Ψ⟩n+1,
(24)
related to the time interval T, as before. See also simplest examples in Appendix A.3.
From the discussion in Appendix A.2, we know how left- and right-movers are
generated by transpositions acting on a spin chain. Presently, however, we have to move
the complete transverse necklaces of spins. This is effected by an obvious generalization of
the previous unitary of Equation (A7), i.e., by a unitary operator ˆUkin defined as:
ˆUkin :=
S
∏
l=−S
S
∏
k=1
ˆP2k−1 2k; l
S
∏
k′=1
ˆP2k′ 2k′+1; l =: exp(−iT ˆHkin),
(25)
where the transpositions ˆPij; l exchange the nearest neighbor spins at longitudinal positions
i and j, respectively, with identical transverse index l. Similarly as before, the corresponding
Hamiltonian ˆHkin can be given analytically as a polynomial in ˆUkin and ˆU†
kin [23].
Thus, we finally arrive at the one-step update rule for the cellular automaton reverse-
engineered from the Dirac equation in 1 + 1 dimensions:
|Ψ⟩n+1 = ˆUkin
S
∏
k=1
ˆ
M(k)|Ψ⟩n.
(26)
This presents our main result. – Following the arguments presented in this work, the
Equation (26) summarizes the behavior of a new deterministic cellular automaton for the
Dirac equation in 1 + 1 dimensions. Emphasis lies on the deterministic evolution, while
earlier attempts have been probabilistic or fully quantum mechanical instead.
3. Discussion
We emphasize that the dynamics of the “Dirac automaton” described above is com-
pletely based on permutations of underlying Ising spins, the two-state variables that define
its ontological states, in accordance with the Cellular Automaton Interpretation of Quantum
Mechanics [4].
We had to introduce the scattering operator
ˆ
M(k), Equation (22), in order to encode
the addition/subtraction arising on the right-hand side of the Dirac equation through the
mass term, cf. Equations (7)–(9), in a deterministic way through suitable permutations. Our
finding in this “Necklace of Necklaces” model has been that permutations of spins on one
necklace are conditioned by a measurement result on the neighboring one. – It appears that
all earlier attempts to formulate an automaton for the Dirac equation, to the best of our
knowledge, instead had to make use of interfering amplitudes borrowed from quantum
mechanics or of probabilistic evolution [29–35]. In distinction from our classical automa-
ton, these models are cellular automata of a different (nondeterministic) kind. They are
known as quantum cellular automata and probabilistic cellular automata, respectively. See also
references [36–41] for related more general discussions of probability and quantum theory.
This may all seem rather tedious. However, it illustrates that addition and subtraction
on a finite set of adjacent integers with periodic boundary conditions can be obtained
simply from permutations of these numbers, which represent discrete automaton states.
Such a description is obviously not limited to small sets of such states.
Clearly, since there are non-commuting transpositions (exchange interactions) ˆP and
operators ˆL involved which measure the transverse position of an up spin, it will not
