7 
 
polariton wavelength. The second path involves SPhPs launched by the edge and scattered by the 
tip into the detector, resulting in a periodicity corresponding to the polariton wavelength. To 
illustrate the contribution from these paths, we perform a Fourier transform of the amplitude =+() 
profile at different frequencies (rows of the 2D plot) in RB2 (Fig.3d). The results confirm that the 
real-space amplitude profile contains two components with distinct spatial frequencies, 
corresponding to the AB() and 2ABCD,   which match the values calculated for the 100 nm 
thick sample (Fig.1c). The 2 component is attributed to the tip-launched SPhPs while the 
 component is attributed to the edge- launched SPhPs. Following an established procedure, we 
fit the profiles of the near-field amplitude signal using the equation65, 
 =+() = EF
GHIJ
√L
+ N
GHIJ
L1 + 7E  (3) 
where F, N and 7 are complex parameters, O is a real parameter and  is the complex-valued 
wavevector. The first term represents the tip-launched polaritons that travel a distance of 2? and 
the second term corresponds to the edge-launched polaritons that travel a distance of ?.  During the 
fitting procedure, the real part of  is set to the analytically calculated value of the suspended 
membranes, while the imaginary part is treated as adjustable parameter. The term √? accounts for 
the geometrical spreading factor of the cylindrical-wave nature of the tip launched polariton while 
the factor 1/?4 represents the efficiency on the excitation of the edge-launched polariton by the 
synchrotron beam.  The fits for the =+() profile (Fig.3e) show a good agreement with the 
experimental data. A high Q factor of up to 23.6 is obtained for the far-infrared SPhPs in the RB2, 
which closely matches our theoretically calculated Q factor for RB2 (Fig.4d and Fig.1d). Achieving 
Q factors matching theoretical results underscores the ability of membrane technology to create 
highly crystalline, atomically smooth, and low-defect membranes, thereby preserving the optical 
properties of the bulk single-crystalline materials.  This high Q factor is comparable to the values 
of well-known low-loss polaritonic materials, such as the mid-infrared SPhPs in SiC thin films (Q 
~ 28)59 and hyperbolic PhPs in hBN (Q ~ 20)4 and MoO3 (Q ~ 25)1,41. Additionally, the Q factor 
is significantly larger than that of terahertz hyperbolic PhPs in MoO3 (Q ~ 7.5)37 and GeS (Q ~ 
10)35. This comparison highlights the promise of SrTiO3 membranes as an emerging material 
platform for advanced far-infrared polaritonic applications. Additionally, we analyze the  of 
mid-infrared SPhPs in RB3, which show significantly shorter propagation length (Supplementary 
Note 6 and Supplementary Fig.6).  These SPhPs demonstrate a low Q of about 5, consistent with 
our previous study and with the theoretical calculation in Fig.1d.   
 
To demonstrate the importance of suspension, we perform a similar SINS line scan in the region 
of the 100 nm SrTiO3 membrane supported by the SiO2/Si substrate (Supplementary Note 7 and 
Supplementary Fig.8). We see that the effect of the substrate is to slightly increase the SPhP 
confinement factor 7 (or ) and to significantly decrease the quality factor, so that the maximum 
Q factor value in RB2 is only 6.  This can be understood by considering how the dielectric function 
of the substrate and the non-symmetric dielectric environment of the membrane affect the 
dispersion relations of PhPs. The increase in the confinement factor is primarily attributed to the 
