Quantum-stabilized states in magnetic dipolar quantum gases
Lauriane Chomaz1.
1 Physikalisches Institut, Universit¨at Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 226,
69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
chomaz@uni-heidelberg.de
(Dated: April 9, 2025)
A decade ago, a universal stabilization mechanism driven by quantum fluctuations was discovered
in ultracold Bose gases of highly magnetic atoms. This mechanism prevents these systems from col-
lapsing and instead allows exotic states of matter to arise, including ultradilute quantum droplets,
crystallized quantum states, and specifically supersolids. We review the experimental and theo-
retical progress in understanding these quantum-stabilized states, their emergence, and intriguing
properties.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Ultracold gases offer a prime platform for exploring
quantum phenomena with exceptional control.
Their
high purity and tunability enable the engineering of a
variety of Hamiltonians by manipulating particle statis-
tics, trapping potential, internal atomic structure, and
interparticle interactions [1, 2].
While most atomic
species interact via isotropic contact interactions of tun-
able strength, introducing long-range and anisotropic in-
teractions has been highly desirable to enrich the physics
at reach [3, 4].
A naturally occurring long-range interaction between
neutral particles is the dipole-dipole interaction. This in-
teraction can be realized in ultracold gases using atoms
with large magnetic moments in their ground state [5],
polar molecules with induced electric dipoles [6], or atoms
excited to Rydberg states [7]. Each of these systems op-
erates in distinct parameter regimes and faces different
experimental challenges.
Here we focus on highly magnetic atoms, for which
large assemblies of tens of thousands of atoms are rou-
tinely brought to quantum degeneracy. These assemblies
exhibit long lifetimes and readily competing interactions
of different natures. Chromium atoms formed the first
magnetic quantum gas in 2005 [8]. Significant advance-
ments came with the realization in the early 2010s of
quantum gases of even more magnetic open-shell lan-
thanide atoms [9, 10].
Despite initial concerns about
their cooling and trapping, these species have proven re-
markably accessible and highly tunable, leading to the
rapid development of many experimental platforms [5].
A turning point in the field came in 2015 with the
discovery of an unforeseen stabilization mechanism – in-
duced by the very effects of quantum fluctuations – that
prevents magnetic quantum Bose gases from collapsing
in regimes where standard theory predicts they do [11].
Based on this mechanism and its understanding, novel
states of matter have been discovered in the following
years, including ultradilute liquid droplets, crystallized
quantum states, and most notably supersolids [12–17].
This article aims to review our current understanding of
the wealth of quantum-stabilized states in dipolar Bose
gases, focusing on the case of polarized lanthanide atoms.
We discuss key experimental achievements, theoretical
descriptions and predictions, as well as promising direc-
tions for future research.
II.
INTERACTIONS IN HIGHLY MAGNETIC
QUANTUM BOSE GASES
A.
Dipole-dipole interactions
Atoms with a large magnetic moment µ in their
ground state interact via sizeable dipole-dipole interac-
tions (DDI). In the presence of an external magnetic field
B, the dipoles get spontaneously polarized and the mag-
netic DDI is
Vdd(r) = 3gdd
4πr3

1 −3 cos2 θ

,
(1)
where θ is the angle between the interparticle position r
and the polarizing field B (i.e. the dipole direction) [3, 5].
The DDI is anisotropic and changes sign, being attrac-
tive (resp. repulsive) when the dipoles are head-to-tail
(resp. side-by-side) [θ = 0 (resp. π/2)], see Fig. 1(a).
The strength of the dipolar interaction is parametrized
by the coupling constant gdd = 4πℏ2add/m scaling with
the dipolar length add = mµBµ2/12πℏ2. Here m is the
atomic mass, ℏthe reduced Planck constant, and µB
the Bohr magneton. In this review, we focus on open-
shell lanthanide atoms, specifically Er and Dy, for which
add ≈66 a0 and 130 a0, respectively [5].
The 1/r3 scaling of (1) decays sufficiently slowly with r
so that the DDI remains long-range and anisotropic with
all partial waves contributing to the scattering in the ul-
tracold dilute regime relevant to quantum gases [2–5].
This contrasts with the van der Waals interaction poten-
tial, scaling as 1/r6, for which only the s-partial wave
remains contributing in the ultracold dilute regime [2].
B.
Tunable contact interactions
Van der Waals forces dominate the interactions be-
tween ultracold non-magnetic atoms. They also exist be-
tween magnetic atoms, giving rise to a second interaction
arXiv:2504.06221v1  [cond-mat.quant-gas]  8 Apr 2025
