8
FIG. 5.
Impact of ancilla qubit error rate on the mean final training accuracy, under the gate noise model with physical
qubit error probability ranging from p = 0.001 −0.01. Each subplot displays the variation in mean final training accuracy with
the number of rounds of syndrome extraction, for a specific combination of ancilla and physical qubit error probabilities. The
ancilla error rates are expressed as a fraction of the physical error rates, denoted by the fraction fanc. The standard deviation
in the meaning final training accuracies, each calculated from 10 training runs, is shown by the shaded regions.
at a lower final training accuracy than the environmental
noise model, which reflects the difference in error levels
between the two models.
Given the greater frequency
of errors produced and the higher error rate for 2-qubit
gates under the gate model, it is unsurprising that the
level of noise in the physical qubits, both detectable and
undetectable, is greater in the gate noise model than in
the environmental noise model.
Our results for both noise models motivate the defini-
tion of a threshold Pauli Error Rate for ancilla qubits,
such that when the error rate is larger than this thresh-
old, error correction may not be effective - namely, the
addition of more syndrome extractions may not improve
training, there is high variability in final training accu-
racy, and the maximum mean final training accuracy is
considerably lower than 1.0 for the system. In determin-
ing the threshold Pauli Error Rate for our system, we
excluded ancilla error rates that produce a plateau at
a final training accuracy of less than 0.90, even if high
variability is not an issue. Taking into account all these
requirements, we arrive at a threshold Pauli Error Rate of
p = 0.003 for the gate noise model, and p = 0.004 for the
environmental depolarising noise model. For comparison,
the current lowest single-qubit gate error rate exhibited
by a NISQ device is 0.15% [59], meaning that we may be
able to run our simple VQC with the [[4,2,2]] code on the
least noisy NISQ devices under special circumstances (for
example, if the dominant noise is gate noise and environ-
mental noise is very low). However, with the addition
of real-world environmental noise to the gate noise, it is
possible that the error threshold would be too low to run
on currently available NISQ devices.
There is a parallel between the threshold we have de-
fined and the Threshold Theorem for quantum error cor-
rection, which asserts that there is a critical error rate
below which sufficiently good quantum error correction
codes can successfully correct errors.
For error rates
above this threshold, errors accumulate too quickly for
effective error correction.
However, despite the paral-
lels, the Threshold Theorem does not explicitly cover the
phenomenon of ancilla errors spreading to the physical
qubits and reducing the effectiveness of the error cor-
recting code.
Though the threshold values we found are specific to
our system and cannot be generalised to other systems,
both the limit on the maximum training accuracy achiev-
