2
ing probe and the two proximity-induced superconduct-
ing InAs leads. This direct coupling in our mesoscopic
geometry is the dominant contribution when the super-
conducting coherence length is longer than the physi-
cal separation of the tunnel probes and superconducting
leads. Further analysis indicates that increasing the ratio
of the Josephson junction width to the superconducting
coherence length will promote Floquet hybridization over
direct coupling in our platform. We provide estimates of
the necessary geometry and assess the feasibility of future
improvement. This study will guide future attempts to
generate Floquet topological superconductivity in hybrid
superconductor-semiconductor systems.
II.
DEVICE FABRICATION AND
MEASUREMENT
The heterostructure used in this study was grown by
molecular beam epitaxy on an InP substrate. The 2DEG
resides in the InAs quantum well separated from the epi-
taxial Al layer by a 10 nm In0.75Ga0.25As top barrier.
This material system has been systematically character-
ized and is described in Ref.
[14].
Mesas for Joseph-
son junctions are defined using a dilute phosphoric acid
and citric acid solution. After mesa definition, the pla-
nar Josephson junctions are patterned by selectively wet
etching the Al layer with Transene D at 50 ◦C for 9 sec-
onds. An 18 nm hafnium oxide layer was deposited glob-
ally by atomic layer deposition. Finally, gate electrodes
are fabricated by the deposition of a Ti/Au metal stack
and a standard lift-off process. The laterally adjacent Al
surfaces serve as ohmic contacts to the 2DEG. For the
device studied here, the width of the Al leads (WS) is
300 nm, the length (L) is 1.6 µm, and the width of the
bare InAs region (WN) is 100 nm as shown in Fig. 1(a)
and (b).
The transmission of the QPCs is tuned to set the
high-bias conductance to 0.015G0, where G0 = e2/2h.
Since the top and bottom QPC gate voltages are set
more negatively than the 2DEG depletion voltage, the
QPC gates also deplete electrons adjacent to the pat-
terned aluminum, helping to define the conduction path
through the Josephson junction. The middle gate volt-
age (Vmiddle) controls the electron density in the un-
covered InAs region.
For the heterostructure used in
this study, the Hall bar measurements show a maximum
mobility µpeak = 57, 000 cm2/Vs at a 2DEG density
n2DEG = 0.6 × 1012 cm−2 at T=10 mK. The electronic
mean free path extracted at peak mobility is 750 nm.
Andreev reflections at the interface between the Al film
and InAs 2DEG beneath it introduce particle and hole
correlations inside InAs 2DEG, leading to an induced
superconducting gap. This proximity-induced hard su-
perconducting gap (∆ind) is approximately 200 µeV and
is extracted from tunneling data measured in a nearby
superconductor-QPC-semiconductor junction.
The in-
terface between the Al film and InAs 2DEG beneath is
Probe V-
a
b
InAs 2DEGs
aluminum
𝐁||
Ws
Ws
WN
L
500 nm
Top Helper
Top QPC
Top QPC
Bottom QPC
Bottom QPC
Bottom 
Helper
Middle gate
VT
CA
IT
VB
CA
IB
IDC
Probe V+
IDC
VJ
FIG. 1.
(a) Schematic of a planar Josephson junction fabri-
cated on an epitaxial Al/InAs heterostructure. The epitaxial
aluminum layer is shown in blue, while the InAs 2DEG is
shown in green. DC current IDC is applied across the device,
producing a voltage VJ when the critical current is exceeded.
Two pairs of QPCs (not shown) are located at the ends of the
central bare InAs region to form tunnel junctions to probe the
local density of states. The direction of the in-plane magnetic
field B∥is indicated with an arrow. (b) False-color scanning
electron micrograph of a typical device with a schematic of
the measurement circuit. The DC voltage bias VT (B) on the
tunneling probe is referenced to the ground. The Al layer is
wet-etched in the green-shaded region and is left untouched
in the blue-shaded region. The white dashed lines indicate
the boundary of the Al pattern. All top gates (yellow-shaded
regions) are separated from the heterostructure by an 18 nm
hafnium oxide layer.
highly transparent, as evidenced by the hard induced gap
(see Fig. 7 and Ref. [14]). The superconducting coher-
ence length is estimated to be ξs = ℏvf/π∆ind = 730 nm,
where vf is the Fermi velocity in InAs 2DEG at n2DEG =
0.6 × 1012 cm−2. Since the width of the Josephson junc-
tion (100 nm) is smaller than both the mean free path and
the superconducting coherence length, our devices are in
the short, ballistic regime. The transparency of the in-
terface between the bare semiconductor region and the
Al-covered region is close to unity, as shown in the Sup-
plementary Materials and as reported in the literature in
similar heterostructures grown in our laboratory [2].
