 
5 
 
in the ACC, WBCs, and tropical systems, etc. 
Historical GMOC variability and its physical modes 
The convergent variability of the CDA-estimated GMOCs (see Methods) is verifying through volume 
transports at 47°, 26°, and 16° N in the Atlantic (where long-term observations exist), as well as the geostrophic 
components against the observational dataset EN4 [35] (Extend Data Fig.2 and Text S2g). To understand the 
mechanism of CDA in reproducing GMOC variability, we decompose the multiscale components of model-
simulated and CDA-estimated GMOCs. The GMOC theory [36] suggests the existence of multiscale processes 
that balance atmospheric forcing and oceanic response to sustain the GMOC. In CDA, atmospheric data 
constraints refine the wind system and correct the atmospheric mean meridional circulation (AMMC), which 
drives ocean circulation, while data-constrained ocean currents improve atmospheric feedback through refined 
heat fluxes (Fig.S2&S3). The balance between the residual of Southern Ocean upwelling minus Northern 
Hemisphere sinking and the low-latitude diffusive mixing maintains the AMMC-GMOC structure [2,37] 
(illustrated in Extend Data Fig.3). The NADW system represents mostly the Northern Hemisphere sinking 
[38]. The Southern Ocean upwelling is represented by the residual circulation (RC) from the wind-driven 
Ekman effect and eddy-induced transport on the flanks of submarine ridges along the ACC [39], i.e., the ACC-
RC system. And we calculate the kinetic energy dissipation rate of 30° S–30° N, εm, to examine tropical 
diffusive mixing effects [40] (see Methods). For the mean state, NADW estimated by both CDAs produces a 
nearly identical isopycnal structure with the observation while ORAS5 only displays somewhat improvement 
from free model simulations (Fig.1g–l). The CDA-estimated ACC-RCs also appear closer to the “observation” 
(Fig.S11), while the εm estimates are close to the level of high-resolution (25 km) ORAS5 ocean reanalysis 
(Fig.S12). 
We perform power spectrum analysis and examine band-pass filtered timeseries of GMOC, NADW, ACC-
RC, and εm indices on decadal (5‒20-yr) (Fig.2), interannual (2‒5-yr) (Extend Data Fig.4) and seasonal-to-
interannual (6-month‒2-yr) (Extend Data Fig.5) scales. We find that the anomaly correlation between two 
model-simulated GMOCs is very small in these three scale bands (0.18, 0.22, and 0.45 respectively), whereas 
the two CDA-estimated GMOCs are significantly correlated in all scale bands (0.62, 0.73, and 0.89 
respectively). This means that the CDA model-data integration does capture multiscale information of the 
Earth system to some degree. In general, the NADW and ACC-RC decadal modes in all data-constrained 
products highly correlate with the “observation” in which the correlations of NADW and ACC-RC in ORAS5, 
CESM-CDA, and CM2-CDA by order are 0.60, 0.93, 0.86 and 0.70, 0.68, 0.58, respectively (Fig.2b&c). For 
