5
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
20
40
60
80
100
ESS
two singular points
repellor
Cost-to-benefit ratio, b/c
Threshold, T
Fig. 4. Presence of singular strategies is shown as a function of the
benefit-to-cost ratio parameter b/c and threshold parameter T for sig-
moid benefit function B(τi) =
b
1+exp(−βsig(τi−T )). Parameter val-
ues: n = 5 and βsig = 5.
In particular, in the case of T = n, if a singular strategy
exists, it must be a repellor (see Fig. 4). This finding aligns
with the evolutionary outcomes observed in threshold PGG
with discrete strategies [40].
IV.
SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we provide individual-based simulations to
verify the theoretical analysis presented above. Our simula-
tions are carried out for populations with size N = 104 and
run for 104 generations. In structured populations, individu-
als are arranged on a 100 × 100 lattice with the von Neumann
neighborhood and periodic boundary conditions and they in-
teract with their k = 4 nearest neighbors. The initial trait
value of each individual is randomly assigned from a Gaus-
sian distribution around the initial investment, x0, with stan-
dard deviation σ0 = 0.01. The birth rate of every individual
is based on the average payoff of k + 1 games he/she partic-
ipates in. For death-birth updating, an individual is randomly
selected to die and then all neighbors compete for reproduc-
tion. With a probability proportional to his/her birth rate, a
neighbor manages to reproduce and place an offspring in the
vacant position. Whenever an individual reproduces, the off-
spring inherits the parental strategy. However, with proba-
bility µ = 0.01 a mutation occurs and the strategy of the
offspring is drawn from a Gaussian distribution around the
parental strategy with standard deviation σmut = 0.01.
We first present the evolutionary trajectory of the distribu-
tion of investments over time for the linear benefit function,
as depicted in Fig. 5. In Fig. 5(a), we examine the scenario
where the benefit-to-cost ratio is below the critical coopera-
tion threshold r∗predicted by adaptive dynamics. The results
demonstrate that the investment distribution within the pop-
ulation gradually declines to zero. In contrast, Fig. 5(b) il-
lustrates the situation where the benefit-to-cost ratio exceeds
r∗, revealing that cooperative investments evolve from an ini-
tially low level to the maximum, ultimately reaching the state
of pure cooperation.
Figure 6 shows the evolutionary dynamics of the trait distri-
bution for the saturating benefit function. Based on the theo-
retical results, it is known that if the singular strategy exists, it
must be an ESS. Therefore, in our simulations we consider the
benefit-to-cost value at which the existence of singular strate-
gies happens. We find that cooperative investments evolve
toward the singular strategy. The distribution of cooperative
investment in the population stabilizes around the ESS pre-
dicted by adaptive dynamics (the gray dashed vertical line).
Figure 7 further illustrates the evolution of the coopera-
tive investment distribution over time when the sigmoid ben-
efit function is utilized. In Fig. 7(a), cooperative investments
evolve towards the singular strategy and stabilize near it, cor-
responding to the ESS (the gray dashed vertical line). Fig-
ure 7(b) and (c) depict the evolutionary trajectories when the
threshold values are intermediate.
It can be observed that
when the initial distribution of cooperative investments is be-
low the theoretically calculated repellor (the black dashed ver-
tical line), cooperative investments evolve away from the re-
pellor. Conversely, when the initial distribution exceeds the
value of the repellor, the trait evolves towards the ESS and
ultimately stabilizes near it. In the case of a larger threshold
T (see Fig. 7(d)), if the initial investment is positioned to the
left of the predicted singular strategy, cooperative investments
gradually decrease to zero. In contrast, if it is positioned to the
right of the singular strategy, cooperative investments evolve
to its maximum value, consistent with the characteristics of
the repellor.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have investigated the evolution of coop-
erative investments in the spatial PGG with different benefit
functions. By employing the pair approximation approach,
we have derived the frequency dynamics of the mutant strat-
egy. Subsequently, we have obtained the dynamical equations
for these different benefit functions. For the PGG with the
linear benefit function, we have found that there are no singu-
lar strategies, and the evolutionary outcomes depend signifi-
cantly on the benefit-to-cost ratio. Concretely, spatial adap-
tive dynamics predict a benefit-to-cost threshold above which
investments reach the maximum but below which they reach
the minimum. Subsequently, we have identified a potential
ESS when considering the saturating benefit function. Fur-
thermore, for the PGG with the sigmoid benefit function, we
have revealed that the evolutionary outcomes are closely as-
sociated with the threshold T. When the threshold is small, a
unique ESS emerges. For the intermediate threshold, both the
ESS and repellor singular strategies can coexist. When T is
large, it primarily corresponds to a unique repellor.
This work continues along the lines of previous investi-
gations considering continuous games with different bene-
fit functions
[24], but it specifically focuses on the PGG
with group interactions rather than pairwise interactions. We
have derived the mathematical conditions for the emergence
of cooperation. Notably, we have observed that cooperation
emerges in PGG at a lower benefit-to-cost threshold compared
