this theory breaks down at energies of the order of O(100) GeV. However, it is well known that the
addition of the gauge bosons W ±, Z0 and the Higgs boson H, supplemented by the mechanism of
spontaneous symmetry breaking [16–18], gives rise to the Glashow-Weinberg-Salam electroweak
theory [19–21], which is strictly renormalizable [22,23].
Example 3: Strong interaction. In the case of the strong force, the strict renormalizability
paradigm does not actually suggest adding new particles, but rather helps us to identify the
correct degrees of freedom. In fact, the low-energy dynamics can be effectively described in terms
of pions whose Lagrangian is perturbatively non-renormalizable. However, at a more fundamental
level the strong interaction is successfully described by quantum chromodynamics (QCD) [24,25],
which is a strictly renormalizable QFT according to which the fundamental degrees of freedom
are gluons and quarks whose interactions are asymptotically free [26,27].
Remark. It is important to clarify that strict renormalizability as a selection principle for
fundamental Lagrangians is not limited to perturbative QFT and (non-convergent) asymptotic
expansions. It also tells us which is the Lagrangian we need to plug into a path integral to perform
fully non-perturbative analyses, e.g. study of soliton-like solutions, tunneling probabilities, lattice
simulations, etc. A priori this does not imply that a strictly renormalizable local Lagrangian is
always suitable to describe physics at arbitrary high energies. It may happen that new insights
are needed and/or that some of the starting principles need to be slightly modified.3 However,
one of the messages we wish to convey through this paper is that, even if the paradigm of strict
renormalizability will not turn out to be the final step in the evolutionary process of QFT, we
cannot proceed without it and so the gravitational interaction must also conform to it.
In the next two sections we will describe gravity in the framework of perturbative local QFT,
focus on the sub-Planckian regime and provide concrete evidence to support the last statement
in the previous paragraph. Then, in Sec. 4 we will comment on the (super-)Planckian regime.
2
Quantum gravity as a QFT
After the SM was successfully formulated in the language of QFT, it became very natural to
ask whether quantum aspects of gravity could be described in the same framework at the fun-
damental level.
However, it was soon realized that general relativity (GR) is perturbatively
non-renormalizable [28,29], which can be easily understood as follows.
Consider the Einstein-Hilbert action
SEH =
1
2κ2
Z
d4x√−g (R −2ΛC) ,
(5)
3Another often-advocated possibility is that the QFT framework should be replaced by a different one to
consistently describe physics at energies above a certain scale. On the contrary, we will provide both theoretical
and phenomenological arguments that there is currently no indication that QFT and the strict renormalizability
paradigm should be abandoned.
4
