86
Evidence for Intrinsic charm in the proton
In doing so we determined the distributions of charm quarks and antiquarks assuming equality
of the intrinsic (scale-independent) charm and anticharm PDFs, i.e. the vanishing of the charm
valence PDF
c−(x, Q2) = c(x, Q2) −¯c(x, Q2) .
(3.8)
Nevertheless, the valence charm PDF c−(x, Q2) must have vanishing integral over x at all scales
Q2, because the proton does not carry the charm quantum number, but the PDF itself may well
be nonzero, as it happens for the strange valence PDF s−= s −¯s. Indeed, a non-vanishing
charm valence component is always generated, like for any other quark flavor, by perturbative
QCD evolution [261]. However, any perturbatively generated valence charm component is tiny
in comparison to all other PDFs, including those of heavy quarks. Hence, any evidence of a
sizable valence charm PDF is a definite sign of its intrinsic nature. Model calculations [128,
247], while in broad agreement on the shape of total intrinsic charm PDF, widely differ in
predictions for the shape and magnitude of the intrinsic valence charm component. Model
calculations of intrinsic charm complemented with input from lattice QCD [262] also predict a
non-vanishing valence component.
Here we investigate this issue by performing a data-driven determination of the intrinsic valence
charm PDF of the proton, based on the same methodology as in [1] (cf. Sections 3.1.1 and 3.2).
We generalize the NNPDF4.0 PDF determination by introducing an independent parametrization
of the charm and anticharm PDFs, determine them from a global QCD analysis (Section 3.3.1),
and subtract the perturbatively generated contributions by transforming all PDFs to the 3FNS in
which perturbative charm vanishes so any residual charm PDF is intrinsic.
We find a non-zero charm valence PDF, with a positive valence peak for x ∼0.3, whose local
significance is close to two sigma. We demonstrate the stability of this result with respect to
theoretical, dataset, and methodological variations (Section 3.3.2). In Section 3.3.3 we conclude
proposing two novel experimental probes to further scrutinize this asymmetry between charm
and anticharm PDFs: D-meson asymmetries in Z+c-jet production at LHCb, and flavor-tagged
structure functions at the upcoming EIC.
3.3.1. The valence charm PDF
Also in this study we follow the NNPDF4.0 methodology, theory settings and dataset [109]
(Section 2.2), the only modifications being related to the independent parametrization of the
charm valence PDF. Firstly, the neural network architecture is extended with an additional
neuron in the output layer in order to independently parametrize c−(x, Q0), Eq. (3.8), at the
PDF parametrization scale Q0 = 1.65 GeV. In the default PDF basis (“evolution basis”, see
Eq. (1.61)) this extra neuron is taken to parametrize the valence non-singlet combination
V15 = (u−+ d−+ s−−3c−). In an alternative basis (“flavor basis”) it instead parametrizes ¯c:
so in both cases the valence component is obtained by taking linear combinations of the neural
