partially constraining the volume-preserving deformation (RVPD) of the mem-
brane action using gauge-ﬁxing conditions4.
The obtained matrix model preserves 11-dimensional Lorentz invariance and
possesses the symmetry (RVPD) arising from the constrained volume-preserving
deformation. The solutions to its equations of motion include conﬁgurations
with a two-dimensional non-commutative extension.
This study has two key features:
1. The long-standing issues in the quantum Nambu bracket, such as the
violation of the Leibniz rule and the Fundamental Identity (F.I.), are
shown to be not essential for the consistency of the theory when only
the canonical quantization procedure is used.
2. Even in the action of such membranes, the most critical symmetry of
the membrane, the volume-preserving deformation, is maintained in a re-
stricted form (RVPD), and a Lorentz-invariant matrix model for mem-
branes is achieved.
This research oﬀers insights into a non-perturbative deﬁnition of M-theory and
aims to provide a starting point for obtaining a Lorentz-invariant matrix model
for membranes. The exploration of connections with other matrix models and
extensions to supersymmetry remain as future challenges.
The structure of this study is as follows:
• Section 2: The action of the membrane is described using the Nambu
bracket, and the Nambu bracket is decomposed using the Poisson bracket.
• Section 3: Gauge-ﬁxing conditions are introduced to further restrict the
volume-preserving deformation (VPD), resulting in a restricted volume-
preserving deformation (RVPD).
• Section 4: The properties of the RVPD are discussed, demonstrating that
it satisﬁes the composition rule of transformations. A matrix regulariza-
tion is performed to obtain the matrix model.
• Section 5: The equations of motion are derived, and solutions such as
particle solutions and non-commutative membranes are examined.
• Section 6: The conclusions are summarized.
• Section 7: Further discussions are presented.
• Appendix A: The algebraic aspects of RVPD are analyzed.
• Appendix B: The necessity and suﬃciency of the gauge-ﬁxing condition
for restricting the gauge parameters are proven.
4In this study, the quantization of the Nambu bracket refers to the matrix regulariza-
tion of the membrane action, and the quantization of the membrane itself requires further
investigation.
3
