A modified-residue prescription to calculate dynamical correlation functions
Igor Benek-Lins,1 Jonathan Discenza,1 and Saurabh Maiti1, 2
1Department of Physics, Concordia University, Montr´eal, QC H4B 1R6, Canada
2Centre for Research in Multiscale Modelling, Concordia University, Montr´eal, QC H4B 1R6, Canada
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
One of the challenges in using numerical methods to address many-body problems is the multi-
dimensional integration over poles. More often that not, one needs such integrations to be evaluated
as a function of an external variable.
An example would be calculating dynamical correlations
functions that are used to model response functions, where the external variable is the frequency.
The standard numerical techniques rely on building an adaptive mesh, using special points in the
Brillouin zone or using advanced smearing techniques. Most of these techniques, however, suffer
when the grid is coarse. Here we propose that, if one knows the nature of the singularity in the
integrand, one can define a residue and use it to faithfully estimate the integral and reproduce all the
resulting singular features even with a coarse grid. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the method
for different scenarios of calculating correlation functions with different resulting singular features,
for calculating collective modes and densities of states. We also present a quantitative analysis of
the error and show that this method can be widely applicable.
CONTENTS
I. Introduction
1
II. The modified-residue prescription
2
A. Demonstration of the prescription
3
B. Incorporation with other prescriptions
4
III. Examples
5
A. Spectral functions
5
B. Collective modes
6
C. Density of states
6
IV. Error analysis
7
A. Constraint on the sub-interval size
7
B. The order of integration and taking imaginary
part
9
V. Conclusion
9
A. Integration in the singular sub-interval
10
References
10
I.
INTRODUCTION
A response from a D-dimensional quantum system
(D ∈{1, 2, 3}), quite generally, involves integration over
their Brillouin zones (BZs).
In metallic systems, the
integration region is often restricted to the Fermi sur-
face, which still forms a D −1 dimensional manifold (for
D ≥2). Most of these integrations involve integration
of singularities resulting from a pole or a line/surface
of poles, which makes the calculation computationally
very expensive, especially if one also needs to account for
many-body effects [1–4]. This problem has been long rec-
ognized and has led to many prescriptions that help with
the cost of computation without compromising on the re-
sult’s accuracy. These include exploiting special points
in the BZ [5, 6], using the tetrahedron method over BZ
points [7–12], using adaptive mesh in the BZ [13–15],
and using advanced smearing/broadening methods [16–
18], to name a few.
When studying response functions, there are two main
types of singularities of interest. One is that in the inte-
grand, and the other is that in the integral. The singular
– or nonanalytic – features that result from the integra-
tion also carries useful information about the properties
of the system [19–22]. In many cases, the resulting sin-
gular features are the result of many-body effects and are
not easily captured using the prescriptions listed above.
The major issue is that all of these approaches help im-
prove ab initio methods.
When calculating a two-body spectral function of a
new quantum ground state, such as a superconductor,
the universal low-energy properties are not directly de-
pendent on the original lattice and BZ parameters. In
such problems, the computation of the ground state it-
self is so expensive that one has to coarsely discretize
the Fermi surface and the computation is done using a
fixed ‘grid’ of values.
Techniques based on functional
renormalization group (fRG) [23–25] and random-phase
approximation (RPA) [26, 27] are good examples that
illustrate this.
This discretization makes the subsequent computation
of a dynamical response function (that is a function of
an external frequency ω) not amenable to the automated
adaptive algorithms as there is no longer the freedom to
add more intermediate grid points without re-doing the
already expensive many-body ground-state calculation.
In order to be able to model responses from such mate-
rials, it would be beneficial to have a method that can
accurately handle the singularities of the integrand and
reproduce singular features of the resulting integral, all
with the original coarse mesh used to obtain the ground
state.
arXiv:2504.06912v1  [physics.comp-ph]  9 Apr 2025
