 
12
4.2. Crater Shapes and Internal Angle of Friction 
Unlike previous plume measurements, crater geometries observed with high-fidelity 
regolith simulants during this study maintained a parabolic cross-sectional shape (Figure 5b), 
without a clearly defined inner and outer crater as observed with glass beads (Figure 5a) and as 
reported by Metzger (2024a). Since these previous experiments were conducted with uniform 
particle size distributions, it is likely that the complex distribution of particle sizes in examined 
lunar regolith simulants can affect the overall crater geometry and resultant erosion rates due 
to internal angle of friction of the granular material. Internal angle of friction is a material 
property that represents the angle at which granular material begins to shear or fail. As 
previously noted by Metzger (2024a), the primary mechanism which drives the development of 
a more complex, inner and outer crater shape (Figure 5a) during plume impingement is wall 
collapse, where the angle of the crater shape exceeds the internal angle of friction for the 
material. While radial flow from the plume may provide a stabilizing force on the crater walls, 
collapsed wall material can be recirculated by the plume and eroded via entrainment, 
increasing erosion rates.  
Previous measurements by Dotson et al. (2024) have shown that materials with 
monoatomic particle size distributions, such as glass beads, generally have lower internal angles 
of friction which would make wall collapse during crater formation more likely. Thus, 
polydisperse particle size distributions, such as with the lunar regolith simulants in this study, 
can have higher internal angles of friction allowing for steep craters and different erosion 
mechanisms. Since the internal angle of friction is expected to be higher for actual lunar 
regolith, such a relationship implies that viscous erosion from rocket exhaust may be less on the 
Moon, but future PSI studies should examine other high-fidelity regolith simulants, including 
those with agglutinates (Li et al., 2023). Since previous measurements have demonstrated that 
internal angle of friction for granular materials increases with density, viscous erosion rate 
while landing and launching from the planetary surfaces may be somewhat reduced through 
compaction (Dotson et al., 2024). Measurements are already underway to calculate the 
observed angle of internal friction from crater slopes and geometries over time, but local 
variations appear to be highly dynamic, likely a result of turbulent flow discussed in the 
previous section. Future studies with slower, laminar flow may be better suited for such direct 
measurements of slope angles and the impact from internal angle of friction on viscous erosion 
rate. 
 
4.3 Bulk Density 
The results of this study show that viscous erosion rate decreases with an increase in 
bulk density of the surface material. Consistent with the relationship in eq. 1, the viscous 
erosion rate is inversely proportional to the bulk density of the granular material and 
dependent on mass flow rate, suggesting the theory from Metzger (2024a) are correct. Higher 
densities likely exhibit stronger interparticle forces that resist erosion, helping to reduce viscous 
erosion rate. For uncompacted lunar regolith simulants under atmospheric conditions, 
increasing the mass flow rate of impinged gas results in a higher volumetric erosion rate, as 
expected. For a constant mass flow rate, increasing the bulk density results in a decrease in 
volumetric erosion rate from viscous erosion. However, the influence of bulk density on 
volumetric erosion rate is reduced with a decrease in mass flow rate as lower mass flow rates 
