Quantum Combine and Conquer and Its
Applications to Sublinear Quantum Convex Hull
and Maxima Set Construction
Shion Fukuzawa # Ñ
University of California, Irvine, USA
Michael T. Goodrich # Ñ 
University of California, Irvine, USA
Sandy Irani # Ñ
University of California, Irvine, USA
Abstract
We introduce a quantum algorithm design paradigm called combine and conquer, which is a
quantum version of the “marriage-before-conquest” technique of Kirkpatrick and Seidel.
In a
quantum combine-and-conquer algorithm, one performs the essential computation of the combine
step of a quantum divide-and-conquer algorithm prior to the conquer step while avoiding recursion.
This model is better suited for the quantum setting, due to its non-recursive nature. We show
the utility of this approach by providing quantum algorithms for 2D maxima set and convex hull
problems for sorted point sets running in ˜O(
√
nh) time, w.h.p., where h is the size of the output.
2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation
Keywords and phrases quantum computing, computational geometry, divide and conquer, convex
hulls, maxima sets
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.SoCG.2025.XX
Funding This work was supported in part by NSF Grant 2212129.
1
Introduction
In classical computing, divide and conquer is an algorithm design pardigm that is usually
described in terms of the following three steps:
1. Divide: divide a problem into two or more subproblems.
2. Conquer: solve the subproblems, typically using recursion.
3. Combine: combine subproblem solutions into a solution to the original problem.
Perhaps because of the wide applicability of algorithm design paradigms, like divide
and conquer, there is interest in adapting classical paradigms to the quantum setting. For
example, Childs, Kothari, Kovacs-Deak, Sundaram, and Wang [9] describe an adaptation
of the divide-and-conquer technique to quantum computing that in some cases results in
query complexities better than what is possible classically. Likewise, Allcock, Bao, Belovs,
Lee, and Santha [3] study the time complexity of a number of quantum divide-and-conquer
algorithms, establishing conditions under which search and minimization problems with
classical divide-and-conquer algorithms are amenable to quantum speedups. Akmal and
Jin [2] adapt classical divide-and-conquer approaches for string problems to the quantum
setting. There is also related work by many others; see, e.g., [4,6,8,14,25,35,37].
A well-known problem that can be solved classically using the divide-and-conquer
paradigm is the convex hull problem; e.g., see Seidel [34]. In the two-dimensional version
of this problem, one is given a set, S, of n points in the plane and asked to output a
representation of the smallest convex polygon that contains the points in S. (See Figure 1.)
© Shion Fukuzawa, Michael T. Goodrich, and Sandy Irani;
licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
41st International Symposium on Computational Geometry (SoCG 2025).
Editors: Oswin Aichholzer and Haitao Wang; Article No. XX; pp. XX:0–XX:17
Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
arXiv:2504.06376v1  [cs.CG]  8 Apr 2025
