21
-1
Figure 10 Laguerre Gauss field encoding and decoding using
(Arriz´on et al., 2007) hologram.
field in the first order of the Fourier plane is c1(a) ∝a.
As shown by (Arriz´on et al., 2007), c1(a) ≤a, which
sets a maximum for the light efficiency of reconstruction
η =
∥c1∥2
P
j ∥cj∥2 ≤∥a∥2, with ∥f∥2 =
1
M
P
x,y |f(x, y)|2 the
power of the signal f, and M the number of pixels.
A solution for Ψ(a, ϕ) that fulfills the condition c1(a) =
a and minimizes errors due to the discrete nature of the
SLM is given by (Arriz´on et al., 2007):
Ψ[a, ϕ] = ϕ + J−1
0 (a) sin ϕ,
(93)
where
J−1
0
is
the
inverse
of
the
Bessel
function.
In
Fourier
space,
the
transfer
function
becomes
H[a, ϕ](u, v) = P
j Hj[a, ϕ](u, v) with Hj[a, ϕ](u, v) =
F

cj(a)eijϕ
(u, v). There is no mathematical reason for
H1 to be spatially separated from the other Hj̸=1 terms,
and thus it cannot be spatially filtered in general. To
improve filtering, it is required to add a phase gradient
of spatial frequency u0: Ψ(a, ϕ) →Ψ(a, ϕ + u0x), such
that the transfer function reads:
h[a, ϕ + u0x](x, y) =
X
j
hj[a, ϕ](x, y) eiju0x
=⇒H[a, ϕ](u, v) =
X
j
Hj[a, ϕ](u −ju0).
(94)
The phase gradient has the effect to spatially shift each
Hj term by ju0, allowing the spatial filtering of the tar-
get signal present in H1. However, the SLM pixel density
limits how large u0 can be chosen, as the gradient’s dis-
cretization error increases the fewer pixels are used to
encode it. The bandwidth of the signal must be smaller
than u0
2 to avoid any overlap between the diffraction or-
ders, and ensure the correct reconstruction of the target
field. Therefore the pixel density fixes the bandwidth of
the target signal that can be reconstructed.
As an example, a Laguerre Gauss field has been en-
coded and decoded using the aforementioned hologram
in Fig. 10. The phase of the target field has a high band-
width, as it varies instantaneously from one quadrant to
the next. As can be seen from the reconstructed field, the
phase has been slightly distorted near the image center,
a sign that the gradient is not steep enough to capture
high spatial frequencies.
The main advantage of spatial light modulators lies in
their ability to achieve high diffraction efficiencies, thanks
to their relatively large modulation depth (8 to 16 bits).
However, their refresh rates are limited, typically from
10 Hz to a few hundred Hz.
An alternative to SLMs is the Digital Micromirror De-
vice (DMD). These devices, composed of arrays of reflec-
tive micromirrors, are traditionally used for amplitude-
only modulation. However, various techniques have been
developed to enable wavefront shaping by grouping mi-
cromirrors into macropixels (Gauthier et al., 2016; Popoff
et al., 2024). While DMDs can reach refresh rates of sev-
eral tens of kilohertz, this comes at the cost of signifi-
cantly reduced light efficiency.
B. Potential engineering
For the various platforms presented in this paper, it is
possible to create an arbitrary potential by locally mod-
ifying the linear refractive index.
The ability to engi-
neer such potentials enables the realization of complex
potential landscapes. Here, we describe how attractive
and repulsive potentials can be implemented in the three
platforms.
In warm atomic vapors, one can exploit the hyperfine
structure of the atomic levels to optically pump atoms
into a dark state, i.e. a state that does not interact with
the probe field, and therefore reduce the effective density
of atoms. By spatially shaping the intensity of a control
beam, one can create spatially dependent optical pump-
ing, thus inducing a local decrease in the optical suscep-
tibility. This results in a local change in the refractive
index and therefore a potential seen by the fluid of light.
A lower index creates a repulsive potential, while an in-
crease can create an attractive one. This idea has been
implement in rubidium vapors to create optically writ-
ten waveguides (Andersen et al., 2001; Truscott et al.,
1999). More complicated schemes using the multi-level
structure of alkali atoms have also been proposed (Zhang
et al., 2013), in particular using electromagnetically in-
duced transparency (EIT) (Sheng et al., 2015; Sun et al.,
2006; Vudyasetu et al., 2009). Interestingly, to keep the
shape of the potential constant over z while reaching a
high resolution, non-diffractive Bessel beams have been
used (Fontaine et al., 2019).
In photorefractive crystals, the refractive index change
arises from the spatial redistribution of photo-generated
charge carriers. When the medium is illuminated with an
intense beam, it becomes saturated as shown in Eq. (87),
and its response to additional light is reduced.
A lo-
calized “writing” beam can therefore induce a spatially
