25
tributions from N∗and ∆∗resonance exchanges become comparable. This difference is attributed
to the variation in the isospin factor τ. Regarding the background, s-channel proton exchange,
t-channel K exchange, u-channel Σ exchange and the interaction current have little contribution.
The ground state ∆exchange has a relatively significant contribution, similar to other ∆∗res-
onances. In the reaction γp →K+Σ0, the t-channel K∗(892) and K1(1270) exchanges provide
considerable contributions of differential cross-sections at the forward angles in the high energy re-
gions. Conversely, for the reaction γp →K0Σ+, the contribution from K1(1270) exchange becomes
negligible, while the contribution from K∗(892) exchange increases a lot.
As for the molecules, the N(1875)3/2−exchange provides the largest contributions among
molecules. Alongside N(1535)1/2−, exchanges of these two molecules contribute across a wide en-
ergy range due to their relatively large widths. Together with contributions from s-channel general
resonance exchanges, they help construct the overall structure of the cross-sections, particularly
the peak at W ≈1900 MeV. Notably, the substantial interference effects between the contributions
from s-channel general resonance exchanges and molecule exchanges, are one of the important rea-
sons for the significant differences in the magnitudes of the cross-sections for γp →K+Σ0 and
γp →K0Σ+.
In addition, N(2080)1/2−& 3/2−and N(2270)1/2−, 3/2−& 5/2−exchanges are
mainly responsible for the peak structures around W = 2080 and 2270 MeV, respectively. And the
contributions from these molecules with different spins are roughly comparable, showing no obvious
preference for any particular spin. Moreover, compared with the HFF-P3 model in Ref. [44], our
results of total cross-sections exhibit distinct peaks around W = 2080 and 2270 MeV, indicating
the significant effects of molecules.
For the results of polarization observables, all experimental data are well described. The predic-
tions for some regions currently lacking experimental data are also presented, which can be com-
pared with future experimental results. However, the amount of experimental data for the polariza-
tion observables is still relatively limited, particularly for the reaction γp →K0Σ+. Meanwhile, the
cross-section data for γp →K0Σ+ are also much sparser compared to those for γp →K+Σ0. These
result in the experimental data still not being adequately constraining for our model parameters.
Furthermore, to verify the stability of these fitted results with the molecular masses fixed, we use
this set of fitted values as initial values to perform the fitting with the molecular masses above the
KΣ threshold released. The convergent fitted values for most of the molecular masses fall within
a variation range of 100 MeV. Notably, the mass of N(2270)3/2−remains almost unchanged,
indicating a particularly strong tendency for N(2270)3/2−to contribute in this region.
More abundant experiments are necessary to further strengthen the constraints on the theoret-
