A. Stationary far-from-equilibrium states
A.1. Cascade states
Throughout the main body of the text we have taken it as a given that the state with occupa-
tion numbers for mode k, nk ∼k−γ — with a specific γ — is a stationary state. Here, we review
why this is so.
The rate of change of nk for a weakly interacting classical Hamiltonian with a quartic inter-
action (3.1), assuming spatial homogeneity, is governed by the wave kinetic equation,
∂n1
∂t = 16π
Z
ddk2
(2π)d
ddk3
(2π)d
ddk4
(2π)dλ2
1234n1n2n3n4
 1
n1
+ 1
n2
−1
n3
−1
n4

δ(ωk1k2;k3k4) δ(⃗k12;34) .
(A.1)
This equation is, in fact, familiar: it is simply the nk ≫1 limit of the quantum Boltzmann equation
for bosons, with the scattering amplitude set equal to its tree level value of λ1234, see e.g., [47].
There are four distinct stationary solutions of the kinetic equation. Two are trivial: nk that is
constant, and the Rayleigh-Jeans distribution nk ∼1/ωk (the high temperature limit of the Bose-
Einstein distribution). If the interaction and frequency are scale invariant, λ1234 ∼kβ (meaning,
λ1234 is some function of momenta such that under a rescaling of all momenta by a factor of s,
λ1234 picks up a factor of sβ) and ωk ∼kα, then there are two more stationary solutions:
nk ∼k−γ ,
where
γ =



d + 2
3β ,
direct cascade
d + 2
3β −α
3
inverse cascade .
(A.2)
These are the Kolmogorov-Zakharov (KZ) solutions [3]; we will give a heuristic derivation of γ
in the next subsection. To be precise, if one inserts either of these nk in (A.2) into the kinetic
equation (A.1), the right-hand side vanishes for all finite k1 ̸= 0 (provided the integrals converge).
Stationary solutions correspond to a constant flux in |⃗k| space. Since the d-dimensional sphere
shrinks to a point at k = 0, it is not possible to maintain finite flux at k = 0. Physically, the KZ
solution is not supposed to be valid at all k — to achieve such a solution one always has a source
which pumps in energy and a sink which absorbs energy. The KZ solution occurs for wavenumbers
that are far separated from both the source and sink.
The two solutions given in (A.2) correspond to the flux of two conserved quantities: energy
and total occupation number (wave action). One may compute the sign of the flux, and on the
basis of this establish that the energy flux gives a direct cascade (from large to small k) whereas
the number flux gives an inverse cascade (from small to large k). We note that the KZ solutions
do not exist in all cases: in addition to requiring that the interaction be weak, the integrals in
the kinetic equation must actually converge on the KZ solution. Moreover, the wave must be
dispersive: the dispersionless case ωk = k discussed in Sec. 2 is outside the regime of perturbation
19
