future branches as the multiverse continues to evolve.
The Schr¨odinger equation alone cannot explain the relationship in (4) due to its linearity:
If ψ(t) is a solution to the Schr¨odinger equation, then c ψ(t) for any c > 0 is also a solution
following identical dynamics. This scale invariance means the squared norm φb of a branch
should have no eﬀect on its future evolution, including the number of sub-branches it gener-
ates. Thus, to achieve the proportional relationship in (4), we must modify the Schr¨odinger
equation, as discussed in the next subsection. The advantage of this modiﬁcation is that (4)
emerges naturally from the system’s dynamics, rather than having to be postulated, as with
the original Born rule.
Taking (4) as given for the moment, we can use it to reproduce the experimental predic-
tions of the traditional Born rule (3) in two distinct ways. The ﬁrst way is pragmatic: Since
we cannot distinguish between the universes created at time τ2, it seems natural to assume
that we ﬁnd ourselves with equal probability in each of them. For macroscopic τ2 −τ1, this
immediately implies that we observe outcome b with probability proportional to nb, which
by (4) equals φb/ P
a φa. This recovers the Born rule (3) and thus inherits all its predictions.
The second way to recover all testable predictions from (4) avoids probabilistic concepts
entirely. This means we cannot reproduce probabilistic statements like P(b = 0) = φ0/(φ0 +
φ1) for a single Stern-Gerlach measurement with B = {0, 1}. But this is not a problem —
just as one cannot test a fair die with a single throw. All meaningful tests of the Born rule
involve near-certain predictions, like y ∈[100, 300] in our example in the introduction. For
such tests, (4) is enough. At time τ2, almost all universes have y ∈[100, 300]. Only a tiny
fraction, 2.2·10−14, violate this — but they are so rare that predicting y ∈[100, 300] is natural
even without using probability. If experiments regularly found y /∈[100, 300], we would need
a very strong explanation for why we keep ﬁnding ourselves in such rare branches.
2.3
Small signal truncation
If we take the unmodiﬁed Schr¨odinger equation as our law of motion, we can never obtain (4),
because the linearity of Schr¨odinger’s equation ensures that the number of future branches of
the state ψb(τ1) remains independent of its squared norm φb =

ψb(τ1)
ψb(τ1)

. To establish
11
