Entropy 2024, 26, 612
41 of 84
6.3.1. General Features of the Motion
For each of the N, pN, and R systems, the motions fall into one of three principal
classes: annuli, pretzel, and chaotic. Within each class, the orbits either (i) eventually
densely cover the portion of (ρ, λ) space they occupy, or (ii) do not. A symbol sequence
consisting of a ﬁnite sequence repeated inﬁnitely many times would be in case (ii) whereas
all chaotic orbits (by deﬁnition) are in case (i). Quasi-regular orbits are also in case (i);
for these, the symbol sequence consists of repeats of the same ﬁnite sequence, but with
an A-motion added or removed at irregular intervals. In phase space, the two types of
orbits are separated by separatrixes (trajectories joining a pair of hyperbolic ﬁxed points).
Regular orbits lie inside the ‘elliptical’ region surrounding an elliptical ﬁxed point, whereas
quasi-regular orbits lie outside such a region.
Quasi-periodic trajectories closely resemble their related periodic counterparts, ex-
cept that the orbit does not exactly repeat itself. Consequently, a quasi-periodic orbit
eventually densely covers some region of phase space despite its high degree of regularity,
as manifested by its periodic symbol sequence. A particle moving on a torus S1 × S1 is a
textbook example. Its motion is characterized by its angular velocity around each copy of
S1; if the ratio of these is rational, the motion will be periodic, whereas the motion will be
quasi-periodic if the ratio is irrational. For the three-body case, non-periodic orbits with
ﬁxed symbol sequences are quasi-periodic, and appear as a collection of closed circles,
ovals, or crescents in the Poincaré section (discussed in the next subsection). Quasi-regular
orbits have symbol sequences that are not ﬁxed.
6.3.2. Annulus Orbits
Annulus orbits have the symbol sequence B and consist of an annulus encircling the
origin in the ρ −λ plane. In these orbits, the hex-particle never crosses the same bisector
twice in succession.
Most annulus orbits are quasi-periodic and ﬁll in the entire ring. However, a few
repeat themselves after some number of rotations about the origin, and a wide variety of
patterns are possible contingent upon the initial conditions for the N, pN, and R systems.
No qualitative distinctions between N and pN annuli were observed within numerically
attainable values of η [29,30].
An example of annulus orbits for the N and R systems (for FE conditions), along
with the positions of each of the three bodies as a function of time, is shown in Figure 20
(periodic) and Figure 21 (near-chaotic). Periodic orbits are numerically difﬁcult to ﬁnd, so
the orbits in Figure 20 are actually very close to periodic orbits; this allows the pattern of the
periodic orbit to be visible. At similar energies, the R hex-particle covers the (ρ, λ) plane
more densely than its N counterpart, and has a higher frequency of oscillation. The higher
frequency for the R system was seen in the previous section for two bodies and appears to
generally hold for the three-body system as well. The increased trajectory density for FE
conditions in the R system consequently follows, since the same number of time steps were
used for both.
These features of higher frequency and trajectory density are more apparent in
Figure 22, which provides a comparison of the orbits using FM initial conditions. For these
conditions, the R system (blue) has a slightly higher energy than its N counterpart (red).
The N system is less dense, covers a smaller region of the (ρ, λ) plane, and does not venture
as close to the origin, characteristics that becoming increasingly pronounced for increasing
η, provided that the R energy remains larger than its N counterpart. This is not guaranteed
for FM conditions, as the bottom diagram in Figure 22 illustrates: here, the N system
has about 14% more energy than its R counterpart, and so covers a larger region of the
(ρ, λ) plane.
