 
1 
Quantum Annealing for Combinatorial Optimization: A 
Benchmarking Study 
 
Authors: Seongmin Kim1,4, Sang-Woo Ahn2, In-Saeng Suh4, Alexander W. Dowling3,*, 
Eungkyu Lee2,*, and Tengfei Luo1,* 
 
1Department of Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering, University of Notre Dame; Notre Dame, 
Indiana 46556, United States. 
2Department of Electronic Engineering, Kyung Hee University; Yongin-Si, Gyeonggi-do 17104, 
Republic of Korea. 
3Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Notre Dame; Notre Dame, 
Indiana 46556, United States. 
4National Center for Computational Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, 
Tennessee 37830, United States. 
*Corresponding author. Email: adowling@nd.edu, eleest@khu.ac.kr, and tluo@nd.edu 
 
 
Quantum annealing (QA) has the potential to significantly improve solution quality and reduce 
time complexity in solving combinatorial optimization problems compared to classical 
optimization methods. However, due to the limited number of qubits and their connectivity, the 
QA hardware did not show such an advantage over classical methods in past benchmarking studies. 
Recent advancements in QA with more than 5,000 qubits, enhanced qubit connectivity, and the 
hybrid architecture promise to realize the quantum advantage. Here, we use a quantum annealer 
with state-of-the-art techniques and benchmark its performance against classical solvers. To 
compare their performance, we solve over 50 optimization problem instances represented by large 
and dense Hamiltonian matrices using quantum and classical solvers. The results demonstrate that 
a state-of-the-art quantum solver has higher accuracy (~0.013%) and a significantly faster 
problem-solving time (~6,561×) than the best classical solver. Our results highlight the advantages 
of leveraging QA over classical counterparts, particularly in hybrid configurations, for achieving 
high accuracy and substantially reduced problem solving time in large-scale real-world 
optimization problems. 
 
Keywords: quantum advantage, quantum-classical hybrid algorithm, quantum annealing, 
combinatorial optimization, benchmarking study 
 
 
Introduction 
Quantum computers mark a paradigm shift to tackle challenging tasks that classical computers 
cannot solve in a practical timescale1,2. The quantum annealer is a special quantum computer 
designed to solve combinatorial optimization problems with problem size-independent time 
complexity3-5. This unique quantum annealing (QA) capability is based on the so-called adiabatic 
process6,7. During this process, entangled qubits naturally evolve into the ground state of a given 
Hamiltonian to find the optimal vector of binary decisions for the corresponding quadratic 
unconstrained binary optimization (QUBO) problem8-10. The adiabatic theorem of quantum 
mechanics ensures that QA identifies the optimal solution regardless of the size and landscape of 
