22
achieves super-solar CGM metallicity by 𝑡∼
500 Myr, exceeding single-feedback models
by factors of several beyond 1 kpc, while
maintaining comparable central metallicity.
This suggests synergistic enhancement of
CGM metal enrichment through combined
feedback mechanisms.
(vii) X-ray properties:
delayed response with
transient asphericity Hot gas X-ray luminos-
ity varies by two orders of magnitude, averag-
ing ∼1041 erg s−1 with peaks coinciding with
AGN outbursts. While primarily spherical,
X-ray emission shows transient ∼20 kpc cav-
ities and bubble structures triggered by pre-
vious cold-mode AGN winds, demonstrating
delayed response to AGN activity.
4.2. Comparison with results from MACER2D
The MACER3D simulations presented here build
upon the MACER2D framework, which has been
validated and applied to study AGN feedback in
galaxy evolution. Some key results obtained un-
der the MACER3D framework are consistent with
those from MACER2D simulations, including the
suppression of star formation and black hole growth
by AGN feedback, the heavily time-variable AGN
luminosity, etc. Nevertheless, a few qualitative dif-
ferences in the results between the MACER3D and
MACER2D simulations are worth noting.
First, the increase of dimensionality allows for a
more comprehensive and realistic treatment of gas
dynamics, fluid and thermal instabilities, and turbu-
lence. In MACER2D simulations, the gas dynam-
ics are inherently axisymmetric, while MACER3D
simulations capture complex three-dimensional
structures and dynamics which are particularly im-
portant for accurately modeling gas accretion. For
instance, non-axisymmetric structures such as cool
filaments spiraling into the central regions are ob-
served in MACER3D simulations, but cannot exist
in 2D because of the axisymmetry. In addition, in
MACER2D simulations, long-standing large-scale
eddies are constantly presented, while small-scale
gas structures are absent given even higher spatial
resolution in 2D simulations. This is due in great
part to the inverse cascade of turbulence from small
to large scales in two dimensions. In contrast, in
the MACER3D simulations where turbulence cas-
cades from large to small scales, such artificial,
long-lasting large-scale eddies are not observed,
and small-scale structures are more prominent.
Second, the MACER3D simulations exhibit sig-
nificantly different AGN duty cycles compared to
MACER2D simulations.
Each AGN duty cycle
in MACER3D simulations lasts for ∼102 Myr,
unambiguously consisting of one active phase of
∼10 Myr and one quiescent phase for the rest of the
cycle. The single-cycle timescale in MACER2D
simulations is much shorter, with the AGN lumi-
nosity fluctuating rapidly between active and qui-
escent phases on ∼Myr or shorter timescales, with-
out clear long-lasting active or quiescent phases.
Since the noSN simulations in MACER3D exhibit
similar rapid fluctuations in AGN luminosity as
in MACER2D simulations, we suspect that the
spatially-resolved SN feedback in MACER3D sim-
ulations plays a crucial role in modulating AGN ac-
tivity, which is absent in MACER2D simulations.
Moreover, since the single-cycle timescale is
much longer in MACER3D simulations, the tempo-
ral correlation between AGN luminosity and sSFR
is pronounced in MACER3D simulations (refer to
Fig. 2), suggesting a shared dependence on the
available gas reservoir. This relationship, although
it might exist in MACER2D simulations, is not
so apparent due to the much shorter single-cycle
timescale.
The detailed investigation of the re-
lated underlying physical mechanisms, particularly
whether turbulence and radiative cooling cooperat-
ing with feedback channels modulate the gas sup-
ply for both black hole accretion and star formation,
will be the focus of a subsequent study.
Finally, the MACER3D framework is designed
to be more general and flexible, and can be applied
to a wide range of galaxy evolution studies, in-
cluding disk galaxies, dwarf galaxies, etc., and can
