 
3 
 
estimates of 3-D ocean currents and GMOC [31]. 
Previously, we have applied a cross-sphere CDA scheme that has multiscale observational constraints [28] 
and refined deep ocean bias treatments [10] to two leading models used by the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC): the Community Earth System Model (CESM) [32] and the 2nd generation Coupled 
Model (CM2) [33], establishing two comprehensive CDA systems [29,30], CESM-CDA and CM2-CDA. Here, 
we use these two CDA systems to assimilate atmospheric and oceanic observations since 1945, creating two 
coupled reanalyses spanning over the past 80 years (see Methods). Through decomposition and composite 
analyses of different scale modes on geostrophic and non-geostrophic components, we demonstrate the 
convergent mean state and variability of the CDA-estimated GMOCs consistent with available “observations.” 
We show that the CDA-estimated atmospheric and oceanic states exhibit coherent configuration (see Text S1, 
S2 and Figs. S1–S7). By analyzing GMOC multiscale components gained in CDA, we also show the physical 
connections between tropical activities which have very active air-sea interactions where CDA is vital for 
incorporating data into coupled models, and multidecadal oscillations in high latitudes, which carry the 
fingerprint of historic events.  
The convergent GMOC mean state in two coupled reanalyses 
We first calculate the mean states of GMOC in two historical model simulations CESM-HIS and CM2-
HIS (Fig.1a&b), two CDA estimates CESM-CDA and CM2-CDA (Fig.1c&d), as well as two ocean reanalysis 
products SODA3 and ORAS5 (Fig.1e&f). In both model-simulated GMOCs, substantial northward transport 
circulation is observed above 3000 m, underlain by weak southward return circulation. This northward 
transport circulation features two strong centers: one at 40°–70° S, associated with the Antarctic Circumpolar 
Current (ACC) system, and the other at 30°–50° N, associated with the North Atlantic Deep Water (NADW) 
system. Both centers are enclosed within the 10 Sv contour circle. However, substantial differences exist 
between CESM-HIS and CM2-HIS. For example, the CESM-simulated ACC- and NADW-associated transport 
centers are stronger than those in CM2; the centers in CM2 are enclosed by a continuous 15 Sv contour, while 
in CESM, this close 15 Sv contour breaks between 20° and 40° S, resulting in two distinct circulation centers. 
In the two CDA estimates, the upper northward transport circulation adjusts to feature three separate 
centers within the 10 Sv contour circle. The ACC-associated transport becomes weaker, while the NADW-
associated transport largely strengthens. Both CDA estimates reveal a new circulation center between 10° and 
30° S at a depth of 500–2000 m, while this center appears very weak in SODA3, and absent in ORAS5. The 
maximum strength of NADW-associated transport in CDA estimates is approximately 20% stronger than in 
