3
III.
REALIZATION OF ARBITRARY-ANGLE
GATES
With our waveform and mode choice determinations,
we now turn our attention to the ability to generate ar-
bitrary amounts of entanglement. From the Hamiltonian
shown in Eq. 2, it can be seen that choice of laser in-
tensity, laser detuning δk, and gate duration (which re-
spectively determine the Rabi drive frequency Ωi, the
interaction strength, and interaction time τ) can be used
separately or together to set θ. In this work, we apply
an amplitude scaling factor to the laser intensity to vary
θ. Specifically, we apply the scaling factor to the global
beam AOM while keeping the IA beam pulse shape and
size fixed. We note this approach is similar to Ref. [6],
in which they applied an overall scale factor to the inten-
sity of the applied laser light and found a roughly linear
relationship between gate error and gate angle. Alterna-
tively, Ref. [1] describes an approach in which detuning
and gate duration were varied together for gates with
θ > 0.075π, whereas for θ < 0.075π, only laser intensity
was varied. It should be noted that a similar roughly lin-
ear relationship was found between gate error and angle
despite the different methodologies.
A.
Saturation Response of Acousto-Optic
Modulator
To make full use of the available optical power, for
MS(π/2), we drive the global beam AOM such that the
peak of the Gaussian pulse shape may require an applied
RF amplitude that approaches the peak diffraction effi-
ciency of the AOM. Thus, it can introduce distortion as
the AOM has a nonlinear saturation response. However,
we calibrate this response and apply the appropriate cor-
rection.
The optical response of the AOM to an RF drive is
given by [28]:
I1 ∝sin2
π
2
a
asat

,
(3)
where I1 is the intensity of the first-order diffracted beam,
a is a unitless software scaling value for the RF ampli-
tude, and asat is the corresponding scaled RF amplitude
at which the AOM response saturates. As Ωis propor-
tional to the square root of the intensity, we write down
the equation with proportionality constant Ξ:
Ω(a) = Ξ sin
π
2
a
asat

.
(4)
To calibrate asat and Ξ, we initialize in the |0⟩state and
perform a Rabi oscillation with fixed t while sweeping a.
The resulting data is fit to
P1 = 1
2 (1 −exp(−Ω(a)t/ξ) cos(Ω(a)t))
(5)
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
a, RF Amplitude (a.u.)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
P1, |1  Detection Probability
q0
FIG. 2: The RF amplitude (a) applied to the global
beam AOM is varied and the resulting Rabi oscillation
fit to Eq. 5 in order to determine saturation parameters.
Uncertainty interval shown is a 1σ Wilson score and are
roughly the size of the points.
where P1 is the probability of detecting the ion in state
|1⟩, ξ is an exponential decay constant to account for
dephasing of the Rabi oscillation. Example data for this
fit using a gate duration of t = 50 µs is shown in Fig. 2,
where we find asat = 188.5(6) and Ξ = 2π × 73.6(1) kHz.
Uncertainty on these parameters is the square root of the
diagonal elements of the covariance matrix from the fit.
The asat parameter is a device-specific parameter re-
lated to the RF response of each specific AOM. For the
global beam AOM, we find it to be relatively stable for
a given frequency, so we recalibrate it infrequently. The
Ξ parameter, on the other hand, is related to the optical
power in both legs of the Raman transition, and the op-
tical powers of each beam are recalibrated frequently due
to gradual beam misalignment and optical degradation.
B.
Sequential Applications of MS(θ)
To confirm our scaling methodology is accurate, we
perform repeated applications of the gate at various an-
gles (θ = π/2, π/8, and π/32) and observe the population
transfer between |00⟩and |11⟩. We note that the gates
described here are the fully calibrated versions including
the light shift cancellation described in Section IV. From
these oscillatory population transfer measurements, we
can estimate the scaling of gate error vs θ. As shown
in Fig. 3, we prepare in the |00⟩state and drive oscilla-
tions between the even-parity states (|00⟩and |11⟩), with
leakage to odd-parity states (|01⟩and |10⟩). As discussed
in [29], the amplitude oscillations of the even parity states
and overall gate fidelity will follow a Gaussian decay when
looping over multiple gates as there can be random shifts
in the applied laser frequency.
We model the probability of detecting even-parity
states Peven according to
Peven(M) = 1 −Podd(M)
(6)
