 
7 
 
Integer Programming 
IP uses branch-and-bound, cutting planes, and other methods to search the solution space for 
optimal integer decisions and prove global optimality within a tolerance (gap). We use Gurobi 
(version 10.0.2) 39 for benchmarking with the default settings (0.1% global optimality gap) plus a 
two-hour time limit and 240 GB software memory limit per optimization problem. The benchmark 
QUBO problem is implemented in the Pyomo modeling environment (version 6.6.2) 40. We also 
experimented with a large gap and observed the first identified integer solution often had a poor 
objective function value. These results are not further reported for brevity. 
 
Simulated Annealing 
SA, which is inspired by the annealing process in metallurgy, is a probabilistic optimization 
algorithm designed to approximate a global optimum of a given objective function. It is 
considered a metaheuristic method, which can be applied to a wide range of optimization 
problems41,42. In SA, temperature and cooling schedule are major factors that determine how 
extensively the algorithm explores the solution space43. This algorithm often identifies near-
optimal solutions but cannot guarantee that local or global optimality conditions are satisfied. For 
SA, the hyperparameters are configured as follows: 1,000 reads, 1,000 sweeps, a ‘random’ initial 
state generation, and a ‘geometric’ temperature schedule. 
 
Steepest Descent 
SD operates by employing variable flips to reduce the energy of a given QUBO through local 
minimization computations rather than relying on a calculated gradient in a traditional gradient 
descent algorithm44. This algorithm is computationally inexpensive and beneficial for local 
refinement; thus, it can be used to search for local optima. In our benchmarking study, SD utilizes 
hyperparameters set to 1,000 reads and a ‘random’ strategy for initial state generation. 
 
Tabu Search 
TS is designed to solve combinatorial and discrete optimization problems by using memory to 
guide the search for better solutions, as introduced by Glover45. This algorithm can escape 
already visited local minima by remembering those points (called ‘Tabu List’ to keep track of 
moves during the search), aiming to identify high-quality solutions in a large solution space. This 
algorithm works well for combinatorial optimization problems with small search spaces. 
However, it can be hard to evaluate neighboring solutions and to maintain and update the Tabu 
List with increasing problem sizes. The hyperparameter settings for TS are as follows: 1,000 
reads, a timeout of 100 ms, and ‘random’ initial state generation. 
 
Parallel Tempering with Isoenergetic Cluster Moves (PT-ICM) 
PT-ICM is an advanced Monte Carlo method designed to navigate optimization space, such as 
QUBO problems46-48. PT operates by maintaining multiple replicas of the system at different 
temperatures and allowing exchanges between replicas based on a Metropolis criterion. This 
approach helps lower-temperature replicas escape local minima with the aid of higher-temperature 
replicas. ICM identifies clusters of variables that can flip without changing the system’s energy46. 
In this study, the hyperparameters for PT-ICM are set as follows: the number of sweeps is 1,000, 
the number of replicas is 10, and the number of iterations is 10. 
 
