21
FIG. 13. Schematic diagram of a PEEM experiment. X-rays are
incident on the sample at a grazing angle, typically around 30 de-
grees.
Electrostatic and/or magnetic lenses extract and focus the
photo-emitted electrons to form a real-space image. Adapted from
Ref. [213]
IXMCD ∝|M|cosϕ(M,σ),
(37)
where ϕ is the angle (in the plane of the sample) between
the sample magnetization and photon spin direction212. In this
way, the sign (positive or negative) of IXMCD indicates whether
the in-plane magnetization direction has a component parallel
or antiparallel to the direction of the incident x-rays.
For PEEM experiments with ASI, the incident direction of
the x-rays is usually chosen so that all of the segments have
some component of magnetization (anti-) parallel to the beam.
This allows the sign of IXMCD to be used along with the the
shape anisotropy to determine the magnetization direction in
each nanomagnet. For example, in square or tetris ASI, a com-
mon choice is to orient the beam at 45 degrees with respect to
the lattice, as shown in Fig. 14.
PEEM-XMCD has been used in many experiments to study
both the static214–217 and dynamic15,189,218–222 behaviors of
magnetism in ASI samples. While the references here provide
a few examples of these studies, more detail can be found in
Refs. [3, 10, 223, and 224] and the references therein.
Typical PEEM setups can incorporate both heaters and
cryogenic setups, allowing the temperature to be chosen based
on the ASI material under study and whether the experiment
intends to measure static or dynamic behavior. Dynamic mea-
surements are typically limited to a time resolution on the or-
der of seconds. This is due to the time it takes to change the
x-ray polarization. Faster dynamics can be achieved if mea-
surements are taken with a single x-ray polarization, in which
FIG. 14.
PEEM-XMCD in tetris ASI. (a) The dichroic contrast
IXMCD is positive or negative (white or black) depending on the sam-
ple magnetization. The x-ray direction is labeled with a yellow arrow
as ε. (b) Using the XMCD contrast and the shape anisotropy of the
nanomagnets, a map of the magnetic moments can be made. Adapted
from Ref. [214]
case the time resolution is limited by the speed of the detector
and possibly the incident photon flux.
One limitation of PEEM is that it is an inherently surface-
sensitive technique, because the photo-emitted electrons can
only escape from the top 2-5 nm of the surface212,213. This
makes it well-suited for typical 2D ASI, but 3D systems
require more advanced techniques such as x-ray magnetic
laminography61.
4.
X-ray photon correlation spectroscopy
Another x-ray based technique to study magnetization dy-
namics uses resonant x-ray scattering with a coherent x-
ray beam to perform x-ray photon correlation spectroscopy
(XPCS). While less common than real-space x-ray imaging
techniques like PEEM-XMCD, resonant x-ray scattering from
ASI can provide valuable insights into its magnetic proper-
ties. Resonant x-ray scattering is performed with the x-ray
energy tuned to an elemental absorption edge. The transition
metal L3 edges are common choices. Using these resonant
energies enhances the magnetic sensitivity of x-ray scatter-
ing by many orders of magnitude225. Resonant x-ray scat-
tering has been used to study the magnetic configuration in
square ASI with topological defects226,227, and artificial quasi-
crystals228, the magnetic-field dependent switching behavior
in square ASI229,230, and magnetic diffuse scattering from an
artificial kagome lattice 231.
In XPCS, resonant x-ray scattering is performed with a co-
herent x-ray beam232. If the beam scatters off different mag-
netic domains, the coherence of the beam leads to interference
in the scattering pattern, commonly referred to as a speckle
pattern due to its speckled appearance. The fluctuations of
this speckle pattern are directly related to fluctuations of the
magnetic domains, so their behavior over time can be used to
study magnetic dynamics in the system. Magnetic dynamics
are studied by calculating the one-time intensity autocorrela-
tion function g2(q,τ)113,232,233:
