This means that if an experiment falsifies one of these Lagrangians, then we can always choose
another one that respects the same starting principles. Therefore, there is no way to actually
falsify the assumptions of super-renormalizability and non-locality for the bare Lagrangian.
2.4
What about the massive spin-two ghost?
A feature of quadratic gravity that has raised concerns in the past and stimulated new ideas in
recent years [87, 88] is the ghostly nature of the massive spin-two field arising from the Weyl-
squared term. Looking at the propagator (11), we can see that the sign of the last component is
opposite to the standard case, due to unconstrained fourth-order derivatives acting on the metric.
Ghosts could cause Hamiltonian instabilities due to the Ostrogradsky theorem [89] and violate
unitarity [5]. However, these statements rely on specific assumptions and there are loopholes.
First, Ostrogradsky theorem applies only to Lagrangians that are non-degenerate, but this is
not the case for gravitational Lagrangians due to diffeomorphism invariance. Therefore, strictly
speaking the theorem does not apply to quadratic gravity. Indeed, numerical relativity analyses
have shown that non-linear evolutions of perturbations in spacetimes with single or binary black
holes can be stable [90, 91]. Moreover, stable classical solutions have been found in some toy
models with ghosts [92–94]. The possibility of physically viable metastable scenarios have also
been considered [48,95]. Furthermore, the question of classical instabilities might not arise at all
if the quantum theory were stable [61,96]. This is not the end of the story, but there is certainly
no proof implying that quadratic gravity is physically inconsistent due to classical instabilities.
Second, the claim about unitarity violation relies heavily on the simultaneous assumptions
of positive (squared) norms for ghost states and Feynman prescription (p2 →p2 −iϵ) for the
ghost propagator. However, unitarity can be shown to hold if alternative quantization prescrip-
tions are implemented. There are at least three approaches [5]: (i) choosing negative norms for
states containing an odd number of ghost particles and retaining the Feynman prescription for
all propagators [39, 49–57]; (ii) retaining positive norms for all physical states and prescribing
the ghost propagator with the anti-Feynman shift together with new rules to compute loop inte-
grals [64–66]; (iii) converting the ghost into a purely virtual particle (fakeon) by prescribing the
ghost propagator with an average of Feynman and anti-Feynman prescriptions together with new
rules to compute loop integrals [58–62].
In our opinion, these unitary quantizations still face some open questions (see [5]). Here we
will limit ourselves to making a few remarks and refer readers to the original works for details.
Unlike the first prescription for which the standard Wick rotation still applies, the second and
third require alternative contour deformations for the evaluation of the loop integrals. In the latter
cases the theory is formulated at the level of Feynman diagrams by new diagrammatic rules. Of the
three, only the first seems compatible with the operator formalism of local QFT. In this case, the
ghost states have positive energy and the (quantum) Hamiltonian is positive-definite. However,
it is not yet clear whether negative norms give rise to observable negative probabilities [97, 98].
11
