6 
 
which has been successfully used to probe phonon polaritons in various materials20,33,54. To 
investigate the far-infrared SPhPs, our SINS measurement employs a liquid helium-cooled 
HgCdTe (MCT) detector equipped with a CsI window36, allowing us to capture near-field signals 
down to below 200 cmâ»Â¹. 
 
Fig.3a shows the near-field, broadband optical image of a 100 nm thick SrTiO3 membrane 
suspended over a trench. The suspended membrane shows a reasonable near-field signal intensity, 
although it is lower than that of the membrane on a SiOâ‚‚/Si substrate. This observation is consistent 
with the reduced reflectivity in the absence of the high-refractive-index substrate. A set of SINS 
spectra on the suspended SrTiO3 are acquired at varying distances from the edge (along the green 
line in Fig.3b). In this study, we utilize the demodulated second-harmonic amplitude and phase 
signals (=+() and >+()), which have been normalized against the spectra of a reference gold 
film.  
 
We begin with the spectrum acquired far away (20 Î¼m) from the edge (green solid curve in Fig.3b), 
where the spectral response is minimally influenced by the interference of polaritons generated by 
the edges. It exhibits two peaks at 300 cm-1 and 550 cm-1 which are attributed to the excitation of 
the antisymmetric SPhPs in RB2 and RB3 respectively54. Notably, no symmetric (ENZ) PhP 
features are observed in the suspended membrane. In contrast, strong ENZ peaks are observed in 
SINS spectra acquired from SrTiO3 supported on gold or SiO2/Si substrates54. This can be 
explained by the symmetric dielectric environment of the suspended SrTiO3, which allows the 
SINS tip to predominantly excite the antisymmetric modes (Supplementary Note 4 and 
Supplementary Fig.4). Further, we perform finite dipole modeling63 to simulate the SINS spectrum 
based on the extracted (), assuming an infinitely large lateral size for the SrTiO3 membrane. 
The simulated SINS spectrum reasonably matches the spectral features in RB2, corroborating the 
absence of the ENZ mode (Supplementary Note 5 and Supplementary Fig.5). As we approach the 
edge, the spectra become position-dependent and reveal new peaks in both RB2 and RB3 as 
compared to the data collected far from the edge. The dashed curves in Fig.3b highlight these 
spatially evolving features, arising from SPhP propagation.   
 
To analyze the dispersion and Q factor of the SPhPs, we record the spectra at various points along 
a line perpendicular to the edge (where ? = 0) with a step of 100 nm. Fig.3c shows the 2D plot of 
amplitude spectra =+() obtained from the line scan on a 100 nm thick suspended SrTiO3 
membrane. Multiple fringes associated with the SPhP propagation are observed in RB2, while a 
single fringe is noted in RB3. This observation is consistent with the calculated Q values for SPhPs 
in both RB2 and RB3, as well as with our previous study of SPhPs in RB3 in SrTiO3 supported on 
a substrate54.  The observed fringes result from the interference of SPhPs with the backscattered 
light. Depending on the illumination conditions, different SPhP paths contribute to the periodicity 
of the fringes64. The first path involves SPhPs launched by the tip, backscattered by the edge, and 
then scattered by the tip into the detector, introducing a periodicity corresponding to twice the 
