NNLO polarized PDFs with MHOU
165
In Ref [4, Sec. 4] we have checked the impact on the fit of dataset variations and/or removal of
theoretical constraints. Specifically, we have verified that jets and dijet asymmetry measurements
are equally constraining the gluon PDF, with the former measurements being slightly more
effective. The removal of small-Q data, as for e.g. the large number of JLAB measurements, has
little or no impact, mostly due to the magnitude of the experimental uncertainties of these data.
This enforces confidence on having properly selected the validity of PDF determination. Finally,
we have studied the impact of the sum rules from the baryon octet decays, Eq. (5.4) and, the
cross-section positivity constraint of Eq. (5.13). Regarding the former item, a sizeable breaking
of SU(3) is advocated in the literature [368], which results in an inflation of the uncertainty on
a8 up to 30%. In order to account for this, and more generally to test the sensitivity of the data
to SU(3) symmetry breaking, we perform a PDF fit that differ for the uncertainty associated
to a8, which is enlarged up to 50% of the nominal value. This results in PDFs which are fully
compatible with the standard settings, showing that after training our default ∆T3 and ∆T8
are fully constrained by the data rather than by these constraints. Regarding the cross-section
positivity, we have performed fits removing completely the condition of Eq. (5.13). Here we
observe that the larger size and more constrained PDFs ∆Σ and ∆g are only mildly affected,
with the singlet being slightly enhanced in the large-x region. On the other hand, the positivity
bound has a relevant impact on the suppressed flavor, as ∆¯u, ∆¯d and ∆s. These, once Eq. (5.13)
is not imposed, tend to be unnaturally wiggly in the large-x region or slowly converging to 0 in
the x →1 limit.
5.3.2. Implications for the proton spin
By definition, the first moment of the polarized PDF is related to the spin fraction carried by the
parton inside the original nucleon. In fact, starting from the definition of Eq. (1.51), one can
obtain the polarized PDF by inserting a spin projector. Given a parton q with spin Sq we define
the net-spin fraction ηq as
ηq = Sq
Z 1
0
dz∆q(z) .
(5.22)
The naive parton model, where the proton is described by the quasi-free valence quarks, suggests
then to decompose the total proton angular momentum J in terms of the quark spins and the
orbital angular momentum Lz. However, as we have shown in the previous section, also the
gluon polarization must be taken into account, and thus we decompose J as
J =
X
q
ηq + ηg + Lz = 1
2 .
(5.23)
Let us mention that this decomposition is not unique [369], but further decomposition of
Lz in terms of gluon and quarks are would not be fully gauge invariant. The experimental
measurements show that parton net-spins contribute only to a fraction, approximately 30%, of
