 
7 
 
reduce imbalances introduced during data-model integration. 
GMOC’s fingerprints on historic events 
Previous model studies have shown that if superimposed on a cold phase of surface ocean internal 
variability, the cooling effect of natural aerosols caused by a volcanic eruption can greatly enhance and extend 
the cold abnormality of sea surface temperature (SST) in a global scope [43]. Two CDA estimates produce 
nearly identical global mean SST residual (GMSSTr) (a quadratic fit of GMSST is removed [43]) variability 
on Mt. Agung (1963), Mt. Chichon (1982) and Mt. Pinatubo (1991) events (Fig.S15a), which shows the same 
features of observed volcanic eruptions as been detected [43]. Here, we detect the consequence of such cold 
SST anomalies caused by these historic volcanic eruptions impacting NADW, so as on GMOC, ACC-RC, and 
εm. We find that the SST anomaly (SSTA) distributions produced by the Chichon and Pinatubo volcanic 
eruptions are very similar, whereas the distribution produced by the Agung is very different (Fig.4a‒c). While 
the Agung volcanic eruption produced cold SSTAs in a large area of the Southern Ocean and warm SSTAs in 
the North Atlantic, the Chichon and Pinatubo volcanic eruptions mainly produced cold SSTAs in the North 
Atlantic. To detect possible linkage between the volcanic eruption-caused SSTA and the NADW signal, we 
examine the timeseries of North Atlantic SST residual (NASSTr) and NADW indices (Fig.4d). We find that 
the NADW’s variations have generally an opposite phase with the NASSTr by a roughly 2‒3-yr lag (Fig.4e&f), 
reflecting a speed of a couple of meters per day for local water vertical transport in the North Atlantic [44]. 
Due to enhancement by the cooling effects of the Chichon and Pinatubo events, the NASSTr’s variations 
appear as a very strong intra-decadal cold phase from the early 1980s to the end of 1990s, with its bottom in 
1993‒1994. The surface cold water corresponds to the strong NADW phase over 1990‒2002, with its peak in 
1996‒1997. 
The AMMC anomalies (departure from time mean) caused by the Agung and Chichon/Pinatubo events are 
quite different (Fig.4g&h), with the Agung-caused anomalies being large in the Southern Hemisphere while 
the Chichon/Pinatubo-caused anomalies reside mainly in tropics and high-latitudes of the Northern 
Hemisphere. This suggests that the atmospheric background wind systems during the Agung and 
Chichon/Pinatubo are quite different, resulting in different aerosol distributions driving different anomalous 
atmospheric circulations. Indeed, a strong positive phase of the North Atlantic Oscillation dominates the 
anomalies of atmospheric circulations during the Chichon/Pinatubo events, while during the Agung event, the 
Southern Annular Mode dominates the atmospheric circulation anomalies (Fig.S18). 
