Impact of model and dataset uncertainties on the opacity inversion
The reconstruction procedure is impacted by a few hypotheses. Some are signiﬁcant, others
do not impact the ﬁnal result. The ﬁrst and most important assumption is that the chemical
composition proﬁle in the upper radiative layers of the Sun is accurately reproduced by the evo-
lutionary models including macroscopic transport. Changing slightly the transport properties
can impact the ﬁnal result, but does not erase the need for a signiﬁcant opacity correction at the
BCZ.
Additionally, the necessity for low-metallicity models to replicate the high helium value deter-
mined from helioseismology, along with lithium depletion, calls for some form of macroscopic
mixing. Various tests with different coefﬁcients are depicted in Supplementary Fig. 4. Two co-
efﬁcients for macroscopic mixing, DX,1 deﬁned in Eq. 5, at two different values of Dh varying
by about 30% and DX,2 deﬁned in Eq. 6, are examined. Additional tests altering the reference
opacity tables and equation of state are presented in Supplementary Fig. 5. In every case, these
results indicate the need for an opacity correction at the base of the convective envelope, directly
resulting from the Ledoux discriminant inversion.
Given their link with the solar problem, we present in Supplementary Fig. 6 a high metallicity
standard model, model 7, built using the GN93 abundances and a model built with the re-
cent MB22 abundances. Interestingly, both cases ﬁnd a signiﬁcant reduction of opacity around
0.64R⊙, and a small increase closer to the BCZ. This increase is much lower than what is found
in AAG21 models, especially in the MB22 model. This indicates that the abundance revision of
MB22 leads to a slightly too high opacity around 0.64R⊙as a result of the higher abundance of
metals. This result is quite signiﬁcant considering that this model includes macroscopic trans-
port reproducing the lithium depletion, which leads to a less steep temperature gradient close
to the BCZ than in a standard solar model32. Due to the higher abundance of metals in these
28
