critically-important problem in climate research.
Changes in deep convection have been investigated using a range of approaches.
One approach involves the use of ensemble data from global-scale General Circu-
lation Models (GCMs), with energy and moisture budgets used to examine future
rainfall change (Held and Soden 2006; Byrne and O’Gorman 2015; Seager et al.
2010). However there is a large uncertainty in modelled convective rainfall over the
tropics, due to coarse resolutions (∼50km) which require subgrid-scale convective
parametrisations (O’Gorman 2015). With the development of exascale computing,
there have been significant advances in GCM resolution, with kilometre-scale (k-scale)
models now being able to explicitly resolve convection on global domains (Sch¨ar
et al. 2020). Recently such models have been used in the study of rainfall change
(Cheng et al. 2022). However moist biases have been found in studies of global
convection-permitting models (CPMs), potentially due to these models not capturing
key convective processes such as turbulence (Tomassini et al. 2023). Initial k-scale
studies indicate that there still remain gaps in our understanding of atmospheric
moist convection, some of which can be investigated using idealised studies which can
resolve turbulence (Guichard and Couvreux 2017).
An alternative to global-scale modelling involves using CRMs (Cloud Resolving
Models) or LES (Large Eddy Simulations) to resolve explicitly convective clouds,
and their associated transient motions on smaller domains (e.g. 100km×20km). Both
GCMs and CRMs are dynamically based on an approximation of the Navier-Stokes
equations, called the “primitive equations” (Phillips 1966), CRMs typically have
higher resolutions (10m-1km) than GCMs. Although CRMs can marginally resolve
convection, complexity arises in these models by the choice of the parametrisations
used for the subgrid-scale (i) turbulent motions, (ii) microphysical processes and
(iii) radiative processes (Guichard and Couvreux 2017). A limitation in CRMs is
the need to prescribe lateral boundary conditions, which are not required in GCMs.
CRMs can be used for idealised studies of convection, including the development of
diagnostics (e.g. Muller et al. (2011), Muller and Takayabu (2020)). The study by
Bretherton et al. (2013) used LES to test climate change sensitivities (e.g. to surface
temperature warming). CRMs and LES have been used to inform parametrisations
of subgrid-scale processes in more complex models (De Roode et al. 2016; Guichard
et al. 2004). Another use of CRMs lies in the accessibility of 4D (3D + time) fields
of moisture, vertical wind, etc. which can be used to complement (limited) data from
observations (Oue et al. 2016).
In the present paper, we present a simple turbulence-resolving model, stem-
ming from an idealised model of moist convection (the Rainy-B´enard model, from
Vallis et al. (2019)). The simplicity of the model, the radiation term and uniform
boundary conditions therein allow us to establish a theoretical framework required
for a conceptual approach to the climate change problem, based on fundamental
principles of fluid dynamics. In particular, we will link a wider range of moist,
radiatively cooled regimes, to understand the underlying mathematical behaviour of
our climate change scenario.
We aim first to document a well-posed climate scenario with Rainy-B´enard
convection, through the choice of a radiative cooling parameterisation and boundary
conditions. Second, we identify key parameters for the climate problem, particularly
2
