12
More broadly, reducing entangling angle shows im-
proved gate performance, both in terms of fidelity and
coherence, not only for MS(θ) gateset on the QSCOUT
testbed described here, but also on commercial trapped-
ion systems [1, 6].
Likewise, expanding to the circuit
compilation, these performance improvements persist at
the circuit level [25]. Superconducting systems have also
begun to take advantage of expanded entangling gate-
sets to include fractional gates that yield improvements
in both performance and circuit depth [38, 39]. As such,
generating arbitrary amounts of entanglement is an im-
portant resource for NISQ processors.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was supported by the U.S. Department
of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Advanced Scientific
Computing Research Quantum Testbed Program and
by Sandia National Laboratories’ Laboratory Directed
Research and Development Program.
Sandia National
Laboratories is a multi-mission laboratory managed and
operated by National Technology & Engineering Solu-
tions of Sandia, LLC (NTESS), a wholly owned sub-
sidiary of Honeywell International Inc., for the U.S. De-
partment of Energy’s National Nuclear Security Admin-
istration (DOE/NNSA) under contract DE-NA0003525.
This written work is authored by an employee of NT-
ESS. The employee, not NTESS, owns the right, title
and interest in and to the written work and is responsi-
ble for its contents. Any subjective views or opinions that
might be expressed in the written work do not necessarily
represent the views of the U.S. Government. The pub-
lisher acknowledges that the U.S. Government retains a
non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to
publish or reproduce the published form of this written
work or allow others to do so, for U.S. Government pur-
poses. The DOE will provide public access to results of
federally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE
Public Access Plan. SAND2025-03151O.
APPENDIX A: CALIBRATION SCHEDULE
In this appendix, we outline the typical calibration
schedule for both single- and two-qubit gates performed
for users of the QSCOUT hardware. While some users
will not require the full suite of calibrations and others
will require additional calibrations, this is a representa-
tive workflow.
After loading a chain of ions, the ion florescence is
aligned into a multi-core fiber, where each single core is
coupled to separate photomultiplier tubes (PMT) for de-
tection. For each calibration step, we Doppler cool and
prepare the ions in |0⟩. The axial ion spacing and chain
position are aligned to the 335 nm IA beams using DC
control voltages applied directly to the trap, which tune
the curvature and position of the harmonic trapping po-
tential.
Amplitudes necessary to generate slightly less
than π pulse (when aligned) are applied to the IA beams
while tuning the position of trap potential to achieve
maximum transfer to |1⟩.
Figure 12a shows a scan of
the axial potential well position which moves 1 µm for
each integer step of the solution line number.
Submi-
cron positioning is achieved by interpolating between line
numbers. In the scenario that the well position for maxi-
mum transfer to |1⟩does not coincide for all ions, the ion
spacing is adjusted by scaling the trap frequency. How-
ever, for ion chain lengths of 4 to 6, not all ions will be
fully aligned due to the harmonic nature of the poten-
tial; therefore, the potential is adjusted such that some
ions are intentionally misaligned to have the greatest av-
erage coverage for all ions. At ion numbers greater than
6, quartic terms and/or additional spectator ions may be
necessary to have more even spacing of the data qubit
ions.
Next the drive amplitudes of the 355 nm IA Raman
beams are calibrated.
We calibrate the amplitudes to
yield 10 µs counter-propagating (IA and global) and 25
µs co-propagating IA π-times on the |0⟩→|1⟩transi-
tion. In the co-propagating IA configuration, two tones
are applied to the AOM for the IA beams while one of
those tone amplitude (tone1) is swept. For the counter-
propagating beam geometry, the tone applied to the IA
beams’ AOM is swept while the other tone, on the global
beam, is kept fixed. We measure Rabi oscillations ver-
sus amplitude with a fixed gate duration and determine
the saturation amplitude asat and scaling factor Ξ of the
IA beams’ AOM in equation (4) from a fit to equation
(5) (see Section III). Note that in the co- and counter-
propagating single-qubit case (unlike the two-qubit case
described in Section III), we sweep a single tone applied
to the IA beam, not the tone applied to the global. Fig-
ure 12b and c show the observed Rabi oscillations as the
pulse amplitude is swept for the IA beams. For the am-
plitude scan, the gate duration is increased to 250 µs (co-
propagating, 10x the desired π time) or 30 µs (counter-
propagating, 3x the desired π time) to generate sufficient
oscillations before AOM saturation to ensure a precise fit.
The drive amplitude for the desired π-time is calculated
using equation (4) with the fit asat and Ξ.
The next step in the process is to identify the ra-
dial motional modes for both Raman sideband cooling
and MS gate calibration. Sideband cooling is applied to
all radial motional modes for the pulse amplitude scans
described above and the two-qubit gate calibrations de-
scribed below.
Figure 13a shows a coarse frequency sweep of the lower
(<2.25MHz) and upper (>2.25 MHz) radial sidebands for
two ions. Sideband locations are identified using a peak
finding routine. Finer scans, centered around the peaks
in Fig. 13a, are shown in Fig. 13b and c for the lower
and upper sidebands, respectively. Each sideband in the
lower (or upper) manifold is calibrated in parallel by us-
ing one ion for each sideband mode. For chain lengths
of three ions or more, the ion-mode assignment is chosen
