1 
 
   
Impact of MvdW Equation of State and Neutrino Mass on r and s Process 
Heavy Element Nucleosynthesis in Spiral, Elliptical and Dwarf Galactic 
Environments and Kilonovae Events 
Keith Andrew1, Eric Steinfelds1,2, Kristopher Andrew3 
  
 1Department of Physics and Astronomy, Western Kentucky University 
 Bowling Green, KY 42101 USA 
 2Department of Computational and Physical Sciences, Carroll University 
 Waukesha, WI 53186 USA 
 3Department of Science, Schlarman Academy,  
Danville, IL 61832 USA 
 
 
Abstract: We present an analysis of heavy element production with massive neutrinos in 
galaxies of varying types (spiral, elliptical, and dwarf) and kilonovae events by incorporating a 
Multicomponent Van der Waals (MvdW) equation of state (EoS) for the opacity functions. This 
EoS is applied to derive opacities and calculate the yields of isotopes formed in r-process and s-
process nucleosynthesis, with and without the influence of neutrino masses or oscillations. We 
look at both the lanthanide and actinide sequences using the MvdW parameters that involve the 
interaction strength and excluded volume effects. Our results reflect the characteristic differences 
found in r and s processes in the synthesis and long-term evolution of isotopes from the U, Th, 
and Sr chain across galactic environments. The inclusion of neutrino masses enhances the 
neutron-to-proton ratio, favoring heavier r-process isotopes and altering the overall galactic 
yields by cross section suppression. These findings offer insights into the interplay of nuclear 
physics and astrophysical environments, highlighting the sensitivity of nucleosynthetic pathways 
to EoS modifications and neutrino physics. We compare these results to metallicity profiles of 
similar models: the Galactic Leaky Box, the Galactic Inflow, and the Galactic Closed Box 
models and to the kilonova event GW170781.  
Key words: neutrino mass, van der Waals, nucleosynthesis, galactic metallicity   
I. Introduction In this work we are exploring the use of an analytical phase changing equation 
of state (EoS), the multicomponent van der Waals (MvdW) EoS, to model the impact of neutrino 
masses or oscillations on heavy element production, mostly lanthanides and actinides, across 
galactic types: elliptical, spiral, and dwarf galaxies and a sample kilonova event similar to 
GW170817 as recorded by Swift, LIGO, and NuStar [1, 2, 3, 4]. While galactic and kilonova 
heavy element production methods differ in size and time scale, in this theoretical model they 
only differ by well-known mass consumption rate equations: the Galactic Star Formation Rate 
Equations [5, 6, 7] and the Kilonova Mass Ejection Rate Equation [8, 9, 10].  The production of 
heavy elements in the universe is governed by nucleosynthesis processes such as the rapid (r-) 
and slow (s-) neutron capture processes [11, 12], while there are other known mechanisms: such 
as the p-process or photodisintegration [13, 14], which can produce proton rich isotopes in Type-
