for Na to
Na =
NeX
Mtarget/Navo
Z E0
Emin
dE
Z xmax
xmin
dxIint(E0, E, T)dσ
dxe−Lsh
la ,
(3.19)
where the various quantities that enter this equation are given in appendix A.3. In principle,
it would also be possible to simplify the expression for dσ/dx, since there is no longer a
restriction on the emission angle θa of the ALP. Since the main contribution to the cross
section comes from small angles [75], one can safely extend the integration to large angles
of order unity. Concretely, in analogy to E137, we introduce an arbitrary cutoff for the
angle based on the geometry of the detector given by
θa,max = Rsh
Lsh
,
(3.20)
where Rsh ≈60 cm is the approximate radius of the detector, in this case of the HCALs.
NA64µ
The general setup of the NA64µ experiment is similar to that of NA64 run in invisible
mode, with it being an active beam dump. This means that the formula (3.19) applies to
NA64µ as well, with the caveat that the electron lines in the DB and Primakoff diagrams
in figure 4 need to be replaced with muon lines, and the EOT Ne should be replaced
with the muons on target (MOT) Nµ. Since there are no muons for the anti-muons in
the beam to annihilate with, the contribution discussed in section 3.3 is absent. Finally,
an important difference is the energy distribution function of the muons compared to the
electrons. Since muons are much more massive than electrons, they lose significantly less
energy due to bremsstrahlung compared to electrons, allowing them to easily penetrate the
beam dump [49]. This means the muon’s energy distribution function is independent of the
depth t. Therefore, we can use the thin-target approximation to calculate the distribution
function for muons, which is given by [72]
Iµ(E0, E, t) = δ(E0 −E)
⇒
Iint(E0, E, T) = Tδ(E0 −E) .
(3.21)
This means the expected yield of ALPs simplifies to
Na =
NµX
Mtarget/Navo
T
Z xmax
xmin
dxdσ
dxe−Lsh
la ,
(3.22)
where it is implied that E = E0 in the expressions of xmin,max, la, and the cross section.
It is important to note that this makes Na very sensitive to the length T of the beam
dump.
This is in contrast with the other electron beam dumps, in which the electron
shower attenuates after several radiation lengths.
4
Other Constraints
In this section we review other experimental and theoretical constraints of relevance for
leptophilic ALPs.
– 17 –
