1 Circumventing beam damage
In previous synchrotron-based work – both published[1] and unpublished – on endo-
fullerene samples, we have found that measurements acquired at room temperature
and without any adjustment of the undulator output flux (and/or sample position)
can result in significant beam damage. X-ray absorption and photoemission peaks
would, at best, diminish in intensity on a timescale of minutes. While for some
samples – N2@C60, for example – only a reduction in the intensity of the encapsulate-
related core-level peak(s) was observed as a function of beam exposure, for other
samples (e.g. H2O@C60), the line shape and peak position would also change. We
note that DiCamillo et al.[2] have reported similar beam damage observations, i.e.
the loss of Ar 2p signal, in their lab-based X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
studies of Ar@C60 (although Morscher et al.[3] instead did not observe depletion of
argon under either Mg Kα or He I radiation.)
Our approach to minimising beam damage for the Ar@C60-related measurements
described in the main paper and this supplement involved (a) acquiring spectra at
low sample temperatures (a maximum of 180 K), and (b) detuning the undulator so
as to reduce the photon flux on the sample by an order of magnitude. Throughout
the beamtime experiments we regularly checked for evidence of beam damage by com-
paring photoemission and X-ray absorption peak intensities. No degradation of signal
intensity, or other characteristics such as lineshape, was observed for either soft X-
ray (photoemission, X-ray absorption (XAS), resonant Auger/photoemission) or hard
X-ray (normal incidence X-ray standing wave (NIXSW)) spectroscopies.
2 Valence band photoemission for bulk Ar@C60 film
The valence band spectrum for a thick film of Ar@C60 is shown in Fig.S1. As observed
previously by Morscher et al.[3], the valence band spectra of empty C60 and Ar@C60
are indistinguishable down to a binding energy of ∼10 eV below the Fermi level.
Bulk Ar@C60 
valence band
ℏ𝜔= 110 eV
Fig. S1 Valence band spectrum for a bulk film of Ar@C60 acquired with a photon energy of 110 eV.
2
