10
FIG. 5. ASI microstate control, local optical writing and microwave assisted control. (a) All-optical writing of ASI, allowing local control.
Write/erase toggle switching is possible. Adapted from Ref. [73]. (b) Avalanche switching in ASI assisted by microwave field supplied by
micro-patterned waveguide. Adapted from Ref. [74].
ergy barriers, which prevent access to the ground state.
Both the effective temperature model and the network
model are useful to explore general results about how the ASI
microstate can be controlled with applied magnetic fields, but
for specific systems it can be useful to directly simulate the
response to an external field. Carrying out full micromagnetic
simulations is generally too costly for treating large arrays.
Alternatives such as network models simply track whether lo-
cal fields exceed the switching fields of each island and re-
verse their magnetizations accordingly. This approach can be
used to efficiently track which microstates can be accessed by
field protocols. The flatspin93 package efficiently carries out
simulations of ASI systems using this approach.
Thermal protocols (quenching, annealing, phase transi-
tions, as-grown):
The other major statistical approach to preparing reproducible
ASI configurations is through thermal techniques. While the
rotating field protocols discussed above were motivated by the
fact that early ASI systems were athermal, it has since become
possible to fabricate thermally active systems.
The first hint that it might be possible to create thermal ASI
systems came from the observation that vertex configurations
in ‘as-grown’ samples obey Boltzmann statistics94–96. This
was interpreted as a result of the system being thermally ac-
tive during the deposition process while the islands had not
yet reached their full thickness (and hence following Eq. (12)
the energy barrier KDV was lower) and the thermal state being
frozen in as the thickness increased. Since this initial observa-
tion, various means of activating thermal fluctuations in ASI
have been discovered.
To access ground states, ASI systems can be thermally an-
nealed by heating them to either the Curie temperature of the
material used to form the islands or to the blocking tempera-
ture of the islands Tb ∼KVD/kB (it is worth noting that while
the thermal energy barrier is often taken to be exactly KDV,
careful modeling of the transition between the two microstates
during switching suggests that it can be significantly lower
than this97–99).
The Curie temperature for NiFe is around 850 K, which
is significantly lower than the blocking temperature for ASI
systems with thicknesses greater than 5 nm.
However,
heating permalloy ASI structures to this temperature has
been observed to cause a substantial reduction in saturation
magnetization100. This effect has been attributed to the degra-
dation of the permalloy islands, due to the interdiffusion of the
permalloy into the Si/SiO2 substrates typically used101,102.
It is possible to circumvent this by lowering the Curie tem-
perature and this was demonstrated with systems made of
monolayers of Fe delta-doped into palladium islands103,104
and with alternative materials such as Ni-rich permalloy105
and FePd alloys106,107. On the other hand, annealing ASI sys-
tems based on standard permalloy is possible if a silicon ni-
tride substrate is used100,108 to prevent the permalloy diffusing
into the substrate.
Alternatively, the blocking temperature can be lowered to
below room temperature by reducing the thickness of the
islands to below ∼5 nm (the exact thickness threshold is
system-dependent, so a common trick to maximize the chance
that some region of a sample is thermally active is to de-
posit permalloy in a wedge so that the thickness varies over
the system).
This offers full thermal control over the ver-
tex fractions, as well as the possibility of controlling the
magnetic configuration by sweeping the temperature through
phase transitions109–112. By tuning the energy scales such that
the critical temperature for a phase transition is close to room
temperature,113 it could thus be possible to engineer a dra-
matic change in the spin configuration with small temperature
modulations.
Lattice modification:
So far, we have considered homogeneous arrays of regular fer-
romagnetic nano-islands, but a powerful means of expanding
the range of microstates which can be accessed both through
field protocols and thermal relaxation is to modify the lattice
in a way that locally modifies interaction energies. While this
generally breaks the degeneracy of ASI systems, the reward is
ready access to specific subsets of microstates.
