Continuous-variable spatio-spectral quantum networks
in nonlinear photonic lattices
Natalia Costas,1 Nadia Belabas,2 and David Barral1, ∗
1Galicia Supercomputing Center (CESGA), Avda. de Vigo S/N, Santiago de Compostela, 15705, Spain
2Centre de Nanosciences et de Nanotechnologies, CNRS,
Universit´e Paris-Saclay, 91120 Palaiseau, France
Multiplexing information in different degrees of freedom and use of integrated and fiber-optic
components are natural solutions to the scalability bottleneck in optical quantum communications
and computing. However, for bulk-optics systems, where size, cost, stability, and reliability are fac-
tors, this remains either impractical or highly challenging to implement. In this paper we present a
framework to engineer continuous-variable entanglement produced through nondegenerate sponta-
neous parametric down-conversion in χ(2) nonlinear photonic lattices in spatial and spectral degrees
of freedom that can solve the scalability challenge. We show how spatio-spectral pump shaping
produce cluster states that are naturally distributable in quantum communication networks and a
resource for measurement-based quantum computing.
As the world becomes increasingly interconnected
through technology, there is a growing need to enhance
the capacity of communication channels.
To support
emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence, in-
ternet of things, and cloud computing, communication
networks must be capable of handling greater data vol-
umes.
In optical networks, when a channel reaches
its capacity limit, multiplexing different degrees of free-
dom (DOF) becomes essential.
Recent advancements
in space-division multiplexing, combined with existing
wavelength-division multiplexing, have enabled transmis-
sion rates exceeding few petabytes per second through a
single optical fiber [1].
Similarly, the future of quantum networks, which un-
derpin emerging technologies like the quantum internet,
distributed quantum sensing, and distributed quantum
computing, faces a similar challenge [2–4]. As the num-
ber of nodes in a quantum network or the complexity
of quantum algorithms increases, so does the demand for
more physical resources to process and transmit quantum
information. Multiplexing quantum DOF offers a prac-
tical solution to this challenge. In the optical domain,
quantum information can be encoded in space, frequency,
time, polarization, and angular momentum. Recent ad-
vancements in multiplexing these quantum DOF have
shown remarkable progress, demonstrating that quantum
networks, like their classical counterparts, can scale more
efficiently and handle growing demands [5].
The transition from laboratory experiments to real-
world applications is another critical aspect of quan-
tum technologies. Small-footprint photonic circuits of-
fer a promising solution, enabling the integration of var-
ious quantum operations—such as generation, process-
ing, distribution, and measurement of quantum infor-
mation—into a single, compact device [6, 7]. These in-
tegrated optics solutions not only reduce the size but
also improve stability, reliability, and scalability, making
∗dbarral@cesga.es
them ideal for building large, functional quantum net-
works [8–10].
Quantum information may be encoded in variables
that exhibit a continuous spectrum of eigenvalues, known
as continuous variables (CV). In photonic systems, this
encoding is realized through the fluctuation of field
quadratures [11]. Numerous tabletop experiments have
successfully demonstrated CV quantum networks in the
spatial, frequency, and temporal domains [12]; and re-
cently, integrated experiments in one DOF [13–16]. How-
ever, extending and adapting bulk-optics-based meth-
ods, such as sequential squeezing and entanglement, to
systems involving a larger number of modes remains a
highly demanding task. In this paper we show the po-
tential of spatio-spectral multiplexed encoding of quan-
tum information in the propagating modes generated in a
nonlinear χ(2) photonic lattice without bulk-optics anal-
ogous.
The distributed simultaneous nonlinearity and
evanescent coupling configuration of the photonic lat-
tice together with the spectral properties of both the
waveguides and the interacting fields parallelize multi-
mode spatio-spectral transformations.
Previous works
have analyzed the potential of nonlinear photonic lat-
tices in discrete variables [17–22].
We propose a gen-
eral framework for nonlinear waveguide arrays in CV –
that includes DV as a limit case– that allows engineering
two and three dimensional cluster states naturally dis-
tributable in quantum networks and a resource for quan-
tum computing.
A nonlinear photonic lattice consists of N identical
χ(2) waveguides in which spontaneous downconversion
(SPDC) and nearest-neighbor evanescent coupling be-
tween the generated fields take place (see Fig. 1) [23–
25]. We consider type 0/I downconversion where in each
waveguide an input harmonic field at frequency ωh is
downconverted into signal (s) and idler (i) fields respec-
tively at frequency ωs and ωi = ωh −ωs with identical
polarization. Other strategies as type II downconversion
can be equally implemented adding polarization as an ex-
tra DOF [26]. The buildup of the nonlinear interaction is
arXiv:2504.06229v1  [quant-ph]  8 Apr 2025
