An improved quantum algorithm for linear autonomous differential equations
via Padé approximation
Dekuan Dong,1, ∗Yingzhou Li,1, 2, † and Jungong Xue1, ‡
1School of Mathematical Sciences, Fudan University
2Shanghai Key Laboratory for Contemporary Applied Mathematics
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
We propose a novel quantum algorithm for solving linear autonomous ordinary differential equa-
tions (ODEs) using the Padé approximation. For linear autonomous ODEs, the discretized solution
can be represented by a product of matrix exponentials. The proposed algorithm approximates
the matrix exponential by the diagonal Padé approximation, which is then encoded into a large,
block-sparse linear system and solved via quantum linear system algorithms (QLSA). The detailed
quantum circuit is given based on quantum oracle access to the matrix, the inhomogeneous term, and
the initial state. The complexity of the proposed algorithm is analyzed. Compared to the method
based on Taylor approximation, which approximates the matrix exponential using a k-th order Tay-
lor series, the proposed algorithm improves the approximation order k from two perspectives: 1) the
explicit complexity dependency on k is improved, and 2) a smaller k suffices for the same precision.
Numerical experiments demonstrate the advantages of the proposed algorithm comparing to other
related algorithms.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Quantum computing, which fundamentally differs from classical computing, leverages quantum mechanics
to perform computations using quantum states and quantum gates. For many problems, quantum computing
offers a theoretical advantage over classical computing. In certain cases, quantum algorithms executed on
quantum computers can achieve exponential speedup compared to their classical counterparts [15, 34, 37].
Solving large-scale ordinary differential equations (ODEs) is one such problem where quantum algorithms
show significant potential.
Solving large-scale ODEs is a fundamental problem in science, with numerous real-world applications across
various domains, including weather and climate prediction, chemical reaction modeling, fluid dynamics, and
finance, such as option pricing models, etc. ODEs can generally be divided into two categories: linear ODEs
and nonlinear ODEs. In each category, ODEs can further be divided into autonomous and non-autonomous
ODEs. A general first-order linear ODEs admit,
(
dx
dt = A(t)x(t) + b(t),
t ∈[0, T],
x(0) = x0,
(1)
where A(t) ∈Cn×n is a matrix or discretized operator, b(t) ∈Cn is the inhomogeneous term, x0 ∈Cn
is the initial state, n is the dimension of the system, and T is a final time. When both A(t) and b(t) are
time-independent, i.e., A(t) = A and b(t) = b, the ODE system (1) is referred to as a first-order autonomous
ODE system. Given suitable quantum oracles to access A, b, and x0, the goal of this paper is to design an
efficient quantum algorithm that produces a quantum state that is ϵ-close to the final state |x(T)⟩=
x(T )
∥x(T )∥2 .
Many quantum algorithms for solving linear ODEs (1) have been proposed in the past decades. These
algorithms can be grouped into three categories: a) discretized time steps with Quantum Linear System Al-
gorithm (QLSA); b) time-ordered integral form with Linear Combination of Hamiltonian Simulation (LCHS);
c) Schrödingerization with Hamiltonian simulation. The first category differs from the latter two categories
in its use of Hamiltonian simulation. Methods in the first category rely on Hamiltonian simulation underlying
∗dkdong21@m.fudan.edu.cn
† yingzhouli@fudan.edu.cn; The research was supported in part by NSFC under grant 12271109, STCSM under grant 22TQ017
and 24DP2600100, and SIMIS under grant SIMIS-ID-2024-(CN).
‡ xuej@fudan.edu.cn; The research was supported in part by the National Science Foundation of China Grant 12171101 and
the Laboratory of Mathematics for Nonlinear Science, Fudan University.
arXiv:2504.06948v1  [quant-ph]  9 Apr 2025
