Thawed Gaussian Ehrenfest dynamics at conical intersections: When can a
single mean-field trajectory capture internal conversion?
Alan Scheideggera) and Jiˇr´ı J. L. Van´ıˇcekb)
Laboratory of Theoretical Physical Chemistry, Institut des Sciences et Ing´enierie Chimiques,
Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale de Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015, Lausanne, Switzerland
(Dated: April 9, 2025)
The thawed Gaussian Ehrenfest dynamics is a single-trajectory method that partially includes both nuclear
quantum and electronically nonadiabatic effects by combining the thawed Gaussian wavepacket dynamics
with Ehrenfest dynamics. First, we demonstrate the improvement over the parent methods in a multidi-
mensional system consisting of vertically displaced harmonic potentials with constant diabatic couplings, for
which the thawed Gaussian Ehrenfest dynamics is exact. Then, we show that single-trajectory mean-field
methods completely fail to capture electronic population transfer in the vicinity of conical intersections be-
tween potential energy surfaces associated with electronic states of different symmetry (i.e., belonging to
different irreducible representations of the molecular point group). The underlying cause of this limitation
suggests that the thawed Gaussian Ehrenfest dynamics can be useful for studying nonadiabatic dynamics
close to conical intersections of electronic states of the same symmetry, which have been understudied owing
to the difficulty in locating them. Using a model of this type of intersection, we compare the thawed Gaussian
Ehrenfest dynamics with exact quantum dynamics and find that the approximate mean-field approach yields
a molecular wavefunction that remains qualitatively similar to the exact one even after crossing and recrossing
the conical intersection.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The
Born-Oppenheimer
approximation
simplifies
molecular
dynamics
calculations
by
separating
the
treatment of nuclei and electrons, under the assumption
that electrons adjust promptly to nuclear movements
and remain in the same quantum eigenstate as nuclei
evolve. Within this framework, the nuclear wavefunction
generally evolves on a single potential energy surface,
but the approximation can be generalized to an initial
superposition of electronic states, with each nuclear
wavepacket evolving on its respective potential energy
surface.
However, the Born-Oppenheimer approxima-
tion is inadequate for describing nonadiabatic dynamics,
where
interactions
between
electronic
and
nuclear
motions become non-negligible.
Many methods have been developed to perform nona-
diabatic dynamics while mitigating the exponential scal-
ing of the exact grid-based quantum solution1. Some of
these, such as the multi-configurational time-dependent
Hartree2,3 and variational multi-configurational Gaus-
sian methods4, multi-configurational Ehrenfest dynam-
ics5 and full multiple spawning6, remain exact in the limit
of an infinite number of basis functions. More approx-
imate mixed quantum-classical dynamics methods offer
an efficient alternative by describing nuclear motion clas-
sically while treating electrons quantum-mechanically. In
practice, some nuclear quantum effects can be recov-
ered by propagating a swarm of trajectories and ob-
taining nuclear expectation values by an ensemble av-
erage. Mixed quantum-classical methods, including the
a)Electronic mail: alan.scheidegger@epfl.ch
b)Electronic mail: jiri.vanicek@epfl.ch
multitrajectory Ehrenfest dynamics7,8, trajectory surface
hopping9, mapping approaches such as the Meyer–Miller
model10–12 and spin-mapping methods13–15, and the
coupled-trajectory mixed quantum-classical algorithm16
have been successfully applied to many molecular sys-
tems.
In particular, they generally provide accurate
short-time dynamics across conical intersections17.
Nevertheless, all of these methods still suffer from
an important computational overhead, as they require
the propagation of multiple trajectories.
In this con-
text, Ehrenfest dynamics in its single-trajectory formu-
lation stands out as the most efficient, but also most
approximate, mixed quantum-classical method. Single-
trajectory Ehrenfest dynamics is limited by the overesti-
mation of electronic coherence, as all electronic states
share the same classical trajectory of the nuclei, and
by the inability to account for nuclear quantum effects.
In contrast, the single-trajectory semiclassical Gaussian
wavepacket dynamics methods neglect nonadiabatic ef-
fects, but improve on classical dynamics by partially in-
corporating nuclear quantum effects through the nonzero
width of the many-dimensional Gaussian representing the
nuclear wavefunction18,19. These methods offer various
levels of accuracy and computational cost. The simplest
among them is the single-trajectory frozen Gaussian ap-
proximation, which associates a Gaussian wavepacket of
a fixed width to the classical trajectory. Conversely, the
variational thawed Gaussian approximation provides the
optimal solution for a Gaussian wavepacket ansatz and,
surprisingly, can qualitatively describe quantum tunnel-
ing20.
The thawed Gaussian Ehrenfest dynamics (TGED)
family of methods21
can be seen as a generaliza-
tion of Ehrenfest dynamics and semiclassical Gaussian
wavepacket dynamics, or alternatively, as an applica-
arXiv:2504.05922v1  [physics.chem-ph]  8 Apr 2025
