11 
 
single crystals is well elucidated. For example, atomic scale insights into the decomposition 
pathway of MAPbI3 have been revealed through fast Fourier transform (FFT) patterns obtained 
from high-resolution TEM (HR-TEM) and scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) 
with e-beam energies ranging from tens to hundreds of keV [25,26]. At higher e-beam energies in 
the MeV range, Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) analysis has shown a strong pinning of 
the Fermi level of radiated MAPbBr3, indicating that e-beam radiation could induce a high 
concentration of defects such as MA interstitials and Br vacancies [23]. For e-beam energies 
ranging from several to dozens of keV, as typically used in SEM, the shift in emission bands of 
MAPbBr3 observed in cathodoluminescence (CL) measurements suggests the formation of 
intermediate phases with variable composition [24]. In addition, our work shows a more direct 
phenomenon of cracking on the surface of FAPbBr3 and MAPbBr3 single crystals and provides a 
more convenient approach to demonstrating the decomposition through EDS analysis. For X-ray 
beam radiation, recent studies have used XPS to monitor elemental ratios and electrical structure 
changes in MAPbBr3, under X-ray energies ranging from tens to hundreds of kV, revealing the 
vacancy formation and crystal degradation [28,29]. In our work, we utilize the synchrotron high-
energy X-ray beam to achieve inducing the decomposition of FAPbBr3 and MAPbBr3 single 
crystals while simultaneously collecting GI-XRD patterns. The observed changes in GI-XRD 
patterns effectively reveal composition evolutions on the OIHP single crystal surface. 
 
Table 1. Comparison of the instability of OIHP single crystals under beam radiations 
Beam type 
Beam condition 
Crystals 
Results 
Refs. 
e-beam 
80 & 300 keV in TEM 
MAPbI3 
Decomposition into hexagonal PbI2 
in FFT patterns 
[25,26] 
5 MeV in accelerator 
MAPbBr3 
Pinning of the Fermi level in 
KPFM 
[23] 
2.5 - 30 keV in SEM 
MAPbBr3 
Shift in emission bands in CL 
spectra 
[24] 
10 - 15 keV in SEM 
FAPbBr3 & 
MAPbBr3 
Decreased contents of C and N 
elements in EDS 
This work 
X-ray 
beam 
10 kV in X-ray gun 
MAPbBr3 
Evolutions of elemental ratio in 
high-resolution XPS 
[28] 
150 kV in X-ray tube 
MAPbBr3 
Decreased Br and N concentrations 
in XPS 
[29] 
11 - 17 keV in 
synchrotron 
FAPbBr3 & 
MAPbBr3 
Increased peak intensity of PbBr2 in 
GI-XRD patterns 
This work 
 
