Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Magnetic and spin glass criticality
2
3
Exact ﬁxed point equations
4
4
Solutions and discussion
7
5
Conclusion
10
1
Introduction
Random magnets are expected to possess a spin glass phase for strong enough frustration at
low temperatures [1, 2, 3]. While the mean ﬁeld solution is known [4] for the basic model
with inﬁnite range interaction [5], analytically accessing the spin glass phase for the case of
short range interactions in two and three dimensions proved to be extremely diﬃcult and the
problem essentially remained the realm of numerical studies. The accuracy of the latter, on
the other hand, is limited by the diﬃculties related to the need of reaching large system sizes
[2, 3].
In recent years it has been shown that the replica method normally used to deal with
quenched disorder can be implemented in an exact way when working directly at criticality
in two dimensions [6]. The key observation is that in this case conformal symmetry [7] can be
exploited in a simple way within the scattering framework of the underlying ﬁeld theory, thus
providing the ﬁrst exact access to random criticality. In the language of the renormalization
group [8], the method yields the ﬁxed points whose basins of attraction determine the critical
behavior in the diﬀerent regions of the phase diagram. So far the scattering method has been
used for the study of the “magnetic” random ﬁxed points [6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13] ([14] for a
review), namely those ﬁxed points located along the boundary of the ferromagnetic phase. In
the present paper we show how the method extends to the spin glass renormalization group
ﬁxed points, namely the ﬁxed points ruling the critical exponents inside the spin glass regime.
This is achieved introducing in the scattering framework the “overlap” variables entering the
characterization of the spin glass properties. In a nontrivial way, the resulting exact ﬁxed
point equations make explicit the speciﬁc nature of the overlap variables, which account for
correlations among independent copies of the system with the same disorder distribution.
Remarkably, for the basic example of the random bond Ising model that we analyze, the spin
1
