 
2
video analysis of actual lunar landing events to help study the underlying principles associated 
with PSI events (Fontes & Metzger, 2022; Immer et al., 2008; Immer & Metzger, 2010; Metzger 
et al., 2010; Metzger et al., 2008, 2011). While earlier experiments and models focused on 
specific destinations or space missions, more recent studies have attempted to systematically 
examine PSI principles, including effects of gravity and atmosphere. However, these studies 
appear to fall short in their systematic treatment and characterization of surface properties 
including particle size distributions, cohesion and bulk density on the underlying properties 
associated with PSI cratering events. This study examines the influence of these geotechnical 
properties on the development of PSI crater geometries and viscous erosion rates using small-
scale experiments in atmosphere. 
 
1.1 VISCOUS EROSION RATE 
As the only significant mechanism of PSI expected on the Moon with the potential to 
eject high-velocity particles (Rahimi et al., 2020), determining the underlying equations 
associated with viscous erosion rate is critical for modeling and simulations for future lunar 
landings. Initially, Roberts (1963) theorized that viscous erosion of lunar regolith during the 
Apollo landings would be directly proportional to the shear stress of the exhaust gas, limited by 
the gas momentum transfer to liberated grains. While the initial equations from Roberts are 
still being used to predict erosion during future lunar landings, Metzger (2024a) recently 
showed that the theory and equations developed by Roberts may be incorrect. Leveraging 
analysis of Apollo landing footage in a separate study, Metzger (2024b) showed that viscous 
erosion on the Moon, particularly where saltation of granular particles is infrequent, is likely 
related to energy flux instead. Metzger (2024a) theorized that viscous erosion was proportional 
to the kinetic energy of the gas divided by the combined potential energy and cohesive 
energies of the surface, leading to the development of an improved equation for viscous 
erosion rate as shown in eq. 1.  ğ‘‰Ì‡ is volumetric erosion rate from viscous erosion, K is an 
unknown constant with units of velocity, ğœŒ is the gas density, ğ‘£ is the gas jet velocity at the 
nozzle exit, A is the nozzle exit area, ğœŒm is the bulk density of the soil, ğ‘” is gravity, ğ· is the mean 
particle diameter of grains, ğ›¼ is the cohesive energy density of the soil, and ğ›½ is related to the 
slope of the surface (ğœƒ) as shown in eq. 2.  
 
ğ‘‰Ì‡ =  ğ¾
ğœŒğœ2ğ´
ğœŒğ‘šğ‘”ğ·ğ›½+ğ›¼  
 
 
 
 
      (1) 
 
ğ›½= cosğœƒâ‰ˆ
1
2  
 
              
                 (2) 
 
Unlike previous measurements by Metzger et al. (2010) which used glass beads and 
sand without compaction, this study leverages small-scale plume experiments with high-fidelity 
lunar regolith simulant to examine the variables and relationships in eq. 1 in atmosphere, 
directly investigating any impacts from regolith density. More specifically, measurements in this 
study examine the influence of ğ·, K, ğ›¼, and ğœŒm terms on erosion rate, as defined in eq. 1, with 
simulated lunar regolith. Empirical data from this investigation can ultimately improve PSI 
models for future lunar landings and launches. Understanding these relationships will also be 
helpful for mitigating viscous erosion and risks associated with PSI events. 
