Here Aµ denotes an auxiliary vector ﬁeld and χjβ refers to a fermion, and ωρ,R denote fur-
ther auxiliary antighosts. For instance the ψcR vertex becomes the 4-point vertex ψcωRχ.
In a second step in this and all similar cases, 4-point interactions of fermionic ﬁelds are
treated analogously to b∆and split into two 3-point vertices. This also means that an
n-point Green function with insertions of either ∆or external sources is represented in
FeynArts as a higher-valence function.
We couple each breaking vertex, i.e. also those generated at one-loop in ∆1L
ct , by dif-
ferent external ghosts and scalars and can access them individually for selecting diagrams
in FeynArts. The same decomposition as in Fig. 3 is used if needed. The most delicate
kind of higher-valence vertices in our implementation due to the one-loop renormaliza-
tion is given by the breaking operator ∆1L
ψccR. Since it is both a ∆-insertion and carries
the external source R, this operator necessitates two additional antighost sources, which
would in total correspond to a vertex of valence six. With two spinors, two ghosts and two
antighosts, the vertex is decomposed into three three-point vertices each with their own
scalar ﬁeld, and joined by a triple scalar vertex. Despite this complication, we recover
the necessary diagrams for (∆1L
ψccR · Γ)2L.
Our implementation as described here correctly reproduces the results in Refs. [15,
20]. We mention that simpler implementations in FeynArts which e.g. do not couple
the b∆-vertex to an auxiliary source ﬁeld have been tested but produce incorrect results.
Explicitly, at one-loop the Green function (b∆· Γ)ψRcc was found to be sensitive to such a
diﬀerence in implementation, producing an incorrect relative sign between diagrams with
crossed external ghost lines. We note that such diagrams with identical external fermions
do not appear in the Abelian calculation.
4
Results for the two-loop counterterms
In this section we provide the explicit and full counterterm Lagrangian of both UV renor-
malization and restoration of symmetry breaking L2L
ct = L2L
sct + L2L
fct. The one-loop coun-
terterms needed for subrenormalization are essentially the ones of Ref. [20] but have been
re-derived by doing the complete one-loop renormalization in our setup adapted to the
reducible SU(2)-model.
The technical setup is similar to the ones used in the Abelian two-loop and three-loop
calculations of Refs. [21, 23]. The results for loop diagrams are obtained using the well-
known tadpole expansion method [34–36], by introducing an auxiliary mass into the de-
nominators and setting external momenta to zero. The calculations were performed with
the help of Mathematica, speciﬁcally the packages FeynRules, FeynArts, FeynHelpers
and FeynCalc [37–42]. As discussed in Sec. 3.2, powerful consistency checks are possible
by separately evaluating and comparing both the LHS and RHS of the quantum action
principle (cf. Eq. (3.18)). These consistency checks were performed for the divergent parts
of all breaking Green functions. Additionally we also performed the consistency checks
for the ﬁnite parts for the Green functions (∆·Γ)Gc and (∆·Γ)ψψc. The latter calculation
employs TARCER [43] in order to evaluate the ﬁnite part of some of the two-loop integrals,
providing further independent checks. Further non-trivial consistency checks arise from
the absence of logarithms in the two-loop counterterms required to cancel UV divergences
and symmetry breakings after subrenormalization and all subtleties mentioned in Sec. 3.2
are taken into account.
14
