also directed in the noncommutative gravity [37–44].
Weyl [45, 46] was the first to associate electromagnetism with the phase transformations
of the electron field, and moreover to develop the vierbein formalism, which appears to be
very useful in gauge theories of gravity. A crucial step in the development of gravity as a
gauge theory was done by Utiyama [25], who demonstrated that gravity might be regarded as
a gauge theory of the Lorentz group SO(1, 3), i.e. the spin connection could be treated as the
gauge field of the theory, although the vierbein was introduced in a rather ad hoc way. The
latter weakness was improved by Kibble [26] and Sciama [27], who considered instead the
gauging of the Poincar´e group. A further, more elegant development of the theory was done
by Stelle and West [33, 34] who identified the spin connection and the vierbein as parts of the
gauge fields of the de Sitter (dS) SO(1, 4) or the Anti-de Sitter (AdS) group SO(2, 3), which
was spontaneously broken by a scalar field to the Lorentz SO(1, 3) group. It is also worth
noting the use of the gauge theory of the conformal group, SO(2, 4), in the construction
of Weyl Gravity (WG) [47, 48], the Fuzzy Gravity (FG) [38–44] and its supersymmetric
extension, the superconformal group, in the N = 1 supergravity [35, 47].
Another interesting and more direct suggestion towards unifying gravity as a gauge theory
with the other known interactions described by GUTs has been suggested in the past [49–
51], and revived recently [43, 48, 52–62]. It is based on the observation that the tangent
group of a curved manifold does not necessarily have the same dimension as the manifold.
This possibility opens the very interesting avenue that one can consider higher-than-four-
dimensional tangent groups in a four-dimensional spacetime and possibly achieve unification
of gravity with internal interactions by gauging these higher-dimensional tangent groups.
Then, to a great extent, the machinery that has been developed examining higher-dimensional
theories with extra physical space dimensions, such as those used in the CSDR scheme [9, 14–
24], can be transferred in the four-dimensional constructions since they have the same tangent
group. Examples of the latter are the constraints, such as the Weyl condition that has to
be imposed in the higher-dimensional theories in order to result in realistic four-dimensional
chiral theories describing the internal interactions after the dimensional reduction. Similarly,
the need to impose the Majorana condition in addition to Weyl in the extra-dimensional
theories in order to avoid a possible doubling of the spectrum of the reduced chiral theories
[9, 17]. Along this outlined direction, a unification of the gauge conformal group with those of
the internal interactions has been constructed recently [43, 48, 58, 60–62]. This construction
was subsequently extended to the unification of the gauge conformal group on a covariant
noncommutative (fuzzy) space with internal interactions [44].
In the present paper, we would firstly like to review the gauge theoretic approach of
gravities, giving some emphasis on the conditions that guarantee the equivalence between
gauge and diffeomorphism invariance. Then we review the construction of the Conformal
Gravity and the Noncommutative (Fuzzy) Gravity using the gauge theoretic framework,
while based on an extension of the four-dimensional tangent group we present the Unification
of Conformal and Fuzzy Gravity with Internal Interactions. Finally, both unified schemes
are further examined, concerning their behaviour at low energies, after suitable spontaneous
symmetry breakings, and possible gravitational wave signals from the resulting cosmic string
topological defects..
More specifically, in Section 2 we present the resulting constraints from the requirement
that the gauge invariance in the three-dimensional gauge gravity implies diffeomorphism in-
3
