the required polarization threshold, allowing the observation of the quantum oscillator behavior
for various molecules, see below. Conversely, when the external feedback gain is limited, only the
𝐽-transitions with sufficiently large intrinsic gain can surpass the threshold condition. Exploiting
this property enables selective excitation of individual resonance lines within spectra containing
densely overlapping peaks (see Fig. 3).
Broad Applicability
Figure 3 presents spectra of 𝐽-oscillators alongside their corresponding zero-field NMR spectra for
various illustrative chemical systems. All 𝐽-oscillator spectra were acquired over 10 min (except for
Figure 3F, which was acquired over approx. 20 s). The corresponding FT spectra were normalized
using division by the total number of data points (Convention II, see SI), allowing for the direct
comparison between quantum oscillator-based and zero-field NMR spectra, despite differences in
acquisition times. The preparation of the samples is discussed in the SI (Material and methods
section).
Figure 3A shows 𝐽-oscillators generated from naturally abundant [15N]-acetonitrile ([15N]-
ACN, 0.36 %). Despite roughly ten-fold isotopic dilution compared to the previously discussed
samples (5 %), we successfully achieved sustained oscillations by compensating the reduced in-
trinsic gains with increased external digital feedback gain. Additionally, isotopically labeled ACN
molecules with 1 % abundance of 15N were tested: specifically, [1-13C,15N]-ACN (Fig. 3B) and
[2-13C,15N]-ACN (Fig. 3C). We also investigated a more complex nitrile (Fig. 3I), [U-13C,15N]-
butyronitrile, whose conventional zero-field spectrum (blue trace) is significantly complicated by
a complex interplay of spin-spin couplings. By carefully tuning the feedback parameters, stable
𝐽-oscillations were achieved on individual transitions, demonstrating the potential for systematic
on-demand spectral editing.
Notably, a “near-DC” signal was detected for [U-13C, 15N]-butyronitrile under certain condi-
tions, i.e., a static magnetization under feedback that persisted after emergence for more than ten
minutes. These DC (or near-DC) frequency signals are unresolvable by the conventional zero-field
NMR because relaxation rates for these transitions exceed their coherent oscillation frequencies
while the extended measurement window enabled us to observe them. Whether it is a low frequency
7
