1
Temporal dynamics of GHz acoustic waves in chipscale phononic
integrated circuits
A. Fahad Malik†, Mahmut Bicer†, Krishna C. Balram
Abstract—Phononic
integrated
circuits,
which
manipulate
GHz-frequency acoustic fields in µm-scale waveguides, provide
new degrees of freedom for routing and manipulation of mi-
crowaves in deeply sub-wavelength geometries with associated
implications for chipscale sensing and signal processing. The
combination of low propagation loss, long interaction lengths
and slow speed of sound put together with the large measurement
bandwidths and high frequency resolution available from modern
vector network analyzers (VNA) makes it feasible to visualize
the temporal dynamics of propagating acoustic fields in these
devices and see the device in action. Two representative examples
we discuss here are pulse circulation and ringdown in an acoustic
microring resonator, and the observation of (parasitic) multipath
interference effects in waveguide resonator geometries. In the
absence of fast 3D acoustic field imaging modalities, such time
domain reflectometry based methods provide the best alterna-
tive for mapping interface reflection and loss, which becomes
increasingly critical as these devices start to scale in complexity.
Index Terms—Piezoelectric devices, surface acoustic waves,
bulk acoustic wave, waveguides, guided modes, Lamb waves,
semiconductors, ring resonator, cavity, dispersion, reflectometry,
time domain, Fourier analysis
I. INTRODUCTION
P
Iezoelectric phononic integrated circuits (PnICs) [1], plat-
forms that can route GHz-frequency acoustic fields in
wavelength (µm-scale) waveguide geometries, are currently
being actively explored across a variety of material platforms
[2]–[4] for applications in sensing and signal processing. Like
their well-established integrated photonics counterparts [5],
PnICs provide low-loss [6] waveguiding (≈3.6 dB mm−1
at 3.4 GHz) with strong confinement and long interaction
lengths in chipscale platforms. Given that the acoustic field
is generated from a microwave signal in piezoelectric de-
vices, PnIC platforms provide new degrees of freedom for
manipulating microwaves in chipscale platforms at the deeply
subwavelength-scale (acoustic wavelength (λa) ≈µm, RF
wavelength ≈cm). An illustrative example from our previous
This work was supported in part by the UK’s Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council (EP/V005286/1, EP/N015126/1), the European
Research Council (SBS 3-5, 758843) and the UKRI frontier research guarantee
(EP/Z000688/1).
A.F. Malik gratefully acknowledges funding from the Commonwealth
Scholarship Commission and the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development
Office in the UK. All views expressed here are those of the author and not
the funding body.
M. Bicer, A.F. Malik, and K.C. Balram are with the Quantum Engineering
Technology Labs and the School of Electrical, Electronic and Mechanical
Engineering, University of Bristol, Woodland Road, Bristol BS8 1UB, UK
† Contributed Equally
email: fahad.malik@bristol.ac.uk
email: mahmut.bicer@bristol.ac.uk
email: krishna.coimbatorebalram@bristol.ac.uk
work [6] is the demonstration of compact spiral delay lines
that achieve on-chip signal delays of ≈2.5 µs, corresponding
to a free space delay of ≈750 m, while maintaining an on-chip
footprint < 0.25 mm2.
A large part of the promise of such chipscale acous-
tics platform, like with their microelectronic and photonic
counterparts, derives from the prospect of cascading multiple
elements together and getting the field (either electrons, light,
or microwaves via sound) to flow through them in a controlled
sequence to realize complex functionality. A simple example
would be to go beyond the single acoustic microring resonator
[6] towards coupled ring-resonator [7] geometries with a view
towards improving spectral filtering. But cascading elements
brings with it the challenges of designing (multiple) interface
transitions to minimize reflections and avoid mode conversion,
as these parasitic reflections in a low-loss waveguide platform
can lead to a variety of multipath interference effects, as
we demonstrate below. These stray fields can cause spectral
distortion, with the classic example being triplet transits in
traditional surface acoustic wave (SAW) devices [8].
In the absence of (fast) 3D field imaging modalities that can
map acoustic fields with nm-scale depth resolution [9], time
domain reflectometry (TDR) methods [10] provide the best
alternative for mapping propagating acoustic fields in guided
wave geometries. While TDR methods have long been used
in the microwave domain [11], they are particularly suited to
studying acoustic fields in PnICs. The combination of low
propagation loss, long interaction lengths and slow speed
of sound combined with the large measurement bandwidths
and frequency resolution of modern VNAs makes it feasible
to visualize the temporal dynamics of propagating GHz-
frequency acoustic fields in these devices in exquisite detail, as
we discuss below in Section III. In a way, the PnIC platform
provides a nice playground for acoustic dynamics, especially
multipath interference effects, and the VNA has sufficient
sensitivity for us to resolve and identify these events. This
sensitivity is the main advantage of using the time domain
transform of VNA spectral data over doing the experiments in
the time domain [6], as insertion loss [1] is currently the main
bottleneck in these chipscale devices and limits the achievable
signal-to-noise ratio severely in practice.
More broadly, visualizing the temporal dynamics allows
us to see the device in action. Although PnICs have been
developed in analogy with their photonic counterparts, the
slower speed of sound coupled with direct access to the phase
information in a VNA makes studying temporal dynamics in
this platform much more accessible and provides additional
insights that cannot be directly inferred from the spectral do-
main. Here, we use the side-coupled waveguide ring resonator
arXiv:2504.06959v1  [physics.app-ph]  9 Apr 2025
