Entropy 2025, 27, 395
9 of 14
be straightforward to extract the overall Hamiltonian governing this automaton. An
approximate result can always be obtained with the help of a Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff
formula; yet, an exact result would be of interest and we intend to report this elsewhere.
In the end, the discrete integer variables that we have dealt with can be mapped
to continuous real ones by invoking Sampling Theory, as we recalled in Section 2.1;
see [7,25–27]. We remind the reader that the value of the wave function in the discrete model
is determined at each longitudinal spatial position 2k or 2k + 1 by Equations (20) and (21).
In this way, letting the necklaces of the model become sufficiently large – i.e., the sepa-
rately conserved numbers of up and down Ising spins – the spinor field is free to move so
that its absolute value can possibly become large in some places or small in others in the
continuum limit.
4. Conclusions
To summarize, a discrete deterministic automaton representation for the Dirac equa-
tion in 1 + 1 dimensions is presented, which is based on Equations (10) and (11). In order
to incorporate the structure of these finite differences equations, especially the arithmetic
required by their right-hand sides, by making use of permutations of two-state spins in an
underlying classical Ising model, a torus-like compactification of the state space has been
introduced. Here, the real discrete value of the Dirac field is encoded in the position of an
up spin on a transverse “necklace” together with its longitudinal spatial position on a chain
with periodic boundary conditions—altogether forming a “Necklace of Necklaces”.
Generalizing an earlier study of the Weyl equation [24], which features no mass term,
the evolution of this automaton is determined by elementary spin exchange operations,
building up permutations from transpositions. This is in accordance with the Cellular
Automaton Interpretation of QM which requires to build discrete deterministic models with
dynamics generated by permutations of ontological states [4]. Thus, the “Necklace of Necklaces”
model described in this work never leads to quantum mechanical superposition states, it is
a classical automaton.
However, we recall that quantum mechanical features enter such models “by mis-
take” or, rather, mathematical convenience, as discussed extensively earlier [4,23,24,33,41].
Instead of resuming this here, we conclude by listing several conceivable extensions of
the model:
•
The generalization to more than 1 + 1 dimensions should be feasible, notwithstanding
some necessary bookkeeping efforts.
•
The effective Hamiltonian governing the discrete model should be derived and the
continuum limit be understood.
•
Symmetries and conservation laws of cellular automata are of general interest beyond
the present context.
•
A field theory of fermions obeying the Pauli principle should be formulated (relating
two-state Ising spins to occupation numbers?).
•
An external scalar potential can be considered as a spatially varying mass, yet interac-
tions with dynamical gauge fields will require additional considerations.
This may show that there is ample room for future work.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Data Availability Statement: The original contributions presented in this study are included in the
article. Further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author.
Acknowledgments: It is a pleasure to thank Ken Konishi, Gregory Scholes, and Andrei Khrennikov
for discussions.
