6
FIG. 2. The flowchart shows step-by-step our protocol explained in Section III. Each decision point helps eliminate or confirm
a state entirely based on qualitative comparisons of Fano-Factor values, bypassing the need to know the exact values of these
Fanofactors.
do the above analysis because the high variability of S
in this case likely means that it is a bad metric to be
used in our protocol for accurate prediction of candidate
state based on this method. In Ref. 13, the fano factor
mentioned is for a specific regime of physical parameters
corresponding to the experiment [45].
Here as we are
focusing on protocol, though interesting, we will not be
focusing on the exact behavior of the noise as a function
of internal parameters.
III.
METHODOLOGY FOR DISTINGUISHING
BETWEEN STATES:
It is worth noting to observe that for a given interface
in any state, although the actual values of CCC Fano
Factors differ across different equilibration regimes, the
overall behavior of the electrical shot noise (exponentially
suppressed or constant) is preserved in all cases except in
νi = 3 hosting the particle-hole conjugate states. Both
Anti Read-Rezayi and BS-aPf states exhibit exponen-
tially suppressed noise in full thermal equilibration but
show a constant non-zero CCC Fano-Factor in a partial
thermal equilibration regime. This flip is only seen when
νi = 3, leading to one of the more important advantages
of our methodology to distinguish the states because the
νi = 3 interface acts as a clear indicator of the thermal
equilibration regime.
A significant portion of our protocol is on looking at
the presence and absence of noise, which is much easier
than having to rely on the actual measurements of the
noise every step of the way. Another way this protocol
begins to prove useful is the fact that one does not need
to rely on the knowledge of the true thermal equilibra-
tion length of the sample given the limited studies and
numerical results in the case of the ν = 12/5 FQH state.
With this prologue let us start the description of the
protocol. Looking at Table I we can make the interesting
deduction that irrespective of the thermal equilibration
regime, if the noise detected in the {12/5, 7/3} interface
is zero then the only possible candidate state the system
can be in is Haldane-Heirarchy. This means that we can
successfully determine if the system is in HH state just
by knowing if the contacts are noisy or not (the first de-
cision point in Fig. 2). After having checked for HH, if it
turns out that the noise is not zero, we can safely elimi-
nate the possibility of HH, which also limits the number
of possibilities making it easier to look for patterns. Once
again, if the noise in the {12/5, 2} interface is zero, irre-
spective of the thermal equilibration regime, we can con-
clude that the FQH state is the Bonderson-Slingerland
state with N = 1 (second decision point in Fig. 2). It
is important to note that both particle-like states are
universal in their behavior across equilibration regimes
just based on the presence and absence of noise. Both of
these states are also clearly distinguishable based on just
one simple measurement for each state. However, the re-
maining Particle-hole conjugate states do not share these
properties. They are particularly hard to distinguish be-
cause there seem to be no distinguishing based directly
on the measurements of noise, as described above these
states also do not behave similarly across equilibration
regimes when νi = 3. So, to proceed, we find out the
equilibration regime in play by checking noise at νi = 3.
If the system is fully equilibrated, the only way to dis-
tinguish between the states is by looking at the ranges of
measured noise. BS (N = −3) (νi = 2) in full equilibra-
tion shows almost twice as much noise than A-RR in the
same configuration, making the comparison a fairly rea-
sonable question. In case the noise in the νi = 3 interface
is non-zero, there no longer exists any reasonably large
difference in FFs in any configuration to distinguish it
based on one measurement alone. Here the ratio of FFs
at νi = 7/3 to νi = 3 is ≈2.9 for A-RR state and ≈1.9
for BS (N = −3). Like in the previous case, it turns
out that the difference is respectable enough to allow for
comparison.
We have chosen to make the comparison
limit to be the median of the two values to accommodate
for experimental differences in individual FF values.
IV.
OUTLOOK & CLOSING REMARKS
Given the immense interest in creating the topological
qubits, the dark horses are the fractional quantum Hall
states. In that journey, the 12/5 is a very strong can-
didate as this provides the possibility of universal quan-
tum computing [46–50] due to the possibility of Fibonacci
