New designs of linear optical interferometers with minimal depth and component
count
Timoth´ee Goubault de Brugi`ere, Rawad Mezher, Sebastian Currie, and Shane Mansfield
Quandela, 7 Rue L´eonard de Vinci, 91300 Massy, France∗
(Dated: April 9, 2025)
We adapt an algorithm for CNOT circuits synthesis based on the Bruhat decomposition to the
design of linear optical circuits with Mach-Zehnder interferometers (MZI). The synthesis algorithm
reduces to designing sorting networks with nearest neighbor swapping operations as elementary
gates. We recover previous designs from the literature but with additional theoretical properties
regarding the compiler that implements unitaries on the interferometer. Notably the compiler can
always decide whether a unitary can be implemented on a given interferometer and, if so, returns
the shallowest possible implementation.
We also show natural extensions of our framework for
boson sampling experiments and for the coupling of multiple integrated interferometers to design
larger linear optical systems. In both cases, the designs are optimal in terms of number of optical
components. Finally, we propose a greedy design which exploits the arbritrary-but-fixed coupling
of separate integrated interferometers to perform shallow boson sampling. We discuss the optimal
interferometer dimensions to maximize the transmission. Beyond boson sampling, our developed
framework allows a resource-favourable implemention of any non-adaptive linear optical quantum
algorithm, by providing the shallowest possible interferometer for implementing this algorithm.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Integrated photonics is a promising hardware can-
didate for both noisy-intermediate scale (NISQ) tasks
like boson sampling [1], and universal fault-tolerant
quantum computing [2, 3]. In NISQ photonics archi-
tectures computation is typically performed by passing
photons through a lithographically defined integrated
interferometer and detecting the photons at the output.
Recent improvements in state of the art photon sources
[4] and integrated interferometers [5] have resulted in
demonstrations of photonic NISQ calculations [6, 7].
The design of these integrated interferometers is fixed
upon manufacture, and control of the implemented
operations is achieved by tunable phase-shifters. When
designing these photonic circuits there are two key
desiderata. First, we wish to ensure they are computa-
tionally universal, in the sense that they can implement
any linear optical unitary [8], or can implement a
predetermined subset of unitaries.
Secondly, these
circuits should minimise photon loss and gate infidelity.
To mitigate photon loss, one minimises the optical
depth of the chip.
To mitigate power consumption,
control complexity and fidelity errors, which arise due
to noise and cross-talk in phase settings, one minimises
the total number of phase-shifters.
For a universal m-mode chip with perfect beam-
splitters Clements et al.
gave an optimal scheme
[9] for minimisation of both depth and number of
phase-shifters. However this decomposition, although
optimal, is also a normal form in that the number of
components used is the same regardless of the unitary
∗timothee.goubault@quandela.com
being implemented and the target application. Some
specific cases are subject to improvements. For example
when the beamsplitters are not perfect [10], when the
universality constraint is relaxed, or when we can add
layers of arbitrary connectivity by coupling multiple
chips together. These more general cases motivate the
investigation of new circuit decompositions.
The design of linear optical interferometers shares a
number of similarities with the synthesis of CNOT cir-
cuits [11–13]. Recent insights on the CNOT synthesis
problem for a linear nearest neighbour (LNN) archi-
tecture [11] suggest a way to exploit these connections
to find novel designs.
In this work we adapt the al-
gorithms of [11] and [13] to the case of linear optical
circuit design. This results in two versatile frameworks,
one based on the Bruhat decomposition [14] and one
based on a greedy Gaussian elimination process. These
have various applications and optimality results:
• For the design of universal interferometers we re-
cover the optimal scheme of Clements et al. [9].
• The framework’s efficient compiler decides if a tar-
get unitary can be implemented on a given LNN
interferometer.
The procedure always gives the
shallowest implementation within the chip.
• For the design of interferometers targeting Boson
sampling, our framework is optimal in the number
of linear optical components and in depth.
• For the design of universal interferometers with
layers of arbritrary connectivity, our framework is
optimal in the number of linear optical compo-
nents.
• For the design of interferometers targeting Boson
sampling, with layers of arbritrary connectivity,
arXiv:2504.06059v1  [quant-ph]  8 Apr 2025
