 
4 
 
model simulations, extending vertically by 1000 m to reach a depth of 4000 m. Another prominent change in 
the CDA-estimated GMOCs compared with those of model simulations is intensified deep southward return 
circulation below 2500 m, exhibiting double centers between 3000 and 4000 m, one at 30° S and the other at 
the equator. In the reference ocean reanalysis products, the pattern of GMOC mean state resembles a blend of 
model simulation and CDA estimate: although the upper northward transport circulation exhibits two centers 
marked by a stronger ACC and weaker NADW within a continuous 10 Sv contour circle, the reanalysis 
products exhibit a much stronger and wider scope deep southward return circulation than the model simulations 
and CDA estimates do. 
Basin-based decomposition analysis of meridional overturning reveals that the new CDA GMOC center 
between 10° and 30° S at a depth of 500–2000 m mainly arises from the CDA-enhanced Atlantic subtropical 
gyre system, resulting in a markedly different Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC) (Fig.S6a–
g). In contrast, the substantial southward transport in the CDA estimates largely originates from an enhanced 
Indo-Pacific deep ocean tropical system, corresponding to a strong Indo-Pacific meridional overturning 
circulation (IPMOC) (Fig.S6h–n). Further detailed analyses of CDA-estimated ocean currents and the GMOC 
mean state in the Text S2 support these findings. 
Coherent ocean stratification in balanced coupled estimation 
The convergence of CDA-estimated GMOC mean states can be attributed to the convergent ocean 
stratification which is consistent with the observation (Fig.1g–n). The multiscale CDA constraints greatly 
reduce the model simulation biases and produce coherent ocean vertical structure, achieving better mean 
current velocities than the reference ocean reanalyses (Extend Data Fig.1 and Fig.S7). Both CDA estimates 
align the temperature and salinity structure of the oceans closely with observations, producing ocean 
stratification that is highly consistent with observational products. Notably, below 2000 m, the reduction of 
potential density errors of CESM-CDA from CESM-HIS is approximately 60%‒90% (Fig.1g), and the error 
reduction of CM2-CDA from CM2-HIS even reaches 95% (Fig.1h). Compared with the reference ocean 
reanalysis products, the ocean stratification of potential densities in CDA estimates demonstrates significant 
improvements, especially below 2000 m. 
This convergence aligns with the observational analysis of 950‒1150 m ocean currents based on drifting 
information from the array for real-time geostrophic oceanography (Argo) floats [34]. Owing to the responses 
of ocean vertical structures enforced by local data constraints to air-sea interactions (Figs.S2&S3), the resultant 
coherent ocean stratification of CDA adjusts the deep ocean currents and provides a consistent enhancement 
