Entropy 2025, 27, 395
3 of 14
theory, its probabilistic character with Born’s rule, by relating it to rationally acting agents
that can make predictions, verify them, and improve prior beliefs. – These interpretations,
and likewise others not mentioned here, seem far from the program advocated by ’t Hooft
and followed in a specific way in this article.
Before introducing more detailed models in this paper, it may be worthwhile to recall
that models based on permutations of ontological states lead to Hamiltonians which are
rather poor in tunable parameters or coupling constants. In the long run of developing a
future ontological theory, this may be a desirable feature.
Here, it suffices to point out that a Hamiltonian pertaining to the unitary dynamics
generated by permutations will be completely fixed, once an underlying Ising model and
its updating rule and time step size are defined. However, with respect to realistic circum-
stances, trying to pin down a theoretical model based on experimental data, inaccuracies
of extracted parameters cannot be avoided. Such unavoidable imprecision will replace
the ‘true’ Hamiltonian ˆH – describing deterministic evolution of ontological states – by a
result based on experiments, ˆHexp = ˆH + δ ˆH. And most likely ˆHexp will generate super-
position states, which leads necessarily to a Hilbert space description. This indicates that
the classical automaton models considered here are always intrinsically and unavoidably
close to becoming quantum mechanical “by mistake” [23]. It suggests that quantum theory
more generally might be a best possible theory reflecting our persisting ignorance of the
ontology beneath.
Ingredients for our present considerations were earlier obtained and reported in
references [23,24]. In particular, in [24] we presented further motivation and context of
attempts to find an ontological basis for quantum theory, including additional references.
In order to make this article self-contained, we summarize some of the formal aspects in
the Appendix A, while new results are described in the following Section(s).
It is important to realize that the present study can be considered independently of the
background of discussions concerning the foundations of quantum theory. In the following
derivations, one may consider the Dirac equation as a “classical” field equation, completely
independent of its famous quantum theoretical context. And the question raised and
answered affirmatively in this work is can we construct a discrete deterministic cellular
automaton that captures the dynamics embodied in this equation?
2. Results: An Automaton Beneath the Dirac Equation
To set the stage we first explain how the Weyl equation for massless spin-1/2 particles
is obtained from the cellular automaton described in Appendix A.2, based on the Cogwheel
Model reviewed in Appendix A.1. This will be followed by the construction of an automaton
representing the Dirac equation for massive spin-1/2 particles in 1 + 1 dimensions, which
requires additional structure to incorporate the mass.
2.1. The Weyl Equation
In order to arrive at the Weyl equation, a continuum field equation, from the discrete
cellular automaton based on two-state Ising spins–equivalently, on block numbers defined
in Appendix A.2, Equations (A8) and (A9) – we suitably denote an arbitrary state |ψ⟩of the
spin chain by
