link, such as phase or polarization fluctuations, can prohibit the creation of high-quality entanglement.
Once created, the entangled state begins to deteriorate due to a number of possible decoherence processes.
The quality of the memory can be quantified by the coherence time T2, which is the time during which
phase coherence of the quantum state can be maintained. T2 also determines the maximum separation
distance L between the nodes, since the coherence must be maintained long enough for the BSM station
to communicate to the nodes, and subsequent measurements at A and B to occur. That is, L << vT2,
where v is the velocity of light in the optical link. A coherence time of 10ms has been recently observed
for Rubidium atoms, allowing for a link distance over 100km [469].
Thus, developing good quantum memories, resulting in increased T2, is crucial for increasing sepa-
ration distance between nodes, while maintaining high CHSH violation and QBER. Entangled quantum
memories will also play a crucial role in quantum repeaters, required for quantum networking and es-
tablishing long-distance entanglement (see Ref. [470] for a comparison of decoherence times of candidate
platforms and Ref. [471] for a review of quantum networks with neutral atoms).
Event-ready setups can be divided into two main categories: those that use two photons as heralds
and those with a single-photon herald. A double-herald setup requires one photon from each node A
and B to arrive at the BSM station (see Fig. 18b). The BSM relies on two-photon interference, which is
inherently robust to phase instability [472] (low optical decoherence), but is less efficient, as it requires
the emission, arrival and detection of two photons. Thus, if the overall efficiency to detect a single photon
at the BSM is η, the double-herald setup has efficiency ∼η2. Event-ready entangled states have been
generated over tens of km of optical fibers with atomic ensembles [473] and single atoms [474].
To improve efficiency, single-photon event-ready setups can be employed. These again require entan-
glement between the node system and a photonic system, however in this case the state is of the form
|ψ0⟩|1⟩± |ψ1⟩|0⟩, where |ψj⟩are states of the node system, and |n⟩are n-photon Fock states. This
scheme has the advantage in that the relevant events are those where only one of the nodes emits a
photon. When the two optical channels are combined at a beam splitter, so that one cannot determine
which node emitted the photon, a detection in either output results in an entangled state at A and B
(see Fig. 18c). Using single-photon events increases the event rate (efficiency ∼η), but requires optical
phase stability to attain high-quality entanglement [475–479].
Event-ready schemes are probabilistic, and entanglement generation attempts can only be retried after
a time interval that permits two-way communication between the devices and the BSM setup, creating
a balance between distance, node decoherence and generation rate. If the distance is too large, then
decoherence sets in at the node qubits before successful heralding can be confirmed. One important
figure of merit is the ratio between the entanglement generation rate rent and the decoherence rate rdec,
known as the “link efficiency ηlink = rent/rdec [476]. When ηlink is on the order of unity or better,
then entanglement can be created faster than it is destroyed, which can be used to create entangled
nodes deterministically. This was achieved in Ref. [476] by delivering a separable state in the cases when
entanglement generation fails. More specifically, entanglement creation was attempted repeatedly, and
when entanglement was heralded successfully, it was stored for use at the end of the time window. If
all attempts failed, then a separable state was delivered at the end of the time window. This results
in a state of the form ρdet = psuccessρsuccess + pfailρfail. If ρdet has a fidelity greater than 1/2 with a
maximally entangled state (for 2 × 2 systems), then the system delivers entanglement deterministically
at the given time intervals.
Event-ready schemes can be used to eliminate the importance of the optical link inefficiency in CHSH
violation, but the entanglement generation rate diminishes exponentially with distance due to the at-
tenuation during light propagation to the BSM. Moreover, most quantum memories emit photons in the
visible or near-IR regime, where attenuation can be 1-2 orders of magnitude larger than the telecom
bands.
A solution to this problem is through quantum frequency conversion to the telecom window
using difference-frequency conversion with an intense pump pulse [480, 481], which has been used to
establish entanglement across distances of tens of kilometers for spin systems [482] and atomic ensem-
bles [473, 474, 483].
Nodes consisting of absorptive quantum memories [484, 485], can be entangled in a similar scheme
using entangled photons from SPDC. Here each node consists of a memory that is coupled to an SPDC
source, so that a single photon can be absorbed, while the other photon is sent to the BSM station.
Similar to the single-photon event-ready schemes, if one cannot determine which node produced the
photon detected at the BSM, the result is a pair of entangled nodes. In comparison to single-qubit nodes
discussed above, here the non-degenerate frequencies of the SPDC photons can be tuned such that one
photon is produced at the required frequency for level transition in the memory, and the other at telecom
wavelengths for optimal transmission in the optical link to the BSM.
74
