Figure 4: Applications. Left: switch with controllable hysteresis. A curve-dependent parameter
φ (e.g. the angle between curve tangent and x axis at bottom left corner) is plotted as function
of the control parameter β.
Locally stable curves are found at two disconnected regimes, I or
II, corresponding to distinct connectivity states. It is possible for I and II to be simultaneously
locally stable in a range of β values, resulting in hysteresis; the connectivity profile is different for
β-increasing (red) and β-decreasing (blue) processes. Inset: the limits of stability for each of the
two regions is set by the chosen surface patterns. The values for the I →II and II →I transitions
can thus be tuned independently, allowing full control over the hysteresis loop. Right: Continuous
nontrivial cycle in shape space. Each set of control parameter values β1, β2 (inset) corresponds to
a single curve (of matching color) in real space. A continuous change of parameters results in a
continuous change of curve shape. A nontrivial loop in parameter space, here a CCW cycle, gives
rise to a nontrivial periodic cycle in shape space, here a left-moving wave, as indicated by the gray
arrows.
multistability, abrupt path changes, and hysteresis [20–22,24,27]. The work that we have presented
here allows full characterization and control over the stability of each branch at each value of the
control parameter. We may therefore fine-tune the loss of stability of each branch at a desired value
of the control parameter, and thus accurately design hysteresis loops (Fig. 4). This feature is key
for possible applications like smart switches, actuation devices, or paremeter-sensitive gauges.
Moreover, it is reasonable to consider an experimental system in which two or more system
parameters are controlled, e.g. the rotation between plates and the temperature. We are not aware
of reports of such a system in the literature, but this is likely only because such setup was not
considered useful in the past. As an immediate first application, such control will effectively remove
stability restrictions; a local shape-change that cannot be achieved by heating can be achieved by
rotation and vice versa, and we may pick a non-trivial trajectory in parameter space to achieve the
desired trajectory in shape space. Furthermore, it will be possible to realize nontrivial cycle in the
set of shapes, not through hysteresis but rather by nontrivial closed loop in the set of parameters
(Fig. 4). Other applications may make use of the full dimensionality of parameter space to realize
within the same system larger (namely two-parameter) families of curves.
9
