PAGIONO
An ionospheric activity index
Dr.Paul.Kinsler@physics.org
D.
Fitting II: the power-law tails
Although the G2E fitting performs well, it does not capture
the behaviour at larger dTEC values, which – if sufficiently
well-sampled – can be seen to follow a power-law behaviour.
This indicates that these large-dTEC power-law tails are a true
property of all or some of the data slices, albeit something
which is only visible with large enough dTEC counts 2.
Consequently, after a G2E fit is done, we also attempt a
power-law fit to the difference between the data and the G2E
fit, but only attempting the match in the dTEC range i.e. where
the discrepancy is large enough (more than 75% of the average
of data and fit). Note that although the tails do not always
appear to have identical fall-offs in the positive and negative
δEC directions (as is also the case for the exponential sub-fits),
but to minimise the number of additional fitting parameters
we only fit the sum of the positive and negative tails.
This distribution-tail fitting function is only applied when
dTEC values are greater than α7, and with the power-law fall-
off parameter α8. and amplitude α9, is
pT(δEC) = P(δEC)−p(δEC) = α9 |δEC|α8 H(|δEC| > α7),(7)
where H is a Heaviside step function. The fitting process does
not attempt to match this equation to the usual P(δEC), but
instead matches a line to ln(P(δEC)) as a function of ln(δEC),
and error bars on those log-log point positions are assumed to
be the same.
The results of such fits on available data indicate that the
exponent of the fall-off α8 is not the same over all data slices,
and it can and does vary, typically between values of -2 to -5.
As noted in the introduction, distributions with such power-
law tails do not always have finite moments, the problem be-
ing worse for smaller exponents. This behaviour is why we
here use this fitting process, despite its imperfections, rather
than simply relying on moments such as average, variance,
kurtosis, and so on.
A further complication is that such power-law tails do not
straightforwardly supply us with either width or amplitude pa-
rameters, a point we address later in IV H. Furthermore, since
the tail appears at a very different level of scale and signifi-
cance, it is not easy to judge the importance of this feature3:
is it somehow a key indicator, or an unimportant side effect?
2 The reason for distributions containing large dTEC values is not clear al-
though we believe it is most likely likely due to some physical process.
However, it remains possible that some or all of the values result from tech-
nical shortcomings in the RINEX data, or subtle errors introduced by the
processing; although it is less clear why such issues might generate such
long tailed distributions rather than simpler artifacts. In any case, here the
Tail fits are handled separately, and their contributions to the overall widths
are optional and checked on a case-by-case basis.
3 Since we work with distributions of dTEC values automatically generated
from ground station date, it is difficult to reliably attribute anomalous fea-
tures to either physical or technical effects; especially given that either – or
both – can be intermittent, rare, or non-periodic, and either case could also
give rise to similar features. We do exclude some band pairs (i.e. L1IL6I,
L1IL7I) since they seem never to produce usable distributions, and occa-
sionally temporarily remove ground stations from the data if they seem
to produce anomalous results (e.g. LAMA in early 2024). However, au-
tomating such exclusions is challenging, and not unlikely to be fallible, so
currently we rely on human observation of the outputs.
E.
Ionospheric activity and distribution widths
A key output we aim for here is a simple aggregate iono-
spheric activity index (or scale), which can inform on prop-
agation disturbances likely to be experienced in a given area
and over a given internal of time – and therefore on the corre-
sponding impact.
Since dTEC variances [45] can be correlated with scintil-
lation measures, and our fitted distributions also have vari-
ances (and standard deviations), we ensured that the fitted
parameters for the widths are designed to ensure they cor-
respond directly to the standard deviation of the distribu-
tion (whether Gaussian or exponential).
Then we take an
amplitude-weighted average of the three width contributions
(α1, α3, α5), whilst weighting the double-sided gaussian and
the single-sided exponentials appropriately:
WdT
= 2α1α2+α3α4+α5α6
α2+α4+α6
(8)
= 2
α1α2
α2+α4+α6 +
α3α4
α2+α4+α6 +
α5α6
α2+α4+α6
= 2 ¯α1 + ¯α3 + ¯α5.
(9)
This weighted average is chosen so that the aggregate width
is (or can be) dominated by the most significant component(s)
of the fit function, and is not, for example, unduly affected by
a very wide but very-low amplitude Gaussian component.
F.
Reference choice
Our primary interest here is in recognising, predicting,
or categorizing interesting, unexpected, or disruptive events.
That is, we want to be able to flag up events or behaviours
that are somehow different to a benign and quiet ionospheric
background.
However, the ionosphere is rarely “quiet” in any meaning-
ful sense. For example, if we use the Potsdam KP index as
an indicator for quiet conditions, note that on only three days
between 2020–2022 was it zero, and on only three more was
it its next-lowest value 0.3333. To this purpose, we consider
only days 006 and 007 in 2022 as as our benchmark for rea-
sonably quiet ionospheric conditions. Furthermore, the choice
of quiet days in January, away from equinoctial conditions, is
a way to increase sensitivity towards enhanced ionospheric
activity at equatorial latitudes during equinoctial conditions.
With this reference, we can then rate other days – or other
data slices from other days with respect to this reference; all
without having to invent, guess, or intuit some idealised or
theoretical reference situation. We chose a relatively recent
year (2022) since much earlier years – e.g. at the last solar
minimum – do not provide the same data extent of data cov-
erage in CDDIS.
Nevertheless, even though these quietest KP days (with
KP = 0) do have significantly less dTEC activity than most,
there is still some, and there are still spatially or temporally
localised features that can appear in the data. Thus as long
as we are not interested in subtle distinctions (e.g. between
“quiet” and “almost quiet”), and instead focus on more active
ionospheric behaviour, our reference choice should be seen
primarily as a pragmatic one, rather than an attempt at perfec-
tion. In principle we might even dispense with the KP index as
a proxy for quietness, and instead trawl all available data for
relevant slices to find the minimal variation (in dTEC). How-
6
