SciPost Physics
Submission
Dissipation and noise in strongly driven Josephson junctions
Vasilii Vadimov1 ⋆, Yoshiki Sunada1 and Mikko Möttönen1,2
1 QCD Labs, QTF Centre of Excellence, Department of Applied Physics, Aalto University, P.O.
Box 15100, FI-00076 Aalto, Finland
2 QTF Centre of Excellence, VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd., P.O. Box 1000,
02044 VTT, Finland
⋆vasilii.1.vadimov@aalto.fi
Abstract
In circuit quantum electrodynamics systems, the quasiparticle-related losses in Joseph-
son junctions are suppressed due to the gap in the superconducting density of states
which is much higher than the typical energy of a microwave photon. In this work, we
show that a strong drive even at frequency lower than the double superconducting gap
enables dissipation in the junctions due to photon-assisted breaking of the Cooper pairs.
Both the decay rate and noise strength associated with the losses are sensitive to the dc
phase bias of the junction and can be tuned in a broad range by the amplitude and the
frequency of the external driving field, making the suggested mechanism potentially at-
tractive for designing tunable dissipative elements. Furthermore, pronounced memory
effects in the driven Josephson junctions render them perspective for both theoretical
and experimental study of non-Markovian physics in superconducting quantum circuits.
We illustrate our theoretical findings by studying the spectral properties and the steady
state population of a low impedance resonator coupled to the driven Josephson junc-
tion.
Copyright attribution to authors.
This work is a submission to SciPost Physics.
License information to appear upon publication.
Publication information to appear upon publication.
Received Date
Accepted Date
Published Date
Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
Model
3
2.1
Polarization operator
4
2.2
Quasiclassical limit
6
3
Admittance of the junction
7
3.1
Admittance of a static junction
8
3.2
Admittance of a driven junction
9
4
Low-impedance resonator
10
4.1
Spectroscopy of the driven resonator
12
4.2
Steady state population
13
1
arXiv:2504.06877v1  [quant-ph]  9 Apr 2025
