an increased number of gates and hence gate errors. The
requirement of such additional mitigating circuits and
exponential overheads make these methods impractical.
Along with VQE, works have been done in the Projective
Quantum Eigensolver (PQE)16 framework using ZNE17.
Statistical learning methods are known to learn com-
plex functions underlying the input data very well and
the field of QEM is no exception to such models, as they
eliminate the need for extra mitigating circuit execution,
reducing runtime overheads.
Although initial machine
learning (ML) exploration for QEM has shown promis-
ing results,18–23 they are limited to shallow circuits and
small fermionic systems. Scalable and cost-efficient QEM
techniques must be tested for molecular Hamiltonians for
strongly correlated systems beyond two-electron as they
pose the most versatile and diverse circuit classes. How-
ever, existing schemes face information-theoretic limita-
tions, such as entanglement spreading. To achieve quan-
tum advantage, entanglement is necessary, but it comes
at the cost of rapid noise spreading. Even when oper-
ating at poly(log(log(n))) depth, estimating the expecta-
tion values of noiseless observables, in the worst-case sce-
nario, requires a super-polynomial number of samples24.
Many QEM strategies like ZNE use exponentially many
samples with respect to circuit depth, implying that the
information should quickly get degraded due to sequen-
tial noise effects, requiring exponential overhead to re-
move the accumulated error25. Hence such QEM strat-
egy is primarily limited to model Hamiltonian and very
shallow quantum circuits.
In this work, we develop GraphNetMitigator (GNM)
- a combined Graph Neural Network (GNN) and
regression-based learning model to mitigate the noisy
expectation values obtained through VQE for strongly
correlated molecular systems over their entire potential
energy profile across diverse quantum devices. We use
snippets of the entire circuit consisting of single- and
two-body fermionic excitations for model training and
use them to predict the mitigated expectation values for
the complete ansatz. The use of GNN is motivated from
the fact that graph representations are the best mod-
eling choice for such type of data where the instances
have a similar circuit structures but differ in terms of
two-qubit gate connectivity. We dynamically generate a
portion of noisy training data during ansatz construc-
tion to ensure runtime efficiency.
To validate the ro-
bustness of the GNM, we train it in two different set-
tings: (1) assuming access to the ideal quantum com-
puter (simulator-generated expectation values are used
as labels) and (2) assuming we do not have access to the
fault-tolerant quantum computer. In the latter case, we
generate the labels by sequentially mitigating quantum
error (see supplementary materials for details) which was
found to produce accurate energetics for shallow quan-
tum circuits without additional mitigation circuits. We
employed CNOT-efficient implementation throughout to
reduce circuit depth drastically26,27. The performance of
the GNM is tested on linear H4 and BH molecules across
their dissociation energy surface with diverse noise pro-
files derived from real hardware. We also study the ro-
bustness of GNM over other QEM techniques with varied
synthetic noise strengths.
II.
THEORY
The current limitations of the hardware has motivated
research to construct shallow dynamic ansatz that can be
realized in NISQ hardware28,29. In often cases, the con-
struction of the dynamic ansatz relies on the evaluation
of gradients28 in quantum hardware and under noisy sce-
nario, such ansatz are often sub-optimally expressive. We
previously advocated the importance of minimizing (or
entirely bypassing) the usage of quantum resources while
the dynamic ansatze are constructed such that the result-
ing ansatze maintain the requisite expressibility30–32. Of
course, their execution (through whatever method they
are generated) in a quantum device requires additional
EM routines for accurate prediction of energetics.
In
this manuscript, while our principal focus is to develop
the ML based EM strategy for any arbitrary disentan-
gled ansatz10, we also propose a robust methodology that
forms a dynamic ansatz in a noisy quantum architecture
which is nearly identical to an ansatz constructed under
noiseless environment from the same operator pool. Such
an undertaking serves twin desirable goals: firstly, it au-
tomatically generates the features needed for the regres-
sor of our subsequent ML model and more importantly,
due to its compatibility with a sequential reference error
mitigation (SREM) strategy that generates mitigated re-
sults (which are used as training labels) for sub-circuits
on the fly as the ansatz gets constructed. In short, this
entire workflow can be executed in noisy quantum device
without any implicit or explicit dependence to the fault-
tolerant qubits. In the following section, we begin with
the dynamic ansatz construction strategy in a noisy en-
vironment and demonstrate how this strategy generates
additional features that are used up by the ML regressor.
A.
Construction of a Dynamic Ansatz in Noisy Architecture
For all the two-body excitations characterized by the
hole-particle composite index tuple I, we calculate the
one-parameter energy functional by optimizing the single
parameter circuits
EI = ⟨ϕHF | e−τI(θI) ˆHeτI(θI) |ϕHF ⟩∀I
(3)
where θI is the sole variational parameter in each such
optimization. Furthermore, we calculate the "noisy" ref-
erence energy for each of these one-parameter circuits
with the parameter values set to be zero:
E0
I = ⟨ϕHF | e−τI(θI=0) ˆHeτI(θI=0) |ϕHF ⟩∀I
(4)
With the knowledge of the noisy reference energy for each
one parameter circuit, we only screen in those operators
2
