Quantum controlling and the topological properties of the magnon photo-transport in
two-dimensional collinear ferromagnet
Jun-Cen Li
College of Sciences, Northeastern University, Shenyang 110004, China
An Du∗
College of Sciences, Northeastern University, Shenyang 110004, China
National Frontiers Science Center for Industrial Intelligence and Systems Optimization, Northeastern University, China. and
Key Laboratory of Data Analytics and Optimization for Smart
Industry (Northeastern University), Ministry of Education, China.
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
In our work, we study magnon transport induced by light through Aharonov-Casher (AC) effect,
including magnon spin photocurrent (MSPC) and magnon energy photocurrent (MEPC). Firstly, we
regard the effect of the electric field on the magnon through the AC effect as a perturbation. Then
we derived the expressions of MSPC and MEPC in two-dimensional collinear ferromagnetic system.
And we apply our theory to the two-dimension ferromagnetic Hexagonal and Kagome lattice. We
find that the optical frequency and the relaxation time of the material can be used to control the
photo-transport of magnons. In addition, under the condition of low light frequncy and infinite
relaxation time, the longitudinal magnon photo-transport is related to the topological property of
the magnon system.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In order to develop new electronic devices, the elec-
trical transport, thermal transport and the correspond-
ing topological property of electrons have been exten-
sively studied1–20. On the other hand, the thermal trans-
port and the topological property of phonon have also
been studied in depth in recent years21–28.
With the
development of spintronics, the transport properties of
magnon attracted extensive attention29–31.
Magnon is
quasi-particle equivalent to quantized spin waves. Dif-
ferent from electrons and phonon, the magnons have no
charge but a magnetic moment, which means that it does
not lose energy due to Joule heat, but can be controlled
by the magnetic moment32. So magnons have the poten-
tial to replace electrons as new information carriers.
In order to develop new devices using magnons as in-
formation carriers, it is helpful to study the transport of
magnons. But unlike electron, magnon is neutral parti-
cle. So the driving mechanism of magnon transport is dif-
ferent from that of electron. In order to control the trans-
port of magnons, a series of studies of the thermal Hall
effect33–43 and the spin Nernst effect of magnons44–47
have been done.
In addition, the method of driving
magnon transport by strain has also been studied48.
In order to make it easier to control magnon transport,
the controlling of magnons by electromagnetic field has
attracted attention.
In 2018, I. Proskurin et al.
the-
oretically investigated the magnon spin photocurrents
(MSPC) generated by the Zeeman coupling of magnons
and the magnetic field component of light in antiferro-
magnetic insulators49.
Then H. Ishizuka and M. Sato
proposed to magnon transport induced by the magnetic
field component of linearly polarized (LP) light50,51. On
the other hand, using the electric field part of light to ex-
cite MSPC has also received wide attention. In 2021, E.
V. Bostr¨om et al. studied the magnon circular photogal-
vanic effect enabled by two-magnon Raman scattering52.
On the other hand, we have the hope to achieve ex-
citation of magnon transport by electric field through
Aharonov-Casher (AC) effect.
In 1984, Y. Aharonov
and A. Casher found that neutral particles with mag-
netic moments acquire a geometric phase when moving
in an electric field, an effect known as the AC effect53.
As a kind of neutral quasiparticle with magnetic moment,
magnons can be affected by Aharonov-Casher (AC) ef-
fect.
In 2017, K. Nakata et al.
studied the quantum
Hall response of magnons to magnetic field gradients in
AC effects induced magnons Landau levels54,55. In their
work, although the quantum Hall effect of magnons is
related to the electric field and AC effect, the trans-
port of magnons is still a response to the magnetic field
gradient, instead of electric field. According to AC ef-
fect, the electric field component of light can directly ex-
cite magnon transport. And because magnons and elec-
trons have different statistical and electromagnetic prop-
erties, the phototransport of magnon is different from
that of electron56–60,64.
In 2024.
Y. Wang et al.
in-
vestigated the linear MSPC induced by time-dependent
electric field through AC effect in the SSH model65. In
the same year, they derived expression of the magnon
photogalvanic effect and studied the properties of the
photogalvanic effect of magnons under different polar-
ized light66.
However, considering the relaxation time
of magnons, the linear MSPC and magnon energy pho-
tocurrent (MEPC) induced by time-dependent electric
field in two-dimensional two-dimensional collinear ferro-
magnet are still to be studied.
In this work, we investigate the methods for control-
ling MSPC and MEPC (induced by AC effect) in two-
dimensional collinear ferromagnetic materials. Different
from the work of Y. Wang et al.65,66, we derive linear
arXiv:2504.06852v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  9 Apr 2025
