introduce separate architectural branches to handle different data regimes [39–41]—both of which 
add complexity—our physics-constrained network achieves good performance across all regimes with 
a single, unified architecture and a constant weighting strategy. Physical principles like energy 
conservation are directly incorporated into both the neural network architecture and loss functions 
leading to accurate predictions without violating physical laws. Unlike purely data-driven methods, 
this approach reduces the hypothesis space by incorporating physical constraints, allowing for more 
reliable generalization from small training dataset. Generalization refers to the model’s ability to 
accurately predict new, unseen data with different structural parameters and optical properties. We 
address the challenging phase behavior dependent on gap size, the distance between nanostructures 
in metasurface array. The physics-informed approach effectively incorporates physical domain 
knowledge into the neural network. By incorporating physical laws, the model could inherently 
accommodate the complex behaviors by encoding electromagnetic principles instead of attempting 
to learn them only from data. Furthermore, rather than direct phase angle prediction, we employed 
a sine-cosine representation for handling the phase wrapping challenge to guaranty smooth 
transitions in phase values, in particular at boundaries like 0 and 2𝜋. Conventional machine learning 
models treat these points as distant values rather than the same physical states, and thus create 
artificial errors compromising prediction accuracy. Previous studies have taken varied approaches to 
addressing this phase discontinuities. Jiang et al. [38] attempted direct phase prediction despite 
recognizing the difficulties introduced by discontinuities at the 0/2π boundaries. An et al.  [42] tackled 
this issue by designing two separate neural networks to predict the real and imaginary components of 
the transmission coefficient, from which the phase and amplitude were later derived. In contrast, our 
method directly accounts for the circular nature of phase data within a single, unified network by 
incorporating a sine-cosine representation with Euclidean normalization as a non-trainable layer. This 
approach ensures physically meaningful outputs while reducing network complexity compared to 
multi-network architectures. Our method utilizes a Euclidean distance-based loss function in the sine-
cosine space, effectively capturing the circular nature of phase values. This ensures a physically 
meaningful error metric while preventing discontinuity issues. 
2. Physics-Constrained Neural Network Framework 
2. 1 Dataset Characteristics 
We use two datasets (Dataset A with 1075 data points and Dataset B with 580 data points) obtained 
by finite element method (FEM) simulations of the optical response of a metasurface with single 
nanodisk in the unit cell. Dataset A combines all data points from Dataset B with additional simulation 
