VQE calculations on a NISQ era trapped ion quantum computer using a multireference
unitary coupled cluster ansatz: application to the BeH2 insertion problem
Palak Chawla,1, ∗Disha Shetty,1, ∗Peniel Bertrand Tsemo,1, 2 Kenji Sugisaki,1, 3, 4, 5
Jordi Riu,6, 7 Jan Nogué,6, 7 Debashis Mukherjee,1 and V. S. Prasannaa1, 8, †
1Centre for Quantum Engineering, Research and Education, TCG Crest, Kolkata 700091, India
2Department of Physics, IIT Tirupati, Chindepalle, Andhra Pradesh 517619, India
3Graduate School of Science and Technology, Keio University,
7-1 Shinkawasaki, Saiwai-ku, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 212-0032, Japan
4Quantum Computing Center, Keio University, 3-14-1 Hiyoshi,
Kohoku-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 223-8522, Japan
5Keio University Sustainable Quantum Artificial Intelligence Center (KSQAIC),
Keio University, 2-15-45 Mita, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan
6Qilimanjaro Quantum Tech, Carrer de Veneçuela, 74, Sant Martí, 08019, Barcelona, Spain
7Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Carrer de Jordi Girona, 3, 08034 Barcelona, Spain
8Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad- 201002, India
In this study, we employ the variational quantum eigensolver algorithm with a multireference
unitary coupled cluster ansatz to report the ground state energy of the BeH2 molecule in a geometry
where strong correlation effects are significant. We consider the two most important determinants
in the construction of the reference state for our ansatz. Furthermore, in order to carry out our
intended 12-qubit computation on a noisy intermediate scale quantum era trapped ion hardware
(the commercially available IonQ Forte-I), we perform a series of resource reduction techniques to
a. decrease the number of two-qubit gates by 99.84% (from 12515 to 20 two-qubit gates) relative
to the unoptimized circuit, and b. reduce the number of measurements via the idea of supercliques,
while losing 2.69% in the obtained ground state energy (with error mitigation and post-selection)
relative to that computed classically for the same resource-optimized problem setting.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The field of quantum chemistry using quantum comput-
ers has been one of the most rapidly emerging areas of re-
search in quantum sciences and technologies, owing to the
promise of the speedup that quantum algorithms offer for
solving such problems [1–4]. On the quantum computing
front, since we currently are in the noisy intermediate scale
quantum (NISQ) era [5], calculations involving over a hand-
ful of qubits are primarily limited by the currently achiev-
able two-qubit gate fidelities. In such a scenario, despite
the limited number of qubits available, it is important to
push the boundaries of quantum chemical computations us-
ing quantum computers, while maximizing both precision
and the number of qubits that can be effectively utilized.
On the other hand, on the quantum chemistry front, the
quest to accurately predict molecular energies in strongly
correlated regimes has long been an issue of fundamental
importance owing to the variety of applications that it can
find [6–11].
In this work, we aim to carry out a quantum chemi-
cal calculation where strong correlation effects are at play
on a NISQ era quantum computer. To that end, we use
∗Contributed equally to the work
† srinivasaprasannaa@gmail.com
the widely employed quantum-classical hybrid Variational
Quantum Eigensolver (VQE)[12–24] algorithm with a mul-
tireference unitary coupled cluster ansatz (MRUCC-VQE).
We remark at this point that several works exist in liter-
ature to capture strong correlation effects using the VQE
algorithm [25–30]. However, while many studies focus on
the extremely important formulation step, few take the next
step of implementing and executing a problem instance on a
quantum computer, where the key challenges lie in reducing
circuit depth while retaining precision to as much extent as
possible. To the best of our knowledge, only one work em-
ploys a MRUCC-VQE approach [29] on quantum hardware.
The work uses a superconducting qubit quantum computer
to obtain energies of some light molecular systems.
Our
work is based on the multireference ansatz discussed in Sug-
isaki et al [30], where the authors simulate the BeH2 inser-
tion problem in the MRUCC-VQE framework. We carry
out a 12-qubit computation (with error mitigation) on a
commercially available trapped ion quantum computer for
the same problem. Among the commercially available quan-
tum computers, trapped ion devices offer among the best
two-qubit gate fidelities as well as all-to-all connectivity,
thus making the platform our choice for this work.
The manuscript is organized as follows: We discuss the
BeH2 insertion problem (Section II A) followed by details of
MRUCC-VQE (Section II B) and then proceed to expound
on our resource reduction techniques (Section II C). Sec-
arXiv:2504.07037v1  [physics.chem-ph]  9 Apr 2025
