arXiv:2504.06896v1  [hep-ph]  9 Apr 2025
Decays τ →ππηντ and τ →πηηντ in the extended Nambu–Jona-Lasinio model
M.K. Volkov1,∗A.A. Pivovarov1,† and K. Nurlan1,2,3‡
1 Bogoliubov Laboratory of Theoretical Physics, JINR, 141980 Dubna, Moscow region, Russia
2 The Institute of Nuclear Physics, Almaty, 050032, Kazakhstan
In the framework of the extended Nambu–Jona-Lasinio model, the processes τ →ππη(η′)ντ and τ →
πηη(η′)ντ are considered taking into account mesons in the ground and ﬁrst radially excited intermediate
states. It is shown that in the processes τ →ππη(η′)ντ the vector channel is dominant, and in the processes
τ →πηη(η′)ντ the main contribution is given by the axial vector channel. The scalar meson a0 plays a dom-
inant role in processes with two η-mesons in the ﬁnal state. The signiﬁcance of the relative phase between the
ground and ﬁrst radially excited states for these processes is shown. The obtained results for the τ →ππηντ
process are in satisfactory agreement with the recent experimental data from BaBar and CMD-3, which differ
from the averaged values given in the PDG tables.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The processes related to the nonperturbative region of the theory of strong interactions are the objects of
intensive research in modern electron-positron collider centers such as SLAC (BaBar), KEK (Belle), BEPC
II (BES III), VEPP (SND, CMD-3) and others. It is important to note the current experiments of BES III,
Belle II, and the planned super Charm - Tau factories that add relevance to the study of the processes of strong
interactions. The planned τ decay experiments at the lepton colliders, particularly at the super Charm - Tau
factory, provide high statistics and accuracy. The study of processes of meson production in τ decays is a good
laboratory for the analysis of strong interactions effects at low energies.
However, the theoretical description of the processes in this energy region causes difﬁculties related to the
inapplicability of the QCD perturbation theory. The spectral functions and the meson τ decay widths can be
calculated on the basis of phenomenological models taking into account the quark structures of mesons and the
chiral symmetry of strong interactions. Among such models one can note the chiral perturbation theory [1, 2]
and the Nambu–Jona-Lasinio (NJL) model [3–13], and various extended versions of these models.
The NJL model is based on the chiral symmetry of strong interactions that is partially broken by the current
masses of the u, d and s quarks. When considering the η mesons, it is important to take into account the mixing
of the light u and d quarks with a heavier s quark. Such mixing appears as a result of accounting for the gluon
anomaly that is well described in the NJL model by using the ’t Hooft interaction [14, 15]. In the description of
the decays of the τ lepton with the production of the η/η′ mesons, the effect of chiral symmetry breaking plays
an important role.
One can note the recent success of the NJL model in the description of a series of four particle τ decays with
three pseudoscalar mesons with kaons and η mesons in the ﬁnal states [16–18].
Currently, the process τ →ππηντ is actively studied experimentally. In recent experiments for this decay, the
results have been obtained that differ from the values given in the PDG: Br(τ →ππηντ)BaBar = (1.63±0.08)×
10−3 [19], Br(τ →ππηντ)CMD−3 = (1.68±0.17)×10−3 [20], and Br(τ →ππηντ)PDG = (1.39±0.07)×10−3
[21]. This gives relevance to the theoretical study of processes of this type. The τ →ππη(η′)ντ decays
are closely related to the electron-positron annihilation processes, since the vector channel is decisive in both
cases. Therefore, the widths of the τ decays can be estimated from the e+e−data using the vector current
conservation hypothesis (CVC) [22]. However, for a deeper understanding of the internal structure of the
decays, it is deﬁnitely of interest to provide direct calculations.
The present work is devoted to the description of the decays τ →ππη(η′)ντ and τ →πηη(η′)ντ in the
NJL model. For this purpose, both the ground and ﬁrst radially excited meson states are taken into account as
intermediate resonances. Besides, when considering the processes τ →πηη(η′)ντ, the scalar states are taken
∗volkov@theor.jinr.ru
† pivovarov@theor.jinr.ru
‡ nurlan@theor.jinr.ru
