preserving perturbations, we find a behaviour quite different from that for gcd(k, r) = r
studied above.
First, in section 4.1, we use the leading-order analytic λ-expansion to study self-duality
preserving perturbations around the self-dual constant-F solution. We show that, in
contrast to the gcd(k, r) = r case, this expansion now produces solutions with non-
abelian parts which are space-time dependent, already at the first nontrivial order.
There are additional moduli which appear at leading order in λ and, within the leading-
order λ-expansion, the moduli space appears noncompact. The total number of moduli,
the 4gcd(k, r) constant holonomies, plus the moduli appearing in the λ-expansion add
up to 4r, consistent with the index theorem. However, the moduli space is expected to
be compact on the T4, and we do not yet know how to determine its global structure
using the leading-order expansion in nonlinearity. We leave this important problem for
future work.
Second, in section 4.2, this analytic finding is further supported by studying the multi-
fractional instanton for gauge group SU(3) on the lattice, for r = 2, k = 1, using a T4
with ∆(2, 1, 2) = 0 (or 4L3L4 = L1L2). In contrast to the r = 2, k = 2, ∆(2, 2, 1) = 0
(or L1L2 = L3L4) case, the numerical minimization found no constant-F solutions—see
Figures 5 and 6 for two different sizes of T4. By the analytic argument of section 4.1,
the constant-F self-dual instantons are a set of measure zero. As numerics generates
only a finite number of configurations, the fact that the numerical algorithm found
no constant-F backgrounds is consistent with our analytic result. As Figure 6 shows,
among the 214 self-dual configurations (Q = 2/3, k = 1) on the larger (32, 8, 8, 8) lattice,
we found several with small spatial variation of F. For these configurations, we fitted
the analytical prediction of the leading-order λ expansion of section 4.1 for the gauge
invariant tr F 2
13 with the numerics. We found reasonable agreement for small values of
the new “non-compact” moduli, making this rather preliminary study self-consistent.
See section 4.3.
We further corroborate our finding by evaluating the winding Wilson loops in these
non-constant-F configurations. In contrast to the gcd(k, r) = r constant-F solutions,
here we have no analytic results for the Wilson loops. However, we show that, when
summed over all numerically generated self-dual configurations, these average to zero
(consistent with the finite size of the sample, see Figures 7 and 8).
In [1, 27], we
showed that the integral of the winding Wilson loop over the fractional instanton moduli
space should vanish (this vanishing follows from the Hamiltonian interpretation of the
twisted partition function). The vanishing of the winding Wilson loops averaged over
all numerically generated configurations (shown on Figures 7 and 8) provides evidence
that the entire moduli space of the r = 2, k = 1 fractional instanton is covered by our
numerical procedure.
Our results indicate that a small self-duality preserving fluctuation around the ∆(r, k, ℓ) =
0 (rℓL3L4 = L1L2) self-dual constant-F fractional instanton with gcd(k, r) ̸= r leads
– 7 –
