arXiv:2504.06384v1  [quant-ph]  8 Apr 2025
Continuous-Variable Quantum Key Distribution with Composable Security and Tight
Error Correction Bound for Constrained Devices
Panagiotis Papanastasiou1,3, Carlo Ottaviani2,3, Stefano Pirandola2, Poonam Yadav2, and Marco Lucamarini1,3
1School of Physics, Engineering & Technology, University of York, YO10 5FT York, U.K.
2Department of Computer Science, University of York, YO10 5GH York, U.K. and
3York Centre for Quantum Technologies, University of York, YO10 5FT York, U.K.
Constrained devices, such as smart sensors, wearable devices, and Internet of Things nodes, are
increasingly prevalent in society and rely on secure communications to function properly. These
devices often operate autonomously, exchanging sensitive data or commands over short distances,
such as within a room, house, or warehouse.
In this context, continuous-variable quantum key
distribution (CV-QKD) oﬀers the highest secure key rate and the greatest versatility for integration
into existing infrastructure.
A key challenge in this setting, where devices have limited storage
and processing capacity, is obtaining a realistic and tight estimate of the CV-QKD secure key
rate within a composable security framework, with error correction (EC) consuming most of the
storage and computational power. To address this, we focus on low-density parity-check (LDPC)
codes with non-binary alphabets, which optimise mutual information and are particularly suited for
short-distance communications. We develop a security framework to derive ﬁnite-size secret keys
near the optimal EC leakage limit and model the related memory requirements for the encoding
process in one-way error correction. This analysis facilitates the practical deployment of CV-QKD,
particularly in constrained devices with limited storage and computational resources.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Quantum key distribution (QKD) [1] allows two parties
to establish a common secret key, which can later be used
in symmetric cryptographic primitives. Its security re-
lies on the fundamental principles of quantum physics
rather than computational complexity conjectures [2–
5] and constitutes, along with post-quantum cryptogra-
phy [6], the leading candidate for countering quantum
threats, such as an eavesdropper equipped with a quan-
tum computer.
Initially, QKD was developed for discrete-variable
(DV) systems, which use discrete degrees of freedom,
such as the polarization of the electromagnetic ﬁeld.
Later, protocols based on continuous degrees of free-
dom, such as the quadratures of the electromagnetic ﬁeld,
i.e., continuous-variable (CV) systems [7], emerged, of-
fering high performance in the asymptotic regime and
over short distances, as well as compatibility with ex-
isting technological infrastructure. Recent studies have
advanced both the security [8, 9] and the experimental
performance [10, 11] of CV-QKD, bringing it close to the
repeaterless PLOB bound [12] and making it comparable
to DV-QKD.
The most common and earliest CV-QKD protocols em-
ploy Gaussian modulation of coherent states (GMCS),
utilising homodyne detection [13] or heterodyne detec-
tion [14] in direct or reverse reconciliation (RR) [15].
CV-QKD has also been extended to protocols using dif-
ferent frequencies (thermal states), two-way communi-
cation [16–20], and network settings [21–32]. There also
have been considered schemes with post-selection [33–35]
and discrete modulation [37–41].
In this study, we focus on the GMCS protocol, which is
particularly eﬀective in short- to moderate-loss regimes,
and precisely quantify the demands of postprocessing,
especially error correction (EC), which can signiﬁcantly
impact the protocol’s performance [42–49]. More speciﬁ-
cally, we adopt the analysis from Ref. [9], which imposes
strict bounds on the secret key length, to evaluate the
protocol’s performance under composable security with
ﬁnite-size eﬀects.
Furthermore, we adapt the tight one-way EC bound
from Ref. [50] to non-binary low-density parity-check
(LDPC) codes [51–53] to compute secret key rates with
near-optimal performance.
This allows us to estimate
the storage requirements of the encoder during EC. Al-
though this represents only half of the complete EC pro-
cedure, it provides valuable insight in scenarios where
there is a strong asymmetry in computational resources
between the CV-QKD transmitter and receiver. Speciﬁ-
cally, the transmitter, which performs the encoding, can
be lightweight and agile, while the receiver, responsi-
ble for decoding, may be bulkier and better suited for
computationally intensive tasks. This scenario arises in
networks of small sensors transmitting to a central pro-
cessing unit, as seen in smart home sensors, wearable
devices, IoT systems [54–59], or drones [60]. These de-
vices play a crucial role in modern society, supporting
the technological infrastructure by enabling automation,
real-time monitoring, and critical decision making. As
they become increasingly integrated into daily life, cyber
threats targeting them pose signiﬁcant risks to public
safety. We suggest feasible cases where CV-QKD can be
used to safeguard from these threats.
In Sec. II A, we introduce the composable secret key
length bound.
In Sec. II B, we derive the information
leakage in one-way EC for nonbinary LDPC codes. In
Sec. II C, we present the ﬁnal formula for the secret key
rate, and in Sec. III, we introduce one-way EC with non-
binary LDPC codes. Finally, we link these results to an
estimate of the storage required for the encoding of the
