11
side the cryostat, showed a round trip power level of
25 µW/A warm, dropping to 20 µW/A after the cryostat
reached base temperature (see Table III). This amount
of loss (roughly an attenuation of 20 dB) was expected
due to fiber mismatch at each cryogenic connection, but
we expected the single-fiber path to have much higher
throughput overall. We eventually discovered that the
FC/PC connectors used in the original single-fiber in-
stallation were highly unstable when cooled. Direct loop-
back tests of the connectorized fiber using liquid nitrogen
(LN) showed zero received power well before 77 K was
reached.
We then attempted to characterize our losses. First,
both fibers have core diameters of 100 µm, which can ac-
count for the first loss of at least 75% (6 dB) in coupling
efficiency, moving from the 200 µm to 100 µm cores. In
fact, the loss was found to be greater than that because
of numerical aperture and reflection effects. For exam-
ple, our 300 K throughput tests showed ∼100 µW/A
compared to the expected 1.7 mW/A. This means the re-
maining connectors contribute about 12 dB of loss warm,
and about 13 dB cold. We found that the majority of the
reduction happened above 77 K, meaning liquid nitrogen
(LN) dunk tests could be used to establish expected per-
formance near 0 K.
To better model expected loss contributions,
we
then conducted a series of dunk tests with the SMA-
connectorized Accuglass fibers. The best optical trans-
mission with an air-side fiber coupler was found to be
232µW/A. The cryogenic fiber coupler in the feedthrough
plate provided 225µW/A at 300 K, and 216µW/A in LN
vapor, without any further drop in transmission upon im-
mersion in LN. That is a relative loss of 0.3 dB between
cold and warm measurements. We were also able to see
roughly comparable shifts in loss simply by bending the
warm cable. This suggests that the SMA interconnects
are temperature stable and that all 11 interconnects com-
bined are likely to contribute only ∼4 dB of loss. The
UV/VIS fibers are rated for ∼0.05 dB/m of loss and thus
contribute ∼0.2 dB to the total loss in our opitcal path.
The fibers themselves have an expected interconnect
loss specified by Accuglass of up to 2 dB/connection; this
implies that our measured loss is dominated by fiber in-
terconnect loss in the systems with many fiber breaks,
and not by thermal or internal losses in the fibers them-
selves.
Extensive bench testing was done to optimize
overall throughput cold, given that in this test we ex-
pected to be limited by our ability to re-focus the beam
back into the output fiber. As part of this testing, we
switched to the lower NA (0.10) Thorlabs fiber listed in
Table II to get a smaller core diameter and stay within
the limit of the reflective collimator specifications. We
also switched the output fiber to be of the same material
as the new input fiber. Our testing indicated that this
smaller NA fiber had higher interconnect loss than the
previous fiber, and we thus opted for long, single-fiber
runs to and from the 10 mK cryostat stage to minimize
overall system loss. Bench top tests of the new fiber are
summarized in Table III, including a 4 K measurement
demonstrating little change in transmission at cryogenic
temperatures.
FIG. 7.
Chopping test setup in the dilution refrigerator.
Light from an LED outside the vacuum vessel is sent through
a 10 µm-diameter fiber (pink) to the base stage of the cryostat
where the MEMS chopping unit is mounted. After chopping,
the light beam (red) is collected and redirected to the top
of the cryostat using a 105 µm-diameter fiber (blue).
The
optical output signal is read out with an APD at 300 K.
The final configuration of fiber optics used for the pulse
timing and cryogenic spot size measurements described
in the main text is shown in Figure 7 with components
listed in Table II. Throughput for an equivalent system
was measured on the bench in August 2024, with key
results summarized in Table III. In the cryostat, we ex-
pected the input path to have a cold attenuation on the
order of 35 dB relative to power injected at the 300 K
vacuum feedthrough. We expected only a small amount
(3-5 dB) of loss in the output path, given that the output
fiber diameters increase from 10 µm to 105 µm to 200 µm
in moving from 10 mK to 300 K. These values are im-
portant for understanding the cryogenic trends seen in
the scanning measurements discussed in the main body
of the text.
2.
APD Data Acquisition and Throughput
Measurement - Details
As described in the main text, to measure optical pulse
characteristics, we used a Thorlabs APD with 400 MHz
bandwidth and maximum conversion gain of 12.4 V/µW
at a peak wavelength of 600 nm. The setup, shown in Fig-
ure 7, was optimized based on our experience comission-
