9
For calibrations, we determine ζbr prior to calibrat-
ing the frame rotation. To confirm that the residual shift
canceled through this method matches our previous mea-
surements of phase accumulation (Fig. 5), we investigate
how ζbr affects the determination of the best ϕf,i(τ) in
Fig. 8. Four examples of the ϕf,i(τ) calibration are pre-
sented, each at taken at a different ζbr. Each ζbr yields
a different necessary ϕf,i(τ) for cancellation of the light
shift.
When compared to the light shift imparted by
the single-qubit MS(π/2) as a function of ζbr (originally
presented in Fig. 5e and reproduced as teal diamonds in
Fig. 8b), there is significant agreement. This agreement
further indicates the measured necessary frame rotation
does indeed cancel any light shift of the gate. Frame rota-
tion scans presented in Fig. 8 were performed interleaved
with the single-qubit Ramsey measurements in Fig. 5 to
combat possible drift in the system.
While the frame rotation alone is sufficient to cancel
the entire light shift, there are clear performance im-
pacts for non-ideal ζbr as shown in Fig. 8a. At ζbr =
1.05, nearly all the population is transferred to |11⟩at
ϕf,i(τ) = −6.25° (which cancels a light shift of +6.25°).
However, as ζbr moves away from its optimal point so
does the maximal degree of population transfer to |11⟩.
As such, we can also extract a rough performance esti-
mate of the gate based on its ability to generate |11⟩.
To estimate the performance of a single gate, we take
the square root of the probability of measuring |11⟩, or
√P11. When we plot that performance metric as a func-
tion of ζbr in Fig. 8c, there are clear reductions away from
the optimal point, ζbr = 1.05, similar to the reduction in
coherence seen in Fig. 5f.
A simulation of the fourth-order light shift is also
plotted in Fig. 8b with the measurements.
The light
shifts from each combination of comb teeth (i.e.
red
with global, blue with global, and red with blue as well
as intra-comb combinations) are summed (and scaled
based on empirically estimates that approximate beam
amplitudes and polarizations) to determine the simu-
lated fourth-order contribution.
We fit the simulation
to the empirical results, and find the Rabi rate to be
1.10 times the measured rate (at ζbr = 1.0, we measure
Ω(105)
b,g
/2π = Ω(105)
r,g
/2π = 122.1 kHz), and ζbr to be 1.04
times the intended (or programmed) ratio. These mis-
matches between the measurements and simulations are
not unexpected. The mismatch in Rabi rate is likely due
to imperfect polarizations at the ion not adequately cap-
tured in the model. Specifically, ˆπ polarization compo-
nents of the light are unable to drive counter-propagating
carrier Raman transitions, but will contribute to light
shifts from the |F = 0, mF = 0⟩−|F = 1, mF = ±1⟩Zee-
man transitions (separated by ∼5.96MHz from the car-
rier) which are neglected in this model.
Likewise, the
minor mismatch in the amplitudes we program relative
to the amplitudes at the ion are a result of slight differ-
ences in AOM efficiencies at the blue- and red-detuned
frequencies.
The next challenge is understanding how to scale the
100
80
60
40
20
0
20
40
60
f( ), Frame Rotation (o)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
P11
a)
32 × MS( /32)
8 × MS( /8)
4 × MS( /4)
2 × MS( /2)
0
/16
/8
3 /8
/4
5 /16
3 /8
7 /16
/2
, Entangling Angle (rad.)
25
20
15
10
5
0
 
f( ), Calibrated 
Frame Rotation (o)
b)
FIG. 9: Frame rotations for various different MS(θ) a)
M × MS(π/M) are performed while the total frame
rotation magnitude, ϕf,i(τ) is scanned. Plotted are
examples (M = [2,4,8,32]) from the complete dataset.
The peak of the upper half of the distribution is fit for
each M in the dataset to a Gaussian through maximum
likelihood estimation and plotted in b) where the
shaded regions correspond to the examples presented in
a). There is a clear linear relationship between θ and
the ϕf,i(τ). This relationship is used to interpolate the
needed ϕf,i(τ) for any given θ.
magnitude of these light shifts for any arbitrary en-
tangling angle θ.
In this case, we use M successive
MS(π/M) pulses and repeat the procedure above for
a variety of M.
In Fig. 9a, we see that with decreas-
ing θ, the residual light shift to be canceled decreases
as well. Interestingly, we find a linear relationship be-
tween θ and the frame rotation, ϕf,i(τ) needed to cancel
the light shift, as shown in Fig. 9b. Therefore, in prac-
tice, we only need to find two points along this functional
form to interpolate/extrapolate the needed frame rota-
tion for any arbitrary rotation. We find 2 × MS(π/2)
and 32 × MS(π/32) are sufficient.
V.
ZZ GATES AND PHASE AGNOSTICISM
The final step in our procedure is to convert the MS(θ)
gate into its phase-agnostic ZZ(θ) formulation [7, 34, 35]
for integration into larger and deeper circuits. We note
that ZZ(θ) gates are phase agnostic because single-qubit
Z gates commute with ZZ(θ). The rationale for this con-
version is two-fold.
To begin, two-qubit MS(θ) gates
are performed in a counter-propagating configuration
(two tones on the IA beam and one tone on the global
beam). Our single-qubit gates can be performed either in
