Gotor and Held 2024). It has further been suggested that those mechanisms might include positive
feedbacks leading to an abrupt transition (Arnold et al. 2012; Herbert et al. 2020; Zurita-Gotor et al.
2022), which might make superrotation an example of a tipping point. Most of these dynamical
studies were conducted in an idealized modeling framework of a dry atmosphere without explicitly
taking into account processes including condensation of water vapor and radiation. Two exceptions
are the studies of Caballero and Huber (2010), which observed a spontaneous transition to super-
rotation under large radiative forcing, and Arnold et al. (2013), which reported weak superrotation
in response to increasing sea surface temperature (SST).
In this work, rather than focusing on the dynamical processes underlying superrotation, we
instead explore the consequences that such a large-scale circulation change would have for climate
if it were to occur, in particular for surface temperature and the water cycle. To do so, we impose
superrotation using a prescribed torque in a moist model which includes parameterizations for
major physical processes in the atmosphere such as radiation, convection, and condensation (see
Section 2 for details). We find that superrotation is not restricted to a zonal wind change in the upper
tropical troposphere but rather affects the general circulation as a whole, resulting in substantial
impacts on surface temperature and precipitation. These impacts could potentially be important
for interpreting paleoclimate proxies and the processes controlling warm climates in Earth’s past
and future. The impact of (forced) superrotation on surface temperature, revealed in this study,
together with the emergence of superrotation in simulations of hot climates (Caballero and Huber
2010; Arnold et al. 2013) suggests a possible feedback between superrotation and SST that has
received little attention to date.
After presenting the modeling setup used in our study (Section 2), we discuss the temperature
and precipitation changes induced by superrotation (Section 3). We then build an understanding of
the physical processes underlying the temperature changes by investigating the top-of-atmosphere
(TOA) radiative balance using a forcing/feedback framework (Section 4) and reconstructing the
simulated temperature response using an energy balance model (Section 5). Finally, we relate
the superrotation-induced water cycle changes to the circulation changes (Section
6) before
summarizing our results (Section 7).
4
