4
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
−2
0
2
4
6
8
Signal (mV)
Height Above Sample (mm)
 100%
 10%
(a)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
5
10
15
20
Working Distance (mm)
(b)
FIG. 4: The rate at which the signal changes with
distance varies with iron oxide concentration in the
suspension. (a) The change in lock-in amplifier (LIA)
output voltage as the sensor head is moved away from the
sample. A power-law fitted curve is shown for 100%
(black) and 10% (red). The gray area shows the noise
floor. (b) The maximum working distance, the point at
which the fitted power-law curve increased by one
standard deviation, for each concentration.
value of the curve fit, divided by the signal standard de-
viation (Fig. 3c). The lowest concentration with a SNR
above 1, was 10% concentration, with an SNR of 2.0 ±
0.3. This was taken as the lowest concentration that could
be reliably detected. 10% concentration of the 200 µl vial
used equates to a volume of 20 µl. This equates to an ap-
proximate iron mass of 0.56 mg. Therefore, the sensor has
shown to be capable of detecting 0.56 mg of iron in 200 µl
of suspension or 2.8 mg/ml, at a distance of 0.5 mm from
the sample.
To determine the maximum separation distance at which
each concentration could be detected, each concentration
was placed in turn into the jig with the sensor head placed
directly above it. The sensor head was lowered until con-
tact was made with the sample and then increased in height
up to 40 mm away in steps of 0.5 mm. At each step, a 0.5 s
measurement was made. This measurement was repeated
five times and an average line profile taken. Figure 4a shows
that the signal tends towards a base value with increasing
distance. The magnetic field strength is inversely propor-
tional to the distance from the source, B ∝1/rn, where n
is -1 for a current carrying wire and -3 for a dipole.
A
power law curve of the form f(x) = a + bxc was fitted
to these measurements to check if these measurements fol-
lowed the expected power law pattern and to see what was
the value of the exponent. The fitted curve was also used
to determine the maximum working distance of the magne-
tometer, for increasing concentrations. The fits showed an
exponent value that started at -2 for higher concentrations
and trended towards -1 at 10%.
The iron-oxide suspension is super-paramagnetic because
the size of the γ −Fe2O3 iron-oxide nanoparticles is be-
tween 3.5 and 10 nm. Bulk γ −Fe2O3 is ferrimagnetic due
to ferric ions (F 3+
e
), with each ferric ion having a magnetic
moment of 5 µB [37], where µB is the Bohr magneton. The
bias field magnet on the magnetometer sensor head will in-
duce a field in the sample as it gets closer, causing an in-
crease in the detected magnetic field. This behavior is more
complex than that of a simple dipole, which would have
a B ∝r−3 or B ∝r−1 relationship for near and far field
regimes respectively. The iron-oxide nanoparticles may also
cluster together to form a more complex magnetic system.
The magnetic field from the permanent bias magnet at-
tached to the sensor has a field drop-off with distance also.
The orientation of this field relative to the sample will also
change how the field is induced in the sample. The sample
can be considered a finite volume of magnetic moments and
during measurement the integrated contribution of all the
individual moments across the sample is being detected.
Due to the nano-size nature of the particles, they will be
susceptible to Brownian motion while suspended in the so-
lution which could cause the exponent value to deviate from
n = −3. The overall result is many individual dipoles, ran-
domly distributed throughout a finite volume contributing
non-uniformly to the total detected signal, causing a de-
viation from the -1 or -3 exponent value expected from a
perfect dipole.
To determine the point at which the signal from the
sample is considered no longer detectable (the maximum
working distance of the magnetometer) a threshold value
of one standard deviation was used. For each concentra-
tion, the fitted curve was used to determine the point at
which the curve went above the threshold value. The re-
sults are shown in Figure 4b. As with the 2D scans, con-
centrations below 10% are not shown as the SNR was too
low. It is possible to conclude that the working distance
decreases with concentration with the maximum working
distance for 100% concentration being 14.6 ± 2.2 mm and
the 10% concentration being the lowest concentration with
a working distance above 0, at 5.8 ± 4.23 mm.
In conclusion, we have demonstrated an endoscopic fiber-
coupled nitrogen-vacancy diamond DC magnetometer with
a maximum sensor head diameter of 10 mm capable of de-
tecting iron-oxide nanoparticles in MagTrace™suspension.
The lowest concentration detected was 2.8 mg/ml.
The
detection range of the lowest detectable concentration was
5.8 ± 4.2 mm. The maximum detection range of the probe
was 14.6 ± 2.2 mm. Further improvements to the system
could include a smaller sensor head design, taking advan-
tage of the small size of the 0.5 mm3 diamond used for
detection. This would help in making the magnetometer
more applicable to scenarios where sensing is needed in
confined spaces or to reduce physical trauma and obtru-
siveness. Increased sensitivity would improve the detection
range of iron oxide suspension as well as reduce the concen-
tration that can be detected. Using more permanent mag-
