2
cisely define generalized pinning field defects and prove their
IR factorizations in Section II.
The factorization property enables us to determine the long-
distance dynamics of such defects by leveraging the full spec-
trum of conformal boundary conditions, thereby rendering the
problem significantly more tractable. For example, as we dis-
cuss in Section IV B, this elucidates the conjectured factoriza-
tion of the 3d O(N) CFT induced by the O(N)-symmetric
surface mass term in terms of known boundary conditions
and also yields nontrivial predictions for more general sur-
face mass deformations. As another example, the conformal
boundary conditions of Virasoro minimal models in 2d were
classified long time ago. However limited results are avail-
able for conformal (non-topological) line defects except for
those in the Ising CFT. In Section IV A, we analyze a large
class of 2d pinning defects defined as in (I.1), demonstrating
how factorization together with the monotonicity g-theorem
and symmetry constraints allow us to completely nail down
the IR conformal defect.
In general, the symmetries of the CFT restrict the possible
factorization channels in (I.3). In particular, anomalies of the
symmetries preserved by the defect will force degeneracies in
the direct sum, as we discuss Section III, and they play an
important role in solving the pinning defects in 2d minimal
models with examples in Section IV A and Appendix A.
As mentioned before, these generalized pinning defects are
ubiquitous in CFT and thus it would be interesting to study
their applications, as probes of strongly coupled systems. For
instance, quantum chromodynamics (QCD) with a sufficiently
large number of massless fermion flavors (within the confor-
mal window) admit nontrivial Caswell-Banks-Zaks type fixed
points [32, 33]. Notably, the fermion mass operator ¯ψψ is con-
jectured to have a scaling dimension that interpolates between
2 and 3, varying from the strongly-coupled to the weakly-
coupled ends of the conformal window [34–36]. Our results
predict the existence of nontrivial factorized interfaces in con-
formal QCD, arising from the corresponding pinning field
flows, and may provide new ways for testing conjectures re-
garding the endpoint of the conformal window. Furthermore,
when viewed as an extended operator at fixed time, gener-
alized pinning defects have been employed to model local
quantum channels, capturing the effects of local decoherence
and weak measurement on quantum critical states (see e.g.
[37, 38]). It would be interesting to explore the implications
of our findings on the universality classes of such quantum
channels. Finally, in CFTs with holographic duals, it would be
interesting to investigate the dual description of codimension-
one pinning defects, which may correspond to factorizing ge-
ometries involving new end-of-the-world branes [39–43].
The generalized pinning defects considered here are de-
fined by defect RG flows from the trivial defect triggered by
bulk local scalar operators. Immediate generalizations include
such flows on more general topological defects, and triggered
by more general operators, such as spinning local operators
and even operators attached to nontrivial topological lines (see
previous related works [44–50] in 2d). A further generaliza-
tion amounts to considering RG flows on a slab, a fattened
version of our setup here, and reduce to our setup when the
intermediate phase in the slab is gapped in the IR. It will be
interesting to understand general properties of such flows and
the long distance behavior of the resulting defects.
II.
FACTORIZATION
The main goal of this section is to prove the factorization
property for generic pinning flows,
D ≡lim
h→∞
h
eh ˆ
Oi
ren = |B⟩⟨B| ,
(II.1)
where |B⟩is a linear combination of Ishibashi states which are
in one-to-one correspondence with scalar primary operators in
the CFT [51]. This linear combination is further constrained
by locality, and gives rise to a Cardy state in 2d [52]. For this
reason, we will also refer to |B⟩as a Cardy state in general di-
mensions. As will soon become evident, the primary task lies
in rigorously defining each component of (II.1). By generic,
we mean the flow does not preserve any extra symmetry and
towards the end of the section we will discuss cases with extra
symmetry, and how (II.1) is modified accordingly.
For convenience, we will work in the Euclidean flat space
with coordinates {⃗x, xd} such that the defect is planar and
located at xd = 0. We first define the CFT Hilbert space H at
xd = 0 in the N-S quantization [53] as spanned by
|ϕf⟩=
X
a
Z
Rd
+
ddx fa(x) ϕa(x)|0⟩,
fa : Rd
+ →C , (II.2)
where ϕa(x) are normalized primary operators of dimension
∆a with smearing factors fa on the half space xd > 0, and
the index a may also include spin indices. The inner product
with scalar operators ϕa in (II.2) reads
⟨ϕf|ϕg⟩=
X
a
Z
Rd
+
ddx ddy
f ∗
a(x)ga(y)
(|⃗x −⃗y|2 + (xd + yd)2)∆a ,
(II.3)
and the generalization with spinning operators is obvious. The
smearing factors fa are constrained such that |ϕf⟩∈H has a
finite norm, namely ||ϕf|| ≡
p
⟨ϕf|ϕf⟩< ∞, and the Hilbert
space H is complete with respect to this norm.
Next we define the space to which the Ishibashi states be-
long, since they are not normalizable and therefore do not re-
side in the Hilbert space H. We first consider a dense sub-
space Φ ⊂H (i.e. its closure ¯Φ = H) spanned by finite linear
combinations of primary operators and their descendants. We
then introduce the dual space Φ′, consisting of all continuous
linear functionals on Φ and equipped with the weak topology
[54, 55]. The full structure is captured by a Gelfand triple
(also known as a rigged Hilbert space) [54, 55],
Φ ⊂H ⊂Φ′ .
(II.4)
Explicitly, an element |I⟩∈Φ′ is defined by the weak limit of
elements in H, namely |I⟩= w-lim
n→∞|In⟩as below,
∃|In⟩∈H : ∀|ψ⟩∈Φ , lim
n→∞⟨ψ|In⟩= ⟨ψ|I⟩.
(II.5)
