to prepare good initial molecular states for subsequent use in a dynamics simulation. The idea of exact
dynamical evolution has also been applied to other physically interesting problems. McArdle [43] proposed
time-evolution to simulate a muon-resonance experiment and determine Hamiltonian interaction parameters
that characterize a material. Rubin et al. [44] proposed and costed the quantum dynamical simulation of
a nuclear projectile moving through a material which is modeled under the BO approximation, in order to
determine the stopping power for inertial fusion target design by measuring the projectile kinetic energy
over time. Motlaugh et al. [45] proposed and costed a quantum dynamical evolution of a specific vibronic
Hamiltonian relevant to a class of photochemistry.
Despite encouraging proposals and initial results, the study of FTQC algorithms for real-time quantum
chemical dynamics has remained a fairly niche direction in quantum algorithmic research so far. Compared
to quantum algorithms for ground state energy estimation, detailed algorithm instantiations and costing
are generally unavailable. As discussed above, the multi-scale modeling required in the catalysis pipeline
involves formidable challenges, with or without quantum computers, and there is little hope of providing a
solution to the entire problem at once. Here we target specifically the most quantum-mechanical aspects
of the pipeline, the study of reaction mechanisms involving bond reconfiguration. With this application
in mind, we introduce a framework to target this problem, and a detailed analysis that includes all three
core components of an end-to-end description: the preparation of initial states, the time-evolution, and the
information extraction from a final state, schematically represented in Fig. 1. A summary of the challenges
and our contributions is as follows:
1. Initial state preparation pertinent to chemical dynamics invokes protocols like thermal state preparation
to account for finite temperature effects. Algorithms for thermal state preparation are inefficient in the
worst-case [46, 47, 48] or have a complexity that depends on parameters whose behavior has not been
analyzed in chemical scenarios [49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55]. In fact, substantial work is needed to extend
these algorithms from finite-dimensional/lattice systems to a chemical context. Ref. [41] suggested to
initialize the quantum state at the initial time in Born-Oppenheimer approximation, exploiting the
representation of nuclear motion in normal mode coordinates to prepare a nuclear wavefunction, but
did not give an explicit construction. Here we provide such construction, while also discussing the role
that kinematic degrees of freedom play, and introducing physically-motivated adjustments on the state
preparation to simulate useful reaction processes, e.g., by mitigating the statistical rarity of reaction
events via biasing.
2. For time-evolution, two general strategies have been proposed. A brute-force approach involves evolu-
tion under the Hamiltonian of all electrons and nuclei [41], which is nominally efficient but extremely
impractical whenever bulk material properties of a catalyst or the role of a thermal bath must be
included in the model, due to the large number of electrons and ions involved. That is, the number of
degrees of freedom required to represent such physics of interest is overwhelming despite the efficient
algorithmic scaling. Alternatively, it has been suggested that thermalization be included via dissipa-
tive Markovian dynamics [42], although explicit constructions are not provided. It is nontrivial how
bulk material properties and a physically representative thermalization model can be included via a
Markovian master equation, and without an efficient construction of unitaries encoding the Lindbla-
dian (e.g. via its jump operators [56]), one cannot claim efficiency. Here, we follow an alternative
path to reducing degrees of freedom and introduce a partially tunable method to replace atoms with
pseudoions, a new dynamical object that we propose, built using the well-known technique of pseu-
dopotentials [57, 58, 59, 60].
3. To extract information about reaction products encoded inside a quantum state, it was previously
assumed that one has access to a unitary that, given access to any nuclear configuration, outputs a
list of products [41], but the construction of such unitary was not specified. In the worst case, encod-
ing information about how to classify nuclear configurations according to products compromises the
efficiency of the algorithm. Here, we propose an efficient, practical algorithm to identify and count a
limited number of chemical species (molecules, radicals, adsorbed species, etc.) in an exponentially
large wavefunction via fingerprints. Fingerprints are simple functions of the nuclear coordinates, con-
structed through classical machine learning techniques to efficiently classify molecular specifies. Weight
information from the classically trained model is loaded onto the quantum computer and fingerprints
6
