3
FIG. 2. Non-Hermitian pseudogap Kondo Model. (a) Critical JR separating LM and SC phases, vs pseudogap exponent r, for
different JI. Lower-critical dimension of the Hermitian model at r = 0.5 shown as the dotted vertical line. (b-e) Eigenvalue
RG flow for systems indicated by the star points in (a). (b,c) Representative LM and SC flows for r = 0.35; (d,e) Flow for LM
and a new ‘complex strong coupling’ (CSC) fixed point for r = 0.525. NH-NRG calculations with Λ = 3 and Nk = 400.
In the NH case, ˆHN in general has complex eigenvalues,
and its left and right eigenvectors are distinct. The itera-
tive diagonalization procedure in NH-NRG proceeds sim-
ilarly to the Hermitian case, but the recursion by which
ˆHN+1 is obtained from ˆHN must be carefully reformu-
lated to account for these crucial differences – see End
Matter and [46]. One may construct a bi-orthonormal
basis [6] if the spectrum is non-degenerate, and this pro-
vides substantial advantages in terms of the efficiency and
stability of the algorithm. Although quantum impurity
models do typically have many eigenvalue degeneracies,
the most significant source of these is from symmetries.
However, these symmetries can then be utilized to block-
diagonalize the Hamiltonian in distinct quantum number
subspaces [48]. In the present setting, labeling states by
the total charge Q and total spin projection Sz is suf-
ficient to separate all exact degeneracies into different
blocks [49]. It is anyway desirable to exploit symmetries
in this way since it reduces block sizes, and increases com-
putational efficiency [50]. We identify two other sources
of approximate degeneracy in these systems: accidental
and emergent. In both cases, the use of high-precision nu-
merics is found to overcome any instabilities associated
with bi-orthonormalization [46].
Another key aspect of the NRG procedure that must
be adapted is the Fock-space truncation at each step.
In Hermitian NRG, where the eigenvalues EN are real,
we retain only the Nk lowest-lying eigenvalues; but this
becomes ambiguous in the NH context when the eigenval-
ues are complex. We found that truncating by the lowest
real-part of the eigenvalues gives the most accurate and
stable results. We therefore identify the ‘ground state’ as
the one with the lowest real-part (consistent with existing
conventions in NH physics).
We have confirmed explicitly that applying NH-NRG
to a non-interacting NH resonant level model using this
truncation scheme perfectly reproduces the results of ex-
act diagonalization, as shown in the End Matter. This
provides a stringent test of the NH-NRG algorithm.
Our NH-NRG code is available open source to facilitate
future studies of NH quantum impurity models, see [51].
Solution of the NH Kondo model.– We now apply NH-
NRG to the metallic NH Kondo model (bandwidth D ≡1
hereafter). The full phase diagram obtained by NH-NRG
is presented in Fig. 1(a) as a function of the real and
imaginary parts of the complex Kondo coupling, JR and
JI. We find two phases, described by the SC and LM
fixed points of the Hermitian Kondo model, separated by
a first-order quantum phase transition. We identify the
phases from the NH-NRG eigenspectrum at large N after
convergence, which takes a distinct form in SC and LM
phases. In particular, the imaginary part of the eigen-
values Im(EN) vanish in all cases at large N, indicating
the emergent Hermiticity of the fixed point Hamiltonian.
Since the fixed points are Hermitian, we can compute
their thermodynamic properties in the usual way [40]. As
expected, we find an impurity contribution to entropy of
kB ln(2) for a free spin in the LM phase, and 0 for the
screened Kondo singlet in the SC phase.
At relatively weak bare coupling |J| ≲0.25, the NH-
NRG phase boundary (black line) matches precisely with
the Bethe ansatz prediction of Ref. [25], plotted as the red
dot-dashed line (see inset). However at stronger coupling
we find new features. For JR ≳0.55 the LM phase dis-
appears, and the Kondo effect dominates over dissipative
effects. For JR ≲0.55 we find re-entrant Kondo physics
as |JI| is increased. Therefore, the dissipation-induced
unscreened phase in fact occupies a bounded region in
the parameter space of the NH Kondo model.
We analyze the RG flow in Fig. 1(b-e) by tracking the
(rescaled) NRG eigenvalues EN as a function of itera-
tion number N. In (b) we plot the real and imaginary
