2
INTRODUCTION
The study of the flavor sector of the Standard Model
(SM) of elementary particles is a topic of pivotal impor-
tance in fundamental physics. In particular, the elements
of the CKM quark mixing matrix [2, 3] are potentially
sensitive to physics beyond the SM, because many of the
proposed SM extensions lead to new flavor-changing in-
teractions, lepton-flavor universality violations and addi-
tional sources of CP violation. These effects may be ob-
servable at current collider experiments, and could thus
provide an exciting opportunity for (indirect) detection
of new physics. In fact, in recent years various experi-
mental collaborations have reported tensions between SM
predictions and observations [4–11]. In parallel, tantaliz-
ing discrepancies between the values measured for the
|Vub| and |Vcb| CKM matrix elements from inclusive and
exclusive decays persist [12]. It is, therefore, very timely
to improve the knowledge of flavor-changing processes
associated with the elements of the CKM matrix, includ-
ing, in particular, semileptonic decays of pseudoscalar
mesons, which couple the leptonic and the hadronic fla-
vor sectors.
Given the non-perturbative nature of these processes,
lattice QCD represents the only ab-initio framework en-
abling controlled theoretical predictions of the associated
decay rates. In the past few decades, lattice QCD has
been used to compute a broad variety of physical quan-
tities [13, 14] and is now a well-established toolbox to
study flavor-physics from first principles [15].
Lattice
QCD studies of exclusive semileptonic decays of kaons
and heavy pseudoscalar mesons are relatively straight-
forward, and are now at or close to sub-percent preci-
sion levels.
In contrast, the study of inclusive decays
on the lattice has proven to be much more challenging:
this is mainly due to the difficulty of taking into account
a very large number of physical states, including many-
hadron ones. Recently, however, various works suggested
that the differential rates of inclusive semileptonic decays
could be extracted from suitable correlators evaluated on
the lattice [16–21]. In particular, in Ref. [21] it was shown
that these rates can be obtained by computing suitably
smeared spectral densities, associated with a class of four-
point Euclidean correlation functions. Even though the
reconstruction of a spectral density from a finite num-
ber of values of the correlator, with their own numerical
uncertainties, is non-trivial, in the past few years vari-
ous different methods have been proposed to tackle this
problem [18, 22–29].
Following the feasibility study that was presented in
Ref. [30], we used the variant of the Backus–Gilbert
method [31] that was put forward in Ref. [18] and per-
Ds
p
X
ℓ
¯νℓ
ω
pℓ
pν

FIG. 1. Kinematics of the inclusive semileptonic decays of the
Ds meson analyzed in this work.
formed a systematic, complete theoretical investigation
of inclusive semileptonic decays of the Ds meson using
lattice QCD in the isospin symmetric limit. A detailed
discussion of all the steps of the lattice calculation, in-
cluding a careful analysis of all sources of systematic er-
rors, is presented in the companion paper [1]. In this let-
ter, after introducing the problem and briefly discussing
the methodological aspects of the calculation, we focus on
the phenomenological implications of our results by com-
paring them with the available experimental data [32, 33].
METHODS
A schematic view of the inclusive Ds 7→Xℓ¯νℓprocess is
shown in Figure 1, where p denotes the four-momenta of
the Ds meson, pℓof the outgoing lepton ℓ, pν of the anti-
neutrino ¯νℓand ω of the generic final hadronic state X.
For later convenience, we write ω = mDs(ω0, ω), with
mDs the mass of the Ds meson.
The inclusive differential decay rate involves the squared
modulus of the matrix element representing the transi-
tion from the initial Ds state to the Xℓ¯νℓfinal state. To
disentangle the high-energy physics (at the electro-weak
scale) from the low-energy physics probed in lattice QCD,
the matrix element is written in terms of The Fermi ef-
fective Hamiltonian, involving the hadronic electroweak
current Jµ(x) = VcsJµ
¯cs(x) + VcdJµ
¯cd(x) + VusJµ
¯us(x),
which is the sum of the different flavour contributions
Jµ
¯
fg(x) = ¯ψf(x)γµ(1 −γ5)ψg(x) weighted by the cor-
responding CKM matrix elements.
One has to inte-
grate over the three-momenta of the lepton and neutrino,
and sum over all of the allowed final hadronic states,
with four-momentum conservation enforced.
Since, by
