However, the εavg strain maps from the crack-tip region (see Fig. 10(a-c)) indicate that such sin-
gularities are mitigated in practice. Fig. 10(a), corresponding to the sample from the overview
scan, and Fig. 10(b), representing another shot-peened sample, both show strain increasing along
the crack path from the crack tip. In contrast, Fig. 10(c), representing the unpeened sample, dis-
plays no clear strain pattern. These observations indicate a deviation from LEFM expectations,
highlighting the need for further investigation into the strain behavior at crack tips in martensitic
steel.
5
Conclusion
In this study, we employed XRD scanning of martensitic steel samples, including an overview scan
and targeted scans at the crack tip, to determine the strain field around the crack tip. By analyzing
the integrated intensity, peak position, and peak width maps, we identified strain variations near
the cracks. The strain εavg at the crack tip was calculated, revealing patterns that deviate from the
singularities predicted by Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics. The εavg maps from three samples
showed distinct behaviors: In the first two shot-peened samples, strain increases strain from crack
tip along the crack path, while the third, unpeened sample, displayed no clear strain pattern. These
results underscore the need for further research to understand the strain behavior at crack tips in
martensitic steel.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge DESY (Hamburg, Germany), a member of the Helmholtz Association HGF, for
the provision of experimental facilities. Parts of this research were carried out at PETRA III, and
we would like to thank the staff for their assistance in using the P06 beamline. Beamtime was
allocated for proposal ID I-20220505. This research was supported in part through the Maxwell
computational resources operated at DESY.
Funding
We thank the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) for funding under Grant No.
05K22PS2 for the High Speed X-ray Nano Diffraction (HS-XRND) project.
References
Anderson, T. L. & Anderson, T. L. (2005). Fracture mechanics: fundamentals and applications.
CRC press.
Ashiotis, G., Deschildre, A., Nawaz, Z., Wright, J. P., Karkoulis, D., Picca, F. E. & Kieffer, J.
(2015). Journal of Applied Crystallography, 48(2), 510–519.
Baba-Kishi, K. (1994). Ultramicroscopy, 54(1), 1–7.
Broberg, K. B. (1999). Cracks and fracture. Elsevier.
Calvo-Almazan, I., Huang, X., Yan, H., Nazaretski, E., Chu, Y. S., Hruszkewycz, S. O., Stuckel-
berger, M. E., Ulvestad, A. P., Colegrove, E., Ablekim, T., Holt, M. V., Hill, M. O., Maddali,
S., Lauhon, L. J. & Bertoni, M. I. (2019). IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 9, 1790–1799.
11
