During development, we observed that our direct Orb-v3 models—which have more degrees
of freedom and are thus more data-dependent—tend to overfit to forces when trained on mpa,
and struggle to accurately model second- and third-order derivatives of the PES. This problem
occurs even when finetuning on mpa from an -omat base model. Intriguingly, we were able to
resolve this problem via a simple form of distillation of conservative models into direct models.
Concretely, we used orb-v3-conservative-inf-mpa to generate a static set of energy, force and
stress predictions across the entirety of mpa, and then used those predictions as targets when
training orb-v3-direct-*-mpa models. See Appendix H for further discussion.
Speed and Memory
Molecular dynamics simulations are typically run using time steps on the order of a femtosecond,
and yet many physically interesting phenomena only emerge at the nanosecond scale or beyond.
This entails making millions of sequential calls to an MLIP to iteratively update atomic positions.
As shown in the Pareto frontier plot of Figure 1, orb-v3-direct-* are the only universal MLIPs
that can compute hundreds, rather than tens, of forward passes per second, thereby passing
the threshold of one million steps per hour for small systems. This step-change in speed, at a
relatively low cost in accuracy, makes orb-v3-direct-* models powerful tools for accelerated
scientific discovery.
Another clear trend from Figure 1 is the memory efficiency of orb-v3-direct-* models. In order
to stress test memory efficiency (and latency), Figure 2 profiles a range of MLIPs on periodic
systems of up to 100,000 atoms. All baseline methods, as well as our conservative models,
encounter Out Of Memory (OOM) errors for 100,000 atoms; in contrast, orb-v3-direct-20 uses
only 32.8GB of GPU memory and completes in under half a second.
Finally, it is interesting to observe in Figure 2 that state-of-the-art MLIPs are easily bottlenecked
by expensive graph construction routines which can dominate their runtime. As explained in
Appendix D, we have prioritized efficient off-the-shelf solutions using a combination of brute
force and GPU-accelerated nearest neighbors routines, via the cuML library [8].
Benchmark Results
In order to evaluate the performance of the models along the Pareto frontier defined by the
Orb-v3 family of models, we use several well established benchmarks which incorporate tasks
covering a wide variety of computational workflows, including geometry optimization, phonon
calculations, and molecular dynamics.
Matbench Discovery
Table 1 reports F1 and 𝜅SRME from the Matbench-Discovery benchmark [32]. F1 is a metric
that assesses a model’s thermodynamic stability predictions and requires accurate geometry
optimizations combined with single-point energy calculations (relative to a pre-existing convex
hull). The 𝜅SRME metric assesses a model’s ability to predict thermal conductivity via the Wigner
formulation of heat transport [31] and requires accurate geometry optimizations as well as
second- and third-order energy derivative estimation via finite differences. In addition, we
report model forward passes per second, giving a sense of the tradeoffs available at various levels
of benchmark performance. Particularly of note is the performance of Orb-v3 models when
used for computing thermal conductivity, demonstrating that it is possible to train rotationally
non-invariant, direct models which yield competitive results (and by implication, admit smooth
second- and third-order derivatives of the potential energy surface).
4
