5
Representations and spacetime charges
We have started from the partition function (1), written in terms of su(2) representations. How-
ever, this structure is not initially manifest in the matrix integral itself, but arises upon localising
to supersymmetric saddles [3]. While at asymptotically large Ωeach irreducible representation
has an associated semiclassical matrix ‘fuzzy sphere’ configuration [1], at general Ωthe fluc-
tuations about these configurations are large. In particular, away from the large Ωlimit the
expectation value of
1
N Tr C2 is not equal to the matrix expectation value P10
a=8
1
N TrX2
a (this is
in units where the matrix action has an overall factor of Ω4). In the small Ωlimit, for exam-
ple, we have seen that the Casimir goes like Ω2N while the matrix expectation value goes like
1/Ω4 [3]. Our above plots of the Casimir distribution will not then, in general, be equivalent to
plots of the matrix expectation value such as those shown in [8]. As we now recall, the physics of
the su(2) representation is instead to specify how the N units of D-instanton charge are carried
in spacetime. The phase transition we have found is then understood as a change in nature of
the spacetime charge carriers.
Every representation R has a corresponding spacetime geometry with nontrivial cycles that
support different fluxes [2]. This connection works similarly to the LLM and LM geometries
[18, 19] — the representation determines the charge distribution for a Poisson problem that in
turn determines the supergravity fields. For each value of M appearing in the representation
there is a seven-cycle carrying
ND1,M = nM ,
(32)
units of D1 flux. Let M1 < M2 < · · · < Mt be the values of M that appear in the representation.
Each sequential pair of these has a corresponding three-cycle carrying
NNS5,s = Ms −Ms−1 ,
(33)
units of NS5 flux. There is, furthermore, D5 flux that is fixed in terms of the D1 and NS5
flux. There is no F1 flux. Equations (32) and (33) show that the partition N = P
M nMM
can, simultaneously, be interpreted as the D-instanton charge being partitioned into either D1-
or NS5-branes. We will now elaborate on this fact.
The D1- and NS5-branes can be thought of as emergent from the large N matrices, which
initially describe N D-instantons. For each M, the supersymmetric saddle point matrix configu-
ration involves nM copies of a fuzzy sphere. At large N the fuzzy spheres become the worldvolume
of ND1,M coincident spherical D1-branes, giving (32). For the same fixed M, the localisation
formula (1) reduces the fluctuations about the fuzzy sphere saddle to nM moduli integrals over
mMi. These integrals can be written in terms of a collective field
ρM(x) ≡
nM
X
i=1
δ(x −mMi) .
(34)
The geometry of the NS5-branes in (33) is encoded in these collective fields, as we discuss below
and as was established for the BMN model in [20]. The fact that the NS5-branes emerge as
fluctuations of the D1-branes highlights a kind of complementarity at work. The most convenient
description depends on the representation.
12
