Tools and methodology
41
used to describe data from HERA, CHORUS, NuTeV, CDHSW [138], and FPF [124]. Finally, we
provide the linearly dependent structure functions 2xF1 and 2xg5.
Flavor tagging.
In general, any total DIS structure function F can be decomposed in three
different components, according to the type of quark coupling to the exchanged EW boson (see
Section 1.4):
F = F (l) + F (h) + F (hl),
(2.8)
where F (l) denotes the contribution coming from diagrams where all the fermion lines are
massless, F (h) is the contribution due to heavy quarks coupling to the EW boson and F (hl)
originates from higher order diagrams where a light quark is coupling to the boson, but heavy
quarks lines are present.
Given Eq. (2.8), we support the calculation of fully inclusive (total) observables, where only the
lepton is observed in the final state, and flavor tagged final state, where we require a specific
heavy quark (charm, bottom, or top) to couple with the mediating boson. For completeness,
also light structure functions F (l) are available, in isolation, although they do not correspond to
any physical observable.
Theory configuration options
Renormalization and factorization scale variations.
In perturbative QCD the DIS coefficients
of Eq. (1.80), are expanded in powers of as. The estimate of the error introduced by the
truncation of such series is quite relevant in multiple precision applications. Some information
about the missing higher orders, and the related uncertainty (MHOU), can be extracted from the
Callan-Symanzyk equations violation. In this sense, a practical approach to obtain a numerical
estimate consists in varying the relevant unphysical scales (see Section 2.2.2).
In DIS, the two involved unphysical scales are the renormalization scale, arising from the
subtraction of ultraviolet divergences, and the factorization scale, from the subtraction of
collinear logarithms in the PDF definition.
The explicit expressions of the Ci expansion upon scale variations can be found, in [139, Sec. 2].
Generally, these depend, order by order in perturbation theory, on the derivatives of as and the
PDFs with respect to the mentioned scales. The former are the β-function coefficients and the
latter the splitting functions. In Yadism, necessary β-function coefficients are taken from the
EKO package, while the x-space splitting functions are directly implemented.
At the level of structure function, scale variations can be cast into an additional convolution
with a kernel K:
F(x, µ ̸= Q) = (K ⊗C ⊗f) (x)
(2.9)
