1
Introduction
The black hole information loss problem has been explored from various perspectives, such as probabilistic spacetime the-
ory, transfinite set theory, quantum metrology, quantum teleportation, relativistic quantum information, the AdS/CFT
correspondence, and more [1; 2; 3; 4]. One of the crucial elements in addressing the black hole information loss problem
is the quantum entanglement present in matter fields. To have a deeper understanding of the entanglement inherent
in the field, one can consider the associated algebra and its properties in the context of a freely chosen tensor-product
decomposition of the full state Hilbert space [5]. The Hilbert space decomposition depends upon the reference frames
that one chooses. Furthermore, the curvature of spacetime also plays a significant role by affecting the derivatives in field
equations that influence the degree of entanglement within the field [6; 7; 8]. The entanglement dynamics of spacetime
and matter are particularly important in the framework of a information complete quantum field theory, which may pave
a way for unifying quantum theory and general relativity [9; 10]. Additionally, entanglement and other vacuum correla-
tions has also been shown to be affected by other elements, such as the Hawking and local Unruh effect [11; 12; 13; 14].
These effects are also used to explain the transformation between different forms of vacuum correlations [15; 16]. The
expected emergence of Hawking particles (or quasi-particles) also carries substantial significance at various other places
– apart from black hole physics– in the natural phenomena where quantum excitations propagate within a Lorentzian
geometry resembling black holes [17].
In the pursuit of harvesting the entanglement, [18] initially and later [19; 20; 21; 22] proposed a way to harvest
the entanglement using quantum probes. In particular, [19] investigated the entanglement present in the vacuum of
a massless scalar field by using a pair of causally disconnected two-level detectors coupled to the field. Subsequently,
different types of probes were analyzed, including quantum harmonic oscillators and qubits, employing various coupling
types, including both linear and nonlinear couplings, in various spacetimes [23; 24; 25; 26; 27; 28; 29]. In particular, [24]
and [25] introduce the formalism and limitations of a covariant model of smeared particle detectors. [29] use a complex
detector model to study the antiparticle sector of a non-Hermitian field. The distinct entanglement-harvesting profiles
due to minimal and conformal couplings have been illustrated in [30]. [31] showed that vacuum entanglement harvesting
is significantly more efficient for a smooth switching mechanism than a sudden one, especially for spacelike separations.
Moreover, the performance of measurements on quantum fields also affect entanglement harvesting [32].
In the context of black holes, the entanglement harvesting protocol described in [11; 13; 33], involving static detectors
coupled to a real massless scalar field, suggests that the horizon inhibits any kind of correlation near it. However, freely
falling detectors coupled to the massless scalar field don’t experience such decay due to the finite relative gravitational
redshift [13]. Furthermore, at near infinite acceleration of the quantum probes, the entanglement of the fermionic field can
be either zero or nonzero, unlike that of the scalar field, depending on the choice of the state in the Rindler spacetime as
well in the near horizon limit of a Schwarzschild black hole [34; 35]. The generation of entanglement between modes pair of
a quantum field within a single, rigid cavity undergoing non-uniform motion in Minkowski space-time is also shown to be
influenced by the field’s statistics [36]. Moreover, the entanglement tradeoff across horizons also depends on the statistics
[37]. The entanglement properties of fermionic fields differ from those of bosonic fields in several contexts. Notably, the
manner in which fermionic fields become entangled prompted [38] to suggest that fermionic field entanglement, arising
from the expansion of the universe, can be used to reconstruct parameters characterizing the history of cosmic expansion.
Despite the certain different entanglement properties of fermionic and bosonic fields, studies on the entanglement
harvesting protocol involving a detector moving along a specified trajectory and coupled to a fermionic field in a black
hole spacetime are limited. In particular, the roles of gravitational redshift, the Hawking and anti-Hawking effects,
vacuum polarization, and similar phenomena have not been extensively explored for fermionic fields. Takagi [39] initially
explored the detector response function of a Unruh DeWitt (UDW) detector coupled linearly to the scalar density of a
massless Fermionic field in Minkowski spacetime. Subsequently, [40] and [41] demonstrated the similarities and differences
between the UDW coupled linearly to the scalar density of the massless fermionic field and that coupled to a massless
scalar field in flat spacetime. Notably, while the numerical values of the entanglement measures, harvested using detectors,
depend on various detector parameters — such as the energy gap and the switching function — a systematic comparison
can still be made by keeping certain parameters fixed while varying others. [29] studied an example of entanglement
harvesting from a fermionic field in flat spacetime. However, the study of entanglement harvesting for fermionic fields in
curved spacetime is limited. This further motivates us to compare an analysis of entanglement harvesting for a detector
coupled to the scalar density of the Fermionic field with that of a scalar field in the background of a Schwarzschild black
hole.
In section 2, we start with a concise review of quantum field theory applied to fermionic fields within the context
of curved spacetime and then present the derivation of the two-point functions needed in subsequent sections in various
vacuum states. The two-point function in a pure global Gaussian state contains all information about the field. We
3
