uses the initialized reference potential as input, providing a simulated scattering phase shifts that can be
compared with the expected data obtained from experimental cross-sections
• Testing and validation: The optimization procedure continues until the mean absolute percentage error
(MAPE) does not change anymore, indicating that the method has successfully identified the ideal model
parameters and converges to an optimal solution. Once the optimization is complete, the inverse potential
is successfully constructed with the best optimized parameters. To ensure reproducibility, the process can
be repeated using different initial seeds. Exploring different parameter ranges is crucial to avoid missing a
solution with a lower MAPE and to ensure the accuracy of the results.
4
Results
4.1
Database
The scattering phase shift (SPS) data for various ℓ−channels has been taken from schmelzbach et al.[33] (Ed =
3.0 to 5.8 MeV ) and Jenny et al.[34] (Ed = 6 to 14 MeV ). A significant portion of the experimental analysis
relies on analyzing power, which is subject to substantial errors arising from fluctuating systematic uncertainties,
including background subtraction uncertainty, beam position stability, and spin-angle uncertainty. To accurately
model the resonance observed in low-energy experimental data for deuteron-alpha elastic scattering (below 3 MeV
CM energy), D-wave effects must be included in the theoretical cross-section calculations. This necessitates the
analysis of low-energy D-wave data. The two-body α −d system can have the following states, which correspond
to the orbital angular momentum ℓ= 0, 1 & 2, based on the spin-zero of alpha and spin-one of the deutron and
the ℓ−wave components of the α −d system: 3S1, 3P0, 3P1, 3P2, 3D1, 3D2, and 3D3. For J = 1, α −d scattering
allows for the coupling of partial waves with angular momentum difference of two units.
4.2
Optimization routine to obtain Inverse Potential
The model parameters of the reference function must be optimized in order to determine the interaction potential
for the ℓ−channels of α−d. The reference potential consists of three Morse functions, with a total of 14 parameters
to optimize, including the boundary points X1 and X2. Using the four boundary conditions given in Eqn. 3, four
of these parameters can be expressed in terms of the other parameters. As a result, we were left with only ten
parameters to optimize. Thus, a 10-dimensional parameter space is formed, resulting in a vast range of potential
curves. We optimized the parameters α0, α1, α2, r0, r1, r2, V2, D0. Meanwhile, the parameters V1, V2, D1, D2
are determined by enforcing the boundary conditions.
The optimization process is carried out using a genetic
algorithm, which evolves solutions through natural selection, incorporating crossover and mutation to explore the
parameter space effectively.
The optimization routine relies heavily on the selection of bounds. The final integration distance, or rf, has
been set to a high value so that potential eventually becomes zero, and the boundaries are initially selected to span
a broad range.
9
