discussed in this paper, new insights into the true nature of the spin-two ghost are now available,
and in addition to the successful description of the CMB anisotropies, quadratic gravity provides
cosmological predictions that can be confirmed or falsified in the near future.
Take-home message
What lessons can we learn from this historical account? We can certainly say that in the past
century, whenever the perturbative QFT framework has been challenged, it has ultimately proven
triumphant, and with it the strict renormalizability paradigm. This does not mean that all the
ideas behind the alternative approaches were useless. For example, Dirac’s tools for dealing with
negative norms have provided useful methods for formulating gauge theories. Moreover, results
from current algebra and S-matrix bootstrap have inspired the later QFT successes.
A striking fact that we must observe is that most of the approaches proposed as alternatives
to the perturbative QFT framework during the three different phases of challenges share similar
features and many of them have seen a revival.
For example, Heisenberg’s 1938 idea of the
existence of a universal minimal length has seen a significant revival in the context of quantum
gravity, especially in the case of discrete approaches [257]. The S-matrix bootstrap has continued
to be reconsidered in all three phases, despite its proven impotence against QFT, and is perhaps
having its greatest revival today [258]. After failing to describe the strong interaction, string
theory quickly became one of the most popular approaches to quantum gravity. Another recurring
theme throughout the three phases has been that of non-local field theories, and indeed non-local
quantum gravity is still being actively studied today [85].
Is history repeating itself once again? Only time will tell, but for now we can objectively
state that history and current observations stubbornly point towards a strictly renormalizable
QFT description of gravity. Furthermore, quadratic gravity makes falsifiable cosmological pre-
dictions. The latter, if verified observationally, could represent a new confirmation of the strict
renormalizability paradigm. In this case we might actually start to think that the old property
of “being strictly renormalizable” (contrary to the modern Wilsonian view) is not just a matter
of luck [259, 260], but may have a much deeper meaning. Even if the strict renormalizability
paradigm does not turn out to be the final step in the evolutionary process of fundamental
theoretical physics, history and Nature are telling us that we cannot proceed without it.
In a recent meeting on quantum gravity [88], John Donoghue raised an interesting question:
“What is success [for quadratic gravity]?” Our answer would be that the uniqueness of quadratic
gravity as the most conservative renormalizable QFT of gravity, its successful explanation of the
CMB anisotropies, and its sharp predictions constitute an unprecedented success for the QFT
framework applied to gravity. It is precisely this success that should give us the right motivation
to delve deeper into the theory and try to find definitive answers to the open questions about the
spin-two ghost, microcausality and the (super-)Planckian regime. We do not know where this
journey will take us, but it is definitely worth getting on board and continuing the adventure.
23
