Physics-informed KAN PointNet: Deep learning for simultaneous
solutions to inverse problems in incompressible flow on numerous
irregular geometries
Ali Kashefia,∗, Tapan Mukerjia
aStanford University, Stanford, 94305, CA, USA
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Kolmogorov-Arnold networks
PointNet
Physics-informed deep learning
Inverse problems
Irregular geometries
Steady state incompressible flow
A B S T R A C T
Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks (KANs) have gained attention as a promising alternative to
traditional Multilayer Perceptrons (MLPs) for deep learning applications in computational
physics, especially within the framework of physics-informed neural networks (PINNs). Physics-
informed Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks (PIKANs) and their variants have been introduced and
evaluated to solve inverse problems. However, similar to PINNs, current versions of PIKANs are
limited to obtaining solutions for a single computational domain per training run; consequently,
a new geometry requires retraining the model from scratch. Physics-informed PointNet (PIPN)
was introduced to address this limitation for PINNs. In this work, we introduce physics-informed
Kolmogorov-Arnold PointNet (PI-KAN-PointNet) to extend this capability to PIKANs. PI-
KAN-PointNet enables the simultaneous solution of an inverse problem over multiple irregular
geometries within a single training run, reducing computational costs. We construct KANs using
Jacobi polynomials and investigate their performance by considering Jacobi polynomials of
different degrees, as well as special cases such as Legendre polynomials, Chebyshev polynomials
of the first and second kinds, and Gegenbauer polynomials, in terms of both computational
cost and prediction accuracy. As a benchmark test case, we consider natural convection in a
square enclosure with a cylinder, where the cylinder’s shape varies across a dataset of 135
geometries. We compare the performance of PI-KAN-PointNet with that of PIPN (i.e., physics-
informed PointNet with MLPs) and observe that, with approximately an equal number of
trainable parameters and similar computational cost, PI-KAN-PointNet provides more accurate
predictions. Finally, we explore the combination of KAN and MLP in constructing a physics-
informed PointNet. Our findings indicate that a physics-informed PointNet model employing
MLP layers as the encoder and KAN layers as the decoder represents the optimal configuration
among all models investigated.
1. Introduction and motivation
Physics-informed Neural Networks (PINNs), first introduced by Raissi et al. in 2019 [1], are increasingly recognized
as a valuable tool for solving inverse problems in diverse scientific and industrial domains. These include solid
mechanics [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18], both incompressible and compressible flow
[19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 1, 24, 25, 26, 27], chemistry [28, 29], heat transfer [20, 30, 31], and flow in porous media [32, 33, 34].
The central idea behind PINNs for inverse problems is to train a neural network to minimize both the residuals of the
governing partial differential equations and the distance between the solution provided by the neural network and sparse
observational data at sensor locations in specific norms such as the Euclidean norm. Additional constraints, such as
boundary or initial conditions, may also be incorporated into this optimization process. The choice of the neural network
architecture in PINNs significantly influences the performance and capability of PINN models. A prevalent choice is the
fully connected neural network [3, 2, 35, 36, 37, 38]. However, a notable limitation of using fully connected networks
is that they are generally suited to solving inverse problems for a single specific geometry. For each new geometry,
the network must be retrained from the ground up, which incurs significant computational costs. This challenge is
particularly pronounced when exploring a broad range of geometric parameters for optimizing industrial designs. The
issue of high computational expense in such scenarios was addressed by [39, 20, 40]. To resolve this issue, Kashefi and
Mukerji [20] introduced Physics-informed PointNet (PIPN). In PIPN, instead of using a fully connected neural network,
∗Corresponding author
kashefi@stanford.edu (A. Kashefi); mukerji@stanford.edu (T. Mukerji)
ORCID(s): 0000-0003-0014-9051 (A. Kashefi); 0000-0003-1711-1850 (T. Mukerji)
A. Kashefi & T. Mukerji: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 1 of 25
arXiv:2504.06327v1  [cs.LG]  8 Apr 2025
