on a ruthenium substrate. (Oxygen intercalation was used to reduce the coupling to
the metal surface.)
As the photoemission binding energy, EXP S, is referenced to the Fermi level, EF , the
difference between this and the X-ray absorption energy, i.e. ∆E = EXAS −EXP S
is generally taken to represent the energy of the excitonic state with respect to EF .
This would in turn place the Ar 4s state at 4.90 ± 0.15 eV above the HOMO level
(see Fig. 1(d) of the main paper for a valence band spectrum.) Lizzit et al.[8] probe
the alignment of the Ar 4s level with the empty density of states of graphene in this
way; we adopt a similar approach in the main paper to ascertain the extent to which
the core-excited Ar 4s state might align energetically with the s-SAMO (superatomic
orbital) level. We note, however, that while the agreement with the 4.9 eV separation
of the s-SAMO level from the HOMO in the calculations of Zhao et al.[10] is certainly
noteworthy, the alignment of energy levels calculated from our experimental data in
this way ignores the possible influence of the Ar 2p core hole on the HOMO and
s-SAMO states of the fullerene cage.
4 Fitting Auger-Meitner decay spectra
Although the positions and relative intensities of the primary, easily identifiable spec-
tator and normal Auger-Meitner features (at binding energies of ∼26.8 eV, 28.5 eV,
30.8 eV (on resonance), 33.1 eV (on resonance), 31.7 eV, and 32.1 eV) in the map
and spectra shown in Fig. 2 of the main paper are in line with many previous studies
[see, for example, refs 29, 31, 32, 33, 34, and 36 in the main paper], there is one sig-
nificant difference. We found a particular issue with fitting the peaks between binding
energies of ∼29 eV and 30 eV – it was not possible to robustly track the normal
Auger- Meitner feature that appears at an on-resonance binding energy of ∼30 eV
throughout the entire 1 eV width of the resonance region while keeping the intensity
ratio for all normal Auger-Meitner peaks constant, not least because this feature
overlaps heavily with the spectator contribution. This necessarily leads to a higher
level of uncertainty in the division of spectral intensity into normal Auger-Meitner
and spectator contributions.
Fig.S3 shows a comparison of fits of the decay spectra either side of the resonance
condition (ℏω = 245.3 eV). Our strategy in fitting these (and all other decay spectra)
was to fully constrain all peak positions and peak widths, i.e. to allow no freedom in
those parameters as a function of photon energy. In other words, the fitted binding
energy of the spectator peaks across the resonance does not vary, and the normal
Auger-Meitner peaks rigidly change their binding energy in line with the variation in
photon energy (i.e. a change of 20 meV from spectrum to spectrum). In addition, the
relative intensities of the spectator peaks (including the shake-up components) are
fully constrained. However, in order to provide satisfactory fits, we allowed a small
variation in the relative intensities of the Auger-Meitner peaks with on-resonance
binding energies in the 29 - 31 eV range.
4
