3 Ionic vs excitonic: Ar 2p XPS-XAS comparison
Fig.S2 shows the Ar 2p3/2 →4s X-ray absorption resonance in relation to the Ar
2p (L2,3) spectrum acquired over a wider photon energy range. Wurth et al.[4] have
previously identified the origin of the higher lying resonances. In the inset to Fig.S2
we show a comparison of the Ar 2p core-level and 2p3/2 →4s X-ray absorption
spectra, plotted on the same energy scale. (The binding energy (BE) of the core-level
spectrum is referenced to the Fermi level.) There is a difference of 2.7 ± 0.1 eV
between the Ar 2p3/2 core level BE and the peak energy of the 2p →4s X-ray
absorption spectrum, arising from the ionic (photoemission) vs neutral (excitonic,
X-ray absorption) character of the final state of each process.
As highlighted by Martensson et al.[5] and Sandell et al.[6, 7] in the context of argon
adsorption on graphite, the observation that the Ar 2p3/2 binding energy is signifi-
cantly lower than that of the X-ray absorption peak is already a clear indication that
the ionic state is considerably more energetically favourable than the excitonic, charge
neutral state – this is ultimately the driving force for transfer of the 4s electron to
the environment. We note that the difference of 2.7 ± 0.1 eV is rather higher than
the value of 2.1 eV observed for argon on graphite[6], but identical to the 2.72 eV
value reported by Lizzit et al.[8] for argon on a weakly coupled graphene monolayer
Intensity (arb. units)
Photon energy (eV)
Ar 2p3/2 → 4s
Ar 2p X-ray absorption
Thick (bulk-like) Ar@C60 film
Ar 2p3/2
Ar 2p1/2
Ar 2p3/2 → 4s
Δ𝐸= 2.7 ± 0.1 eV
Energy (eV)
Fig. S2 Ar 2p photoemission and X-ray absorption spectra for the bulk Ar@C60 sample.
Wide-energy-range X-ray absorption spectrum for energies close to the Ar 2p (i.e. L2,3) absorption
edges, measured by recording the sample drain current as a function of photon energy – a total electron
yield measurement. Throughout the work described in the main paper and this supplement, we have
focussed on absorption across the Ar 2p3/2 →4s resonance highlighted by the gray rectangle. See
Wurth et al.[4] for a description of the origin of the other, higher lying resonances in the context of
condensed “bare” argon multilayers. Inset: Ar 2p core-level photoemission spectrum (in red) plotted
on same energy axis as the Ar 2p →4s X-ray absorption spectrum (in blue). The energy of the core-
level photoemission spectrum is referenced to the Fermi level and the 2p3/2-related spectra have been
normalised to equivalent heights for ease of comparison.
3
