3
r
r
r −Lex
FIG. 1. A view of the cubic and even crystal in the xy-plane for P = 1 (left) and P = 2 (middle and right). The positive x-, y-, and z-axes
point to the right, upward, and out of the screen or paper, respectively. The displacements, indicated by arrows, connect a source point charge
to a target point. For any P, the primary cell (solid square) containing the source charge and the target point is always located strictly at the
center of the crystal. When the target point is shifted by one period (L) in the negative x-direction, the surrounding charges remain unchanged
in the bulk of the crystal (within the grey circle) but differ at the boundary. See Eq. (12).
inside a cubic cell with a length of L, and then this primary
cell is replicated in all directions to form a perfect crystal. The
crystal contains not only the original source charge located in-
side the primary cell but also duplicated charges located inside
all replicas. If the target point at the displacement r is also lo-
cated inside the primary cell, i.e., r ∈[−L, L]3, the electric
potential at the target point generated by the original source
charge and all its duplicates must diverge as the number of
replicas approaches infinity. In order to eliminate this diver-
gence, oppositely charged point charges are introduced at the
displacement r from each duplicated charge, neutralizing all
replicas. Now, the electric potential generated by the crystal
consisting of the source charge, all duplicates and their corre-
sponding neutralizing charges, becomes finite and physically
meaningful.
Perhaps surprisingly, given the displacement r and the pe-
riod L, the electric potential of interest produced by an in-
finitely large crystal cannot be uniquely determined, although
all replicas have been made electrically neutral. In fact, the
electric potential is composed of an intrinsic bulk term only
depending on r and L, and an infinite boundary term addi-
tionally depending on the geometry of the macroscopic crys-
tal relative to the primary cell. The infinite boundary term for
an arbitrary geometry is defined by[13]
νib(r) = −2π
V
lim
k→0
(k · r)2
k2
.
(9)
The orientation chosen for the conditional limit k →0 fully
characterizes the summation order of the Coulomb lattice
sum. By definition, νib(r) is always negative for any r ̸= 0.
The infinite boundary term expressed as the k →0 limit pro-
vides a simple way to help understand the vexing but impor-
tant conditional convergence problem associated with PBC.
(e.g.[25–33]). More discussions of Eq. (9) for crystals with
fairly arbitrary geometries are given elsewhere. At present,
the replicas are assumed to distribute evenly around the pri-
mary cell such that the volume of the crystal grows according
to (2P + 1)3L3 with P being an integer and P ⩾1. Fig. 1
shows the cubic crystal in the xy plane at P = 1 and P = 2
respectively.
To understand the bulk and boundary terms of the electric
potential in such a highly symmetric geometry, we translate
the target point by one period to create another displacement
r −Lex ∈[−L, L]3 and its corresponding cubic and even
crystal in the right of Fig.1. Obviously, when P →∞, bulk
charges surrounding the two target points can be overlapped,
and then must produce an intrinsic bulk potential as a peri-
odic function of the displacement. On the other hand, surface
charges at the infinite boundary differ and thereby produce the
infinite boundary term, which depends on the relative geom-
etry of the crystal, the period L, and the displacement. Since
the periodic translation from r to r −Lex yields different
charge arrangements at the boundary, the infinite boundary
term must not be a periodic function of the displacement. This
non-periodic nature of the boundary term reflects the com-
ment made by Caillol[34].
The cubic infinite boundary term corresponding to the
present highly symmetric geometry reads explicitly[35],
νib cub(r, L) = −2π
L3
lim
k(cub)→0
(k · r)2
k2
= −2πr2
3L3 ,
(10)
which coincides with the spherical infinite boundary term
evaluated previously[13, 35] and the spherical average of any
infinite boundary term,
1
4π
Z
dΩνib(r) = −2π
V
lim
k→0
k2r2
3k2 = −2πr2
3V .
(11)
Here, dΩ= sin θdθdϕ denotes the solid angle element, with
θ and ϕ as the polar and azimuthal angles of the vector r,
respectively.
Given the boundary term expressed in the above explicit
form, the remaining bulk component can be obtained by sub-
tracting νib cub(r, L) from the total electric potential gener-
