2
0
1
0
1
0
1
Fluence (arb. units)
1
2
0
1
E (arb. units)
Time (ps)
ETHz
∆E×100
T = 295 K
6
8
10
0.0
0.1
 ∆σ1
 ∆σ2
 Drude fit
Energy (meV)
∆σ  (Ω−1cm-1)
T = 295 K
(a)
(c)
(b)
2ω
ω
FIG. 1. A general approach to identify the bandgap and a typical pump-probe response for NiPS3. (a) Excitation fluence
dependence of photo-excited carriers as a result of transitions through one-photon absorption (left, linear fluence dependence)
or through two-photon absorption (right, quadratic fluence dependence). (b) The pump-induced change in the reflected THz
electric field (∆E, orange curve) exhibits a phase difference with respect to the equilibrium reflected THz probe pulse (ETHz,
grey curve). In this case, the frequency-resolved optical response is required to characterize the fluence dependence of photo-
excited carriers. (c) Frequency-resolved transient change in optical conductivity, ∆σ = σtransient −σequilibrium, at the time delay
of 1 ps. A Drude-like behavior is seen, indicating an influx of photo-excited carriers. Measurements for (b) and (c) taken at
T = 295 K with 1.476 eV excitation energy.
(ETHz = Epump off
THz
). This data is taken at T = 295 K
with an excitation photon energy of 1.476 eV. Similar
time-domain responses are seen for all three excitation
energies and for both 7 K and 295 K. The ∆E peak is
sometimes referred to as spectrally-integrated transient
THz response [26], which gives an overview of the pump-
induced dynamics.
However, when the pump induces
changes in both the amplitude and phase of the probe
THz field, this frequency-integrated THz response does
not correspond to a clear and meaningful quantity, such
as the number of light-induced carriers.
Instead, one
needs to analyze the frequency-resolved optical response
to characterize photo-excited carriers.
A standard thin-film model [25] is used to evaluate the
frequency-resolved optical conductivities. At maximum
response (time delay t = 1 ps), the pump-induced tran-
sient change in optical conductivity exhibits a Drude-like
shape (Fig. 1(c)). This response is indicative of an in-
crease in free carriers in the material as a result of photo-
excitation. Analysis of the fluence dependence of this car-
rier response allows us to unravel the mechanism through
which these carriers were generated. Linear absorption of
a photon with energy ω, leading to the promotion of an
electron to an excited state at an energy ω above its ini-
tial state, exhibits a linear fluence dependence (Fig. 1(a),
left) [27, 28]. Alternatively, the material could undergo
two-photon absorption (TPA), promoting an electron to
an excited state at an energy 2ω above its initial state.
The probability of a TPA transition occurring is equiv-
alent to the product of the probability of one photon
and the probability of another photon, both of energy ω,
being absorbed at the same time. This results in a tran-
sition rate proportional to the square of the intensity, or
an excited carrier response with quadratic fluence depen-
dence (Fig. 1(a), right) [27].
Before moving on to detailed analysis, we would like
to point out a special feature at low temperatures. The
transient optical response at T = 7 K exhibits a unique
behavior when pumping at 1.476 eV [25], the energy of
the lowest ultra-narrow exciton peak in NiPS3 [4, 5, 26].
For the time-domain response, the normalized reflected
THz field ∆E/E shows a short increase and then a long-
lived suppression, as shown in Fig. 2(a). Correspond-
ingly, the frequency-resolved optical conductivities ex-
hibit a narrow Drude peak and an onset of broad sup-
pression in ∆σ1 (Fig. 2(b)) at t = 1 ps. The broad sup-
pression evolves further and gains spectral weight with
increasing time delay. It is hypothesized to be a long-
lived population inversion seen at THz energies [25].
In contrast,
for 1.494-eV and 1.610-eV pumping,
∆E/E exhibits only a positive signal with an exponen-
tial relaxation (Fig. 2(c) and (e)), as is typically seen for
the case of photo-excited carriers. Correspondingly, the
pump-induced transient change in optical conductivity
at t = 1 ps for these excitation energies exhibits a sim-
ple Drude-like response (Fig. 2(d) and (f)), similar to
the room-temperature response at 1.476-eV pumping as
shown in Fig. 1(c). Note that in the antiferromagnetic
state, the transient response should contain a magnon
feature at 5.5 meV [26]. This feature is absent here due
to the insufficient energy resolution, which is a result
of the sample thickness (400 µm). Therefore, we only
study larger energy scale features such as the bandgap
by analyzing the pump fluence dependence of the photo-
excited carriers. The similarity of the photo-excited car-
rier response, despite the resonant nature of the 1.494-eV
pumping at T = 7 K, indicates similar carrier generation
mechanisms at these energies in both the paramagnetic
and antiferromagnetic phases. In the following discus-
sion, we will focus on the t = 1 ps response when the
Drude response is strongest for all excitation energies at
all temperatures.
