PAGIONO
An ionospheric activity index
Dr.Paul.Kinsler@physics.org
LdT: An ionospheric activity index based on distributions in GNSS-derived TEC rates of change
Paul Kinsler∗and Biagio Forte†
Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, United Kingdom
(Dated: Wednesday 9th April, 2025)
The Earth’s ionosphere forms part of the solar-terrestrial environment, in synergy with other parts such as
magnetosphere and plasmasphere. The state of the ionosphere is determined by the spatial distribution and
temporal evolution of its electron density, and it varies in response to “space weather” – the variation of the
solar-terrestrial environment due to the combination of solar activity and geomagnetic conditions. Notably, the
radio waves used in satellite telecommunications suffer variation in their propagation time delays due to the
dispersive nature of the ionospheric plasma.
Many aspects of our societies now depend upon satellite telecommunications, such as those requiring Global
Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS), which offer precise satellite-based positioning, navigation, and timing.
GNSS is based on radio waves that propagate through the ionosphere and in addition to delays, experience
more complicated propagation effects caused by inhomogeneities in the spatial and temporal electron density
distribution in the Earth’s ionosphere.
Scales and indices that summarise the state of the solar-terrestrial environment due to solar activity and geo-
magnetic conditions already exist. However, the response of the ionosphere to active geomagnetic conditions, its
geoeffectiveness, and its likely impact on systems, services, and operations reliant upon ionosphere-traversing
radio waves are not encapsulated by these state-of-the-art indices. This difficulty is due to a range of reasons:
the intrinsic day-to-day variability even during quiet space weather conditions, persistent seasonal patterns,
and because radio wave measurements of the ionosphere depend upon the signal frequency as well as wider
propagation effects.
Here we develop a novel index that both relies on and describes the state of the ionosphere during specific
space weather conditions. It is based on the estimate of ionospheric propagation disturbances in GNSS signals,
and it is able to characterise together the spatial and temporal evolution of ionospheric propagation disturbances
(hence, ionospheric irregularities) in near real time. For the first time, this new ionospheric scale encapsulates
day-to-day variability, seasonal patterns in the ionosphere, and the geo-effective response of the ionosphere to
disturbed space weather conditions. Whilst this method was developed on the basis of data publicly available
from the International GNSS Service (IGS), it can be expanded to any other GNSS network. It is intended that
this new scale will be utilised by agencies providing space weather services, as well as by service operators to
appreciate the current conditions in the ionosphere, thus informing their operations.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The Earth’s ionosphere is part of the solar-terrestrial envi-
ronment, and responds to space weather conditions in syn-
ergy with the plasmasphere and the magnetosphere [1]. Such
forcing from space weather conditions (typically) originates
in solar events such as flares and coronal mass ejections. In
this article, we present an index (LdT) that can be applied on
wide range of spatial and temporal scales, and encapsulates
this ionospheric variability based on how the ionosphere af-
fects GNSS radio signals.
The ionosphere is characterised by the presence of free
electrons and ions (a plasma) and their behaviour is subject
to the effects of geomagnetic field, neutral winds, and electric
fields. The ionospheric plasma distribution layers with alti-
tude as different processes dominate, and continually varies
in response to different solar and geomagnetic conditions;
for example, from a day-to-day variability to more intense
changes driven by active space weather conditions.
One way to characterise the ionosphere is by specifying
how its electron density varies with altitude, latitude, longi-
tude, and time. These properties of the electron density pro-
file can and are measured using ionosondes, incoherent scatter
radars, in-situ satellite probes, as well as indirectly by observ-
ing propagation effects on satellite radio signals.
Because the ionosphere is a plasma, its particular state
affects the propagation of radio waves, notably those with
∗https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5744-8146; Dr.Paul.Kinsler@physics.org
† https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1682-1930
frequencies between VLF and C band.
Thus as the solar-
terrestrial conditions affect the ionosphere, the concommittant
spatial and temporal variability of its electron density distribu-
tion, together with the presence of inhomogeneities (or irreg-
ularities), affect radio propagation.
Indeed, the state of the ionosphere is already appreciated in
near-real time on a global scale by means of maps of the Total
Electron Content (TEC) and its rate of change (of TEC, hence
ROTI) [2–15]. These maps are estimated from a global net-
work of GNSS monitoring stations and are provided by the
International GNSS Service, although these are also cross-
validated by a range of approaches provided by different Insti-
tutions [16–19]. Here, TEC maps provide insights on the over-
all distribution of ionisation in response to current solar and
geomagnetic conditions, whereas ROTI maps provide an indi-
cation of irregularities forming in different regions. This “ir-
regularity detection” occurs since irregularities along a given
ray propagation path introduce temporal fluctuations in the re-
ceived phase and intensity of GNSS radio waves.
A particular signature is intensity scintillation, or short-
term variations in the received intensity leading to severe sig-
nal fading. This is caused by ionospheric irregularities form-
ing over spatial scales smaller than the Fresnel scale, i.e. ap-
proximately of the order of 400 m at GNSS frequencies in the
ionospheric F region. In contrast, phase fluctuations are in-
duced by irregularities with spatial scales both smaller and
larger than the Fresnel scale. This implies that the rate of
change of TEC and the ROTI are sensitive to a wider range of
irregularities: from larger to smaller spatial scales, as opposed
to the narrower range of scales affecting intensity scintillation
[20].
1
arXiv:2504.06056v1  [physics.space-ph]  8 Apr 2025
