Multilevel Quantum Rabi Models
6
Figure 2. Schematic illustrations of 4-level Rabi models with a non-diagonal coupling.
The upper panel shows the case where the excited and ground state manifolds are each
degenerate (no detunings): a singular value decomposition (SVD) leads to a pair of
uncoupled Rabi models in the radiation basis with different couplings distinguished by
different eigenvalues of the doublet operator. The lower panel shows the case where one
excited state is detuned by ε ̸= 0: coupling between the doublets breaks the symmetry.
As we vary b, the couplings between different atomic subsystems and light change.
At its maximum (b = 1), the type-1 (⟨D⟩= 1) doublet (states |G1⟩, |E1⟩), display a
doubly enhanced light-matter coupling compared to the bare basis states. In contrast,
the type-2 states, |G2⟩and |E2⟩, become dark states: they become completely decoupled
from the field mode.
This coupling enhancement is very similar to superradiant
phenomena in collective light-matter models such as the Dicke model [10, 14, 15], for
which certain superpositions of states become strongly coupled, while others decouple
entirely.
3.3. Atomic Detunings
So far, our analysis has relied on perfect degeneracy in the atomic levels (ε = 0), which
allowed a clean separation into independent doublets.
If this perfect degeneracy is
broken, (ε ̸= 0), the clean separation into doublets (labelled by type) is lost. Parity
symmetry will always remain intact, but the radiation basis would no longer diagonalise
the entire atomic structure, leading to mixing between doublet types. We illustrate this
using a simple example, where we again assume n = m = 2, but now set 0 < ε ≪ω.
We can follow the same steps as before: collect all the couplings into the matrix
Λ, and then use the singular value decomposition (SVD) of the matrix to define a
new atomic basis and two effective coupling constants for this basis, λ1 and λ2. The
interaction part of the Hamiltonian is therefore the same as in the previous subsection,
