9
c)
Thermal Particle Motion: 3 ns evolution
d)
a)
b)
Initial position
Final position
Scale box
FIG. 5. Time-local diffusion simulations. Particle trajecto-
ries obtained using Eqs. (18)–(20) at different temperatures
and interaction strengths. For all four cases, λ = 1/2 ˚A. Cir-
cles (crosses) denote starting (final) positions.
Scale boxes
of 1 nm × 1 nm × 1 nm are shown in grey. In each case, the
underlying lattice geometry is evident in the trajectory, show-
casing both motion within unit cells and transport between
them.
gan by determining which unit cell the mobile particle
was in. Second, assuming that the particle interacts only
with the eight framework ions at the corners of this unit
cell, we used the pre-generated harmonic amplitudes and
phases to calculate rH and ˙rH for those ions. After that,
we proceeded as before by using Eqs. (18)–(20) to com-
pute the force experienced by the particle. This approach
led to a thermal trajectory with correct statistical prop-
erties while keeping the number of computed framework
displacements manageable. To generate the trajectories,
we used 20×20×20 points for each of the three branches
the phonon Brillouin zone so that, after discarding the
zero-momentum points, we used 23997 modes.
For these calculations, we set λ = 1/2 ˚A, and U0 =
4 eV or 8 eV. In the unrelaxed configuration, these
U0’s resulted in energy barriers between two neighbor-
ing unit cells of about 45.5 meV and 91 meV, respec-
tively.
If we allowed the lattice to relax, the barriers
decreased to 42.3 meV and 79.3 meV, respectively. Al-
though these values are lower than typical energy bar-
riers found in solid ionic electrolytes (≈150–300 meV
for good ionic conductors), they have the correct or-
der of magnitude. Initially, we chose two temperatures
ℏΩT = 25 meV or 50 meV and, with two values of U0,
computed four random-walk trajectories spanning 3 ns
Thermal Particle Motion Statistics
Time (ps)
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
2
4
6
8
10
12
Mean squared displacement
standard error
linear fit
FIG. 6. Mean squared displacement. For four different combi-
nations of system parameters, we computed particle motion
for a total duration of 3 ns, then divided the trajectory into
12 ps segments. From these segments, we computed the mean
and standard error of the squared displacement, depicted with
the colored curves and bands, respectively. In all cases, for
roughly the first ps, ⟨|∆R|2⟩grows quadratically with time,
due to essentially ballistic particle motion within a single unit
cell. For longer times, the growth is linear, as shown by agree-
ment with a fit.
with δt = 5 × 10−3 ps, shown in Fig. 5.
In line with physical intuition, weaker interactions U0
and higher temperatures ℏΩT make it easier for the par-
ticle to escape the local energy minima, resulting in a
longer path. To quantify the particle’s diffusive behavior,
we split each trajectory into 250 segments of 12 ps du-
ration each, calculated the squared displacement |∆R|2
as a function of time for each of these segments, then
averaged the 250 results to compute the mean ⟨|∆R|2⟩
for each of the four trajectories, shown in Fig. 6.
We
observe that ⟨|∆R|2⟩∝t, as expected for a diffusive
process, where the proportionality constant is 6D for 3-
dimensional diffusion coefficient D. For the U0 = 8 eV,
ℏΩT = 25 meV case, the simulation time was not long
enough to show diffusive motion, as is evident from
Fig. 5(c), so the slope of ⟨|∆R|2⟩does not accurately
reflect D.
To investigate the temperature dependence of diffusiv-
ity, we simulated trajectories at several temperatures for
U0 = 4 eV. As above, we partitioned each 3-ns trajec-
tory into 250 segments and used them to calculate the
mean square displacement ⟨|∆R|2⟩as a function of time,
shown in Fig. 7, for both time-local and full solutions.
We excluded the first 1 ps from each segment to reduce
the effect of motion within a single unit cell. We fit the
resulting ⟨|∆R|2⟩, weighted by its uncertainty, to find its
slope for each temperature. Recalling that, in 3D diffu-
sion, the variance of displacement as a function of time
is 6Dt, we divided the resultant slopes by 6 to yield the
diffusion coefficients D. We plot the temperature depen-
dence of the diffusion coefficients in the insets of Fig. 7.
Because of the large displacement over the 3 ns win-
