9
FIG. 7: Comparison of χ2 performance for different
inputs to the neural network in the OmniFold approach.
For OmniFold (solid lines), the inputs are the muon and
leading proton kinematics (pµ, cos θµ, ϕµ, pp, cos θp, ϕp),
from which our observables of interest can be derived.
With MultiFold (dashed lines), the kinematic variables
used as input are (pµ, cos θµ, pp, δpT, δαT, δϕT), directly
including the observables of interest.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
With its approach of event-by-event reweighting with
the assistance of machine learning, OmniFold offers the
ability to perform unbinned unfolding of multiple observ-
ables simultaneously while accounting for background
and efficiency corrections with high-dimensional depen-
dencies. We have demonstrated for the first time its ap-
plication to a neutrino cross-section measurement, using
public simulated data from the T2K ND280 detector. By
creating fake data with nontrivial reweightings of the un-
derlying interaction models, we were able to test the clo-
sure properties of the OmniFold approach, finding that
with optimized inputs it was able to achieve similar χ2
goodness of fit with less bias and smaller uncertainties
compared to a conventional IBU approach across several
observables of interest.
Our results did not show strict improvement in terms of
χ2 from using OmniFold-based approaches compared to
a conventional unfolding method. Moving from a binned
to unbinned approach without the addition of other in-
formation yielded generally worse results, which seems to
stem from imperfect neural network training. Compar-
ing MultiFold against OmniFold, we also see that directly
providing the most relevant observables yields better per-
formance than requiring the procedure to derive this in-
formation from other more general inputs, which tells us
that thoughtful choices of input variables are important.
These issues are partially caused by the generally low
statistics associated with a neutrino dataset, but any fu-
ture application of OmniFold to real neutrino data would
face the same problem. Since OmniFold requires train-
ing with the actual data, improving the statistics is not
a trivial matter of running more simulations, and this
problem will require particular attention. Other meth-
ods for data augmentation in unfolding, including pre-
training [67, 68], would be useful to explore in future
work.
That being said, the performance of the OmniFold
method was likely also limited by the nature of the pub-
lic dataset that we used. For instance, the dataset only
contained information about the primary muon and lead-
ing proton in each event, but we would expect OmniFold
to do a better job of dealing with background contri-
butions if we could provide pion kinematic information
where it existed. For events where more than one proton
is reconstructed, providing information about the sub-
leading protons should be helpful too. This is supported
by our general observation that our MultiFold and Omni-
Fold implementations outperformed UniFold by making
use of additional information besides just the unfolding
variable. The public dataset that we used lacked the full
stack of potentially useful information because it was not
used in the conventional analysis, but for a future appli-
cation of OmniFold to actual data we would want to max-
imize the amount of useful information that we provide
as input.
In conclusion, this work shows that OmniFold is a use-
ful unfolding method to apply to neutrino measurements.
Even with a limited dataset, it is able to deliver on its
theoretical advantages, using high dimensional informa-
tion to improve the quality of the unfolding and do this
for multiple observables simultaneously. While we used a
T2K ND280 dataset, the advantages should be similar for
any detector. We have identified the difficulties encoun-
tered during this work, some of which may be particular
to neutrino datasets and will require further study, but
OmniFold shows promise as an unfolding technique for
all neutrino experiments to improve the quality of their
measurements.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank T2K for making the simu-
lated dataset extensively used in this work publicly avail-
able. We would also like to particularly thank Ciro Riccio
for his invaluable help in understanding the T2K public
dataset and in his efforts to produce the dataset initially.
Additionally, we would like to thank Ryan Milton for vali-
dating the implementation of OmniFold used in this work
with his RooUnfold implementation. The work of RH,
BN and CW was supported by the U.S. Department of
Energy, Office of Science, Office of High Energy Physics,
under contract number DE-AC02-05CH11231. The work
of MK and TK was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant
Number JP23H04504. The work of AC was supported
by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science,
Office of High Energy Physics, under DOE award DE-
