as a red dashed line in Figures 3(a) and 3(b). As the external microwave driver progres-
sively builds up the electron anisotropy over time, the anisotropy eventually exceeds the
threshold for the whistler anisotropy instability, leading to the excitation of whistler waves.
These waves rapidly redistribute the electron distribution, reducing the anisotropy below the
instability threshold and suppressing wave growth. The anisotropy then gradually builds
up again, perpetuating a cyclical process that sustains wave excitation near the thresh-
old. A potential evolutionary path is illustrated in Figure 3(b) with solid arrows, showing
the plasma exceeding the anisotropy threshold, relaxing below the threshold during wave
excitation and getting rebuilt again.
As the parallel thermal velocity of the electrons increases, unstable waves begin to grow
preferentially along the background magnetic field when β∥e > 0.025, as shown in Figure
3(c) [42, 43, 46]. These parallel whistler waves are then detected by the B-dot probe located
outside the magnetic mirror, with a measured frequency around 0.7 fce. As the parallel
electron temperature continues to rise, the wave frequency downshifts, consistent with EXP-
B observations.
The results from both EXP-A and EXP-B showing that the frequency
remains stable above 0.6 fce during microwave heating suggest that the parallel electron
temperature reaches a quasi-steady state, as indicated by the dashed arrows in Figure 3(b).
In this state, a balance is established between microwave heating, wave-driven electron
scattering, electron escape through the loss cone, and energy dissipation due to collisions.
To gain deeper insight into our experimental findings, we perform 2D3V PIC simulations
using the OSIRIS code [47] to understand and visualize electron dynamics during whistler
wave excitation. In the simulation, a microwave antenna at the −x boundary emits elec-
tromagnetic waves with a Gaussian transverse profile (width ∼8 c/ωpe), polarized in the y
direction, matching the experimental setup. The microwave frequency is set to f = 2fce.
A static magnetic mirror, similar to the experimental setup, is used with ωce = 0.15 ωpe
(at the equator) and ωce,max = 0.45 ωpe. To reduce the computational cost, the simulation
domain is assumed to be half the size of the experiment. The initial plasma extends from
x = −13 to −5 de (de being the electron inertial length), while the full simulation domain
spans x = −20 to 0 de and z = −80 to 80 de. The time step is set at 0.02 ω−1
pe , and the
cell length is 0.03125 de. Each cell contains 225 particles. The initial thermal velocity of
the electrons is 0.018 c, corresponding to 167 eV. In the x direction, the particle boundary
condition is absorbing, while in the z direction, a thermal bath boundary is used: parti-
7
