deﬁned such that all power-counting divergent two-loop Green functions become ﬁnite.
The only remaining unknowns are then the ﬁnite two-loop counterterms S2L
fct, which enter
Eq. (3.7) via ∆2L
fct. They are determined by the requirement that Eq. (3.7) must vanish
at the two-loop level in the limit LIMD→4, equivalently to the validity of Eq. (3.1) at the
two-loop level. Since ﬁnite BRST-invariant counterterms do not contribute to Eq. (3.1),
the ﬁnite counterterms are not unique.
The method sketched here was explained in detail generically in Refs. [17, 20] and
speciﬁed to the two-loop level in Ref. [21]. Ref. [24] followed a similar approach at the
one-loop level, however based on the background ﬁeld method and partially independent
of DReg. An important advantage we shall employ throughout our analysis is that only
UV power-counting divergent Green functions in Eq. (3.7) can contribute to the ﬁnite
symmetry breaking via local, 4-dimensional terms, while evanescent ﬁnite terms vanish
in the limit LIMD→4 (cf. Eq. (3.1)). Power-counting ﬁnite breaking Green functions may
have evanescent ﬁnite terms, which likewise vanish, and hence can be neglected entirely.
The fact that ∆2L
ct must be a bD variation of a ﬁnite, local expression amounts to very
strong constraints on the possible results of the Green functions ∆· Γ entering Eq. (3.7)
and thus allows very nontrivial checks.
3.2
Remarks on non-Abelian Subtleties
In this subsection we comment in some detail on ways in which the two-loop calculations
become more complicated, compared to the calculations in the Abelian case of Refs. [21,
23]. This includes remarks on non-Abelian subtleties in the structure of the STIs, the
increased number of Green functions as well as explicit checks of Eq. (3.4).
non-Abelian structures of the breaking
In Abelian models, ghosts do not interact and operators containing external sources
do not receive perturbative corrections.
Hence the Abelian counterterm action does
not contain external sources at any order [21]. When evaluating the breaking insertion
(3.5) in the Abelian case, the operator bD simply reduces to sD in Eq. (3.6), and the
second to last term of Eq. (3.6) vanishes. All of this changes in the non-Abelian case.
Exemplarily, Refs. [15, 20] obtained a 1-loop counterterm of the R/R-ﬁeld with divergent
and symmetry-restoring ﬁnite contributions,
S1L
ct ⊃−g2ξC2(G)
16π2
 1
2ǫ + 1
4
 Z
dDx RcψR + h.c..
(3.9)
As a ﬁrst noteworthy consequence, in the evaluation of ∆1L
ct = bD(S1L
ct ) in Eq. (3.6),
the action of bD onto just the ﬁnite part S1L
fct produces ﬁnite and evanescent contributions
of the form
∆1L
fct ⊃
Z
dDx δS0
δψiα
δS1L
ct
δRiα
∼ψi(/∂+ b/∂)cψ,
(3.10)
when the D-dimensional fermion kinetic term within S0 and the term given in Eq. (3.9)
are considered. The appearance of the evanescent operator b/∂within ∆1L
fct is a new non-
Abelian feature. Taking such terms into account is crucial for a consistent renormalization
at higher loop orders.
8
