10
Spallation Neutron Source.
Spectra were measured at
sample temperatures T=1.7 K, T=40 K, and T=150 K
with incident neutron energy Ei=3.32 meV over 360◦
scans in the HK0 scattering plane.
The chopper fre-
quency used was 180Hz.
Two separate background measurements were per-
formed; one with just an empty can of Helium and an-
other on dummy aluminimum sample plates coated with
the same mass CYTOP as that of the true sample holder.
These two background datasets were subtracted from the
crystal data using an empirically derived self-shielding
factor. This factor governs only the relative subtraction
of the CYTOP signature to the helium and was deter-
mined empirically via a method outlined in the Supple-
mentary Information.
Following this step, we used a background subtraction
technique introduced by Helton et al. [9]. This approach
utilizes the oddness of χ′′(ω) with respect to ω and the
fact that S(q, ω) = [1 + n(ω)] χ′′(q, ω), where n(ω) is
the Bose occupation factor. Since the time of flight based
CNCS spectrometer measures scattering events that both
transfer energy to and from the crystals (positive and
negative energy scattering events respectively), we can
exploit this oddness to clean the data of all temperature-
independent background features. With such data taken
at two temperatures TL and TH the method can be de-
scribed by the equation set
S(q, +ω, TL) =S(q, +ω, TL) −S(q, +ω, TH)
−1 + n(ω)
1 + n(−ω)[S(q, −ω, TL) −S(q, −ω, TH)],
S(q, +ω, TH) =S(q, −ω, TL) −S(q, −ω, TH).
(3)
As is detailed in the Supplementary Information, the
largest parasitic background in our measured inelastic
data arises from elastic brag peaks "bleeding" into the
inelastic data due to the finite energy width of the beam;
this effect is especially prominent at low energy transfers.
However, as the elastic Bragg Peaks are nearly temper-
ature independent in strength, this method yields mag-
netic scattering dominated S(q, ω) data sets at two tem-
peratures. Finally, the data underwent D6 symmetriza-
tion, yielding sets on which all analyses were performed.
Figure 7 in the Supplementary information shows these
processing steps for the T=1.7 K dataset.
Additional data at higher energy transfers were taken
with an incident neutron energy of Ei =12 meV (see Fig-
ure 11 in Extended Data). The aforementioned empty
can and CYTOP backgrounds were measured and ac-
counted for. However, the Ei =12 meV data were only
measured at T = 1.7 K, thus the background subtraction
technique of Helton et al. [9], as discussed above, was not
performed.
C.
Empirical Structure Factor Modeling
Fitting the scattering data to the equal-time structure
factor of Equation 1 involved treating energy-integrated
contours as images and performing weighted linear re-
gressions of q-dependent regressors.
This process first
involved finding the squared magnetic form factor |F(q)|2
and calculating fi(q) for the crystal in the HK0-plane for
each bond. To match the pixel resolution of the scatter-
ing data, we transformed these functions into images of
the same dimensions. To enhance the accuracy of this
model, we added 5◦FWHM azimuthal Gaussian “blur-
ring” to these images – centered at q=0 – to account for
the ∼5◦crystal coalignment error measured in the elastic
scattering.
From here, we employed weighted least squares (WLS)
linear regressions, with the weight of each pixel inversely
proportional to its squared measurement error.
These
regressions, with heteroscedasticity-consistent standard
errors and assuming independence of α with ρi but not
between ρi terms, yielded the parameter estimates shown
in Figure 4. Further details on the mechanics of this WLS
approach appear in the Supplementary Information.
D.
DMRG Calculations
We
employ
density-matrix
renormalization
group
(DMRG) [49] to study the ground state properties
of the kagome lattice J1-J2 Heisenberg model with
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya (DM) interaction which is defined
by Equation 2 in the main text. Here, ⃗Si is the spin-1/2
operator on site i and the first term denotes spin cou-
plings between first-nearest (J1) and second-nearest (J2)
neighboring sites, respectively. The DM interaction orig-
inates from relativistic spin-orbit coupling and is nonzero
when lattice inversion symmetry is absent. In this study,
we focus on the z-axis component of the DM interaction
Dij = Dzˆz using the convention defined in Lee et al. [37].
In the present study, we take the lattice geometry to be
cylindrical with periodic and open boundary conditions
in the e1 and e2 directions, respectively. Here, e1 = (1, 0)
and e2 = (1/2,
√
3/2) (in term of unit cells) denote the
two basis vectors of the kagome lattice.
We focus on
cylinders with width W and length L, where L and W
are the number of unit cells (and 2L and 2W are the
number of sites) along the e1 and e2 directions, respec-
tively. Following Yan et al. [17], we refer the cylinders to
as YC −2W, with total number of sites N = 3 × L × W.
For a natural connection to two dimensions, we con-
sider “square-like" cylinders YC-8 and YC-12 with width
W = 4 −6 and length L = 2W. We perform up to 50
sweeps and keep up to m = 8000 states with typical trun-
cation errors ϵ ≈7 × 10−7 for YC-8 and ϵ ≈5 × 10−6 for
YC-12 cylinders.
