In an earlier version of our paper [PFGT20] it was shown that no depth-2 QAC-circuit on n > 3
qubits can implement parity exactly. This result improved upon that announced by Pius [Piu14]
by reducing the number of input qubits, and was tight in the sense that one can easily simulate
the 3-qubit parity gate cleanly with a depth-2 QAC-circuit.
The current paper improves upon our earlier version [PFGT20] by removing the cleanliness
restriction, showing that no depth-2 QAC-circuit can exactly compute the parity of more than
three qubits, even uncleanly. To do this, we introduce a new algebraic technique for our proof
that is of independent interest and potentially useful for proving negative results for depth-3 and
beyond. Our technique is based on work of Shpilka & Volkovich [SV10] on variable-disjoint factors
of a multivariate polynomial. We show that a particular family of multivariate polynomials are all
irreducible. Using that, we prove a speciﬁc entangling property of the C-SIGN gate (a cousin of
the generalized Toﬀoli gate; see Section 2). Roughly, any essential application of a C-SIGN gate
leaves all its qubits entangled, provided they were not so entangled to begin with. By “essential”
we mean that the gate does not disappear or simplify to a gate of smaller arity.
More recently and independently of us, improved bounds for depth-d QAC circuits approximately
computing n-qubit fanout/parity have been obtained by a number of people. Rosenthal [Ros21]
proved that such circuits can approximate parity arbitrarily closely when d ≥7, albeit with an
exponential number of ancilla qubits. He also showed that depth-2 QAC-circuits of arbitrary size
cannot approximate parity (even uncleanly). Nadimpalli, Parham, Vasconcelos, & Yuen [NPVY24]
considered the Pauli spectra of polynomial-size QAC circuits, showing that such circuits of depth-d
using nO(1/d) ancilla qubits cannot compute parity on more than a

1
2 + 2−Ω(n1/d)
-fraction of the
inputs. More recently, Anshu, Dong, Ou, & Yao [ADOY24] obtained a slightly superlinear lower
bound of n1+3−d on the number of ancilla qubits needed to compute any function of linear approx-
imate degree, including parity. Improving this lower bound even slightly to n1+exp(−o(d)) would
imply that parity is not in QAC0, leading to a separation of the language classes computed by
these circuits: QAC0 ̸= QACC0. Here, QACC0-circuits are families of constant-depth, polynomial-
size quantum circuits with single-qubit gates and unbounded mod-q gates (for any q > 1 constant
across the circuits in the family). (Parity gates were shown to be depth-1 equivalent to fanout
gates [Moo99], so these circuits are layer-for-layer equivalent to circuits with fanout gates instead,
and it is known that mod-q gates are simulatable by QAC-circuits with parity gates in constant
depth, and vice versa [GHMP02, HˇS05, TT16].) Echoing Rosenthal’s result [Ros21], Grier & Mor-
ris [GM24] show that constant-depth, polynomial-size quantum circuits equipped with unbounded
threshold gates can compute fanout to arbitrarily close approximation.
Our results use techniques very diﬀerent from all of those used above and address exact compu-
tation of parity for non-asymptotic n, whereas those in [Ros21, NPVY24, ADOY24, GM24] address
approximations of various sorts that are asymptotic in nature. Rosenthal’s bounds on depth-2 cir-
cuits, for example, give asymptotic trade-oﬀs between the closeness of the approximation and the
maximum number of qubits allowed, and (as he implicitly admits) they are nontrivial only for n at
least roughly 1060,000. Our current result is incomparable in that we give a tight upper bound on
n allowing depth-2 circuits to exactly compute parity (even uncleanly).
3
