Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Real
U-NO
HelmFluid
PINP
t = 50
t = 100
Prediction
Error
Prediction
Error
(a) Concentration prediction and comparison
Real
Real
Pred.
Pred.
(b) Latent physical quantities Prediction
t = 50
t = 100
(c) Correlation 
t = 50
t = 100
Correlation
Correlation
0.9039
0.9099
0.9251
0.9207
0.9123
0.9061
Figure 6: (a) A comparison of prediction results between our method and U-NO, Helmfluid. (b) A
comparison between our predicted latent physical quantities and the ground truth and (c) Correlation.
t = 2
t = 4
t = 6
t = 8
t = 10
Real
HelmFluid
PINP
Figure 7: A comparison between our method and Helm-
fluid for 3D smoke prediction, with the predicted frames
increasing from left to right.
As shown in Figure 6 (c), a high cor-
relation (≥0.9) demonstrates the sim-
ilarity of our estimated latent physical
quantities with the true data, indicat-
ing that the estimated physical quanti-
ties contribute to understanding the fu-
ture motion process. However, it is im-
portant to note that, due to the unknown
physical scale, a scaling relationship ex-
ists between the estimated latent physi-
cal quantities and their true values. To
obtain the true values of these estimated
quantities, the initial values of the real
physical quantities or any real data point
are necessary to determine the scaling
constant. A detailed discussion of this
is provided in Appendix D.
Smoke 3D. Similar to the 2D smoke scenario, we extend our method to a 3D setting. During training,
the model predicts the future 4 frames of concentration based on the past 4 frames. During testing,
the model is required to predict the future 10 frames of concentration using the past 4 frames, with
varying smoke source locations and concentrations between the training and testing sets.
In the 3D smoke concentration prediction task, PINP significantly outperforms other models (Table
1). In the frame-by-frame prediction comparison (Figure 4 (c)), our model also outperforms others.
Figure 7 presents an example. Compared to Helmfluid, our model preserves more detailed features.
The prediction results on the top surface are significantly better than those predicted by Helmfluid.
4.2
REAL-WORLD DATA
We consider the nowcasting prediction problem in real scenarios, which can be viewed as the trans-
port problem of water-bearing clouds driven by wind. Unlike the simulated data, nowcasting data is
boundary-less and contains noise. It is important to note that the baseline from the simulated data
test is not applied to this task, and we establish new baselines for this problem.
Baselines. The baselines for nowcasting include video prediction models: ConvLSTM (Shi et al.,
2015), PredRNN (Wang et al., 2022), SimVP (Gao et al., 2022a) and Earthformer (Gao et al., 2022b).
And a physics-driven prediction model: NowcastNet (Zhang et al., 2023). NowcastNet uses a de-
terministic prediction model (Evolution network) paired with a probabilistic model (GAN). The
Evolution network outperforms the GAN-based model in most metrics. Results for the Evolution
network are shown in Table 2, while full comparisons of NowcastNet are in Appendix A (Table S1).
8
