4
yellow arrows in Figure 2 (e)). Note that, another narrow CME appeared before 02:30 UT (marked with the white
arrow in Figure 2 (d)) is not related to the eruption we studied after a careful inspection. This filament eruption was
also studied by Hou et al. (2025) for the sake of searching for sun-as-a-star signatures of filament eruptions at the
radio band.
Figure 2. (a)-(c) DART radio images of the erupting filament reconstructed at the frequencies of 149 MHz, 300 MHz, and
447 MHz, respectively. The white circle represents the optical solar limb. (d)-(f) LASCO C2 images showing the appearance
of two CMEs. The white arrow marks the first narrow CME, which is unrelated to the filament we studied. The yellow arrow
mark the first appearance of the partial halo CME caused by the filament eruption. The evolution of the radio depression at
three frequencies (149 MHz, 300 MHz and 447 MHz) between 02:00 UT and 04:00 UT is shown in the animation. The real-time
duration of the animation is 13 s.
(An animation related to this figure is available.)
3.1. Radio Imaging of the Filament Eruption
At the metric and decimetric wavebands, the radio depression first became visible at ∼02:30 UT, appearing as a
distinct dark structure and becoming darker during its propagation in the following 1 hour. Interestingly, the radio
depression maintained a continuous, loop-like structure at different frequencies for a long time (Figure 2 (a)-(c)). We
compared the spatial extension of the filament at multi-passbands (see Figure 1 (a), (d), (k), and (l)). Unlike the
continuous depression at the radio band, a large portion of the filament is invisible at the EUV and Hα bands during
the eruption, with only a small part of it visible above the two footpoints. The propagation of the filament along
two slits is displayed in the Distance-time plots as shown in Figure 3. The early rise of the radio depression before ∼
02:30 UT (white boxes in Figure 3) was difficult to discern due to its ambiguity, whereas the EUV filament was clearly
identifiable. Shortly after, the radio depression underwent an apparent expansion both in angular width and cross
section between 02:30 UT and 03:00 UT (see Figure 1 (a)-(c) and Figure 3) but with the former being more obvious
