atoms via delocalised hybrid orbitals. Adding submolecular spatial resolution to the
XAS measurements via a strategy similar to that introduced by Ajayi et al.[56] is of
particular future interest in this regard.
Methods
Synthesis of Ar@C60
Ar@C60 was synthesised by molecular surgery[60], a process in which chemical reac-
tions are used to open a hole in the C60 cage large enough to allow argon to enter.
A further series of reactions is then used to close the hole to reform the pristine C60
cage, which now contains an argon atom[15]. (Previously, Ar@C60 has been obtained
in very low yield by exposure of C60 to argon at high temperatures and pressures
followed by extensive purification (see, for example, Saunders et al.[14].)
Preparation of multilayer and monolayer films of Ar@C60
The Ag(111) surface was first cleaned via repeated sputter-anneal cycles (1 keV Ar+
ions at an argon pressure of ∼2×10−5 mbar; sample annealing temperature ∼550oC)
until a sharp (1x1) low energy electron diffraction (LEED) pattern was visible and
there was no evidence of C 1s or O 1s core-level signals in photoemission spectra (for
which the photon energy was tuned to maximise the surface sensitivity of the pho-
toelectrons.) Ar@C60 was then deposited from a thermal evaporator operating at a
temperature of 400 (±20)oC onto the Ag(111) sample, which was held at a tempera-
ture of ∼180 K throughout the deposition in order to prohibit reconstruction at the
fullerene-Ag(111) interface[57]. This produced a (2
√
3 × 2
√
3)R30o LEED pattern[57].
Formation of monolayer coverages in this way essentially “freezes out” reconstruction
(via “nanopitting”[52, 57]) of the Ag(111) substrate, resulting in an X-ray standing
wave coherent fraction value close to unity, substantially larger than that previously
observed for endofullerene monolayers on Ag(111)[58], due to the homogeneity of the
molecular adsorption sites. (Note, however, that a small “overshoot” in molecular cov-
erage beyond the first monolayer is difficult to avoid using this protocol – see S.I.)
Multilayer coverages of sufficient thickness to quench photoemission signal from the
Ag(111) substrate required cumulative deposition times of order four to five hours. A
shift of ∼0.4 - 0.5 eV in the C 1s core-level binding energy for monolayer vs multi-
layer coverages (see SI), coupled with a measurement of the ratio of the intensities of
the C 1s and Ag 3d photoemission peaks, facilitated the identification of monolayer
(and close-to-monolayer) coverage.
Photoemission, X-ray absorption, and NIXSW measurements
All experimental work described in this paper was carried out at beamline I09, Surface
and Interface Analysis, at the Diamond Light Source[59]. I09 is equipped with both
a hard X-ray undulator, which was used for our NIXSW measurements, and a soft
X-ray undulator, used for the acquisition of high-resolution C 1s, Ar 2p, Ag 3d, and
valence band photoemission spectra, and for Ar L2,3 and C K-edge X-ray absorption
spectroscopy. (The resolving power of the soft X-ray branch is 10,000.) Considerable
12
