ship-tracks. Instead, in our study, the age of a ship-track segment is determined by
that of a matched virtual ship-track for which we have precise knowledge of its age,
avoiding the presence of a ship-track head.
Study region and time
This study is conducted over the Northeast Pacific between 2009 and 2020. The
geographic region is between (25 oN, 165 oW) and ( 60 oN, 110 oW) within around
250 miles of the coast. We choose this area because of the availability of automated
identification system (AIS) data and its coverage of stratocumulus decks off the coast
of California and low clouds in the mid-latitudes associated with cyclones.
Data
The AIS data have native temporal resolution of one minute, but are subsampled to
be hourly data because the reanalysis data do not have matching high time-resolution.
We apply a few filters on the ship AIS data. Based on the length, width, draft and
speed of individual ships, we ignore ships whose speed2·width·length <= 5×105m4s−2
or speed2 · width · draft <= 5 × 104m4s−2 . This is done to reduce the amount
of calculation needed to run the trajectory model for each ship since smaller ships
are unlikely to produce a ship-track. After the filtering, we are left with more than
6million ship samples. We ran the HYSPLIT model for these ships, each for 30 hours
before local overpass time [48]. 323,253 of them are within Aqua MODIS granules
for matching up with detected ship-tracks. MERRA-2 reanalysis meteorology fields
[49]are used to advect virtual emissions by these ships to produce simulated ship-tracks
using the HYSPLIT model. The MERRA-2 data are 3-hourly at a resolution of 0.5o
X 0.625o. We compare results from MERRA-2 and ERA-5 and find their performance
is very similar. Aqua MODIS collection 6.1 retrievals [50] are used in this study. We
only include cloud properties retrievals of liquid cloud pixels.
Virtual ship-tracks and ages of ship-track segments
The details of the method can be found in Yuan et al. [23] and here we briefly
recap the procedure. AIS data are first sub-sampled from native resolutions to hourly
resolution. At each hour, we release an air parcel at the height of 950 hPa and use the
HYSPLIT model to simulate its forward trajectory until the time of MODIS overpass.
Each day, we simulate ships that within our study region and within 24 hours of
MODIS overpassing time. We choose a cut-off of 24 hours because errors in reanalysis
winds and trajectory modeling grow with time and we want to avoid simulated tracks
suffer from excessive position errors while 24hours give us the full diel cycle. Once we
obtain the simulated ship-tracks of each ship, we collocate them with available MODIS
granules and keep only those that intersect with these granules that day.
For each MODIS granule that has detected ship-tracks, we iterate through all
detected ship-tracks and match them with simulated ship-tracks. We test a few con-
ditions for matching, such as Frechet distance between the detected and simulated
ship-tracks and maximum overlapping pixels between the two. We find the latter to
be more versatile because both detected and simulated ship-tracks have intersect with
each other, creating complex shapes that are difficult for Frechet distance method to
be effective since we do not have the true order information on the detected ship-
tracks. The age of each segment of a detected ship-track is determined to be that of the
11
