2
Scattering Protons
spin-3
2 baryons, led to the idea that quarks were carrying an additional charge, called color
charge.
Slightly later in mid ’70s, data from electron-positron collisions [30], showed the presence of
two sprays of collimated particles in the final state, which were interpreted as "jets" initiated
by quark fragmentation. Moreover, the existence of events in which a third jet was observed,
lead to the discovery of the gluon, a bosonic particle with integer spin, acting as the strong
force mediator. By measuring the cross-section ratio σ(e+e−→jet + jet)/σ(e+e−→µ+ + µ−),
physicists determined the number of color charges, which was compatible with NC = 3.
Finally, the fact that quarks and gluons were not observed as free particles, or better are only
asymptotically free, as visible in the DIS data, motivates that the underlying symmetry beyond
strong interaction was coming from a non-abelian group.
Due to its complexity, a full analytical solution of a QCD scattering process is not feasible.
Although other approaches are available, here we will deal only with perturbative QCD (pQCD),
i.e. all the quantities will be expressed in terms of a perturbative series in the strong coupling.
The larger the number of perturbative corrections included, the more precise will be the
prediction. In order to maintain a physical description of the theory, the inclusion of higher
order corrections requires to redefine the bare quantities appearing in the Lagrangian in terms of
the renormalized physical quantities. This procedure, as we shall see in Sections 1.1.2 and 1.3.2,
allows the definition of some Renormalization Group Equations (RGE) which are again solvable
in perturbation theory and fix the running of physical input parameters at different scales. As
a matter of fact, the value of the strong coupling is a very good expansion parameter only at
large scales, and blows up at ≈300 MeV, where the approach of pQCD is no longer reliable.
Thus, pQCD is an excellent tool for describing hadronic scattering at high energy colliders, but
might fail for instance in providing a description of low energy cross-sections. Another major
downside of the pQCD method is that the complexity of the computation increases dramatically
at higher orders, for instance due to the large number of Feynman diagrams that must be taken
into account.
In Section 1.1.1, starting from the QCD Lagrangian, we set up the notation that will be used in
all the rest of the work, including the electroweak couplings, while in Section 1.1.2 we examine
how the running of the strong coupling can be used to explain the observed asymptotic freedom.
1.1.1. QCD Lagrangian
The derivation of the QCD Lagrangian is a generalization of Quantum Electrodynamics (QED)
to a more complicated symmetry group, SU(3). The full QCD Lagrangian is given by the terms
LQCD = Lclassical + Lgauge + Lghost
(1.1)
where the classical part describes the dynamics of the quark and gluon fields, while Lgauge
contains the gauge fixing terms and Lghost add the necessary ghost fields [31] needed to remove
