5
Since Θ2
M = 1, this magnetic mirror behaves as a 1D
spinless TRS, thus promoting the symmetry of Hv(kz) to
class BDI. Hence, the product of ΘM and the particle-
hole symmetry Ξ generates a chiral symmetry S ≡ΘMΞ
for the vortex line, with which a Z-valued chiral wind-
ing number WS can be defined to describe the VLT. In
particular, there will be |WS| decoupled MZMs, with the
same S index, appearing at the surface vortex core.
Remarkably, we find a simple JVC relation, with
WS = CM.
(5)
Namely, the number of S-stabilized vortex MZMs exactly
equals that of Mx-protected helical edge modes of a π-
junction in the same superconductor. When CM = ±1,
we have ν0 = 1 and a Z2 JT. Then the system must host a
single vortex MZM (WS = ±1) as concluded in Sec. II B.
The situation for CM = ±2 is, however, not as intuitive.
The π-junction now features two pairs of helical edge
modes, which, upon the dimensional reduction, generate
two vortex zero modes that normally would hybridize
with each other. However, as discussed in Appendix A,
an effective boundary theory analysis reveals that these
zero modes must carry the same chiral symmetry index
and remain decoupled. From the bulk-boundary corre-
spondence, we thus arrive at WS = CM = ±2. General-
ization to JT with a larger mirror Chern number can be
proved similarly and is also provided in Appendix A.
E.
Rotation symmetries and symmetry mismatch
Finally, let us focus on the effect of rotation symme-
tries.
We consider a superconductor candidate with a
space group P4 (No. 75) generated by a 4-fold rotation
symmetry C4z around ˆz. If the vortex line orientation
ˆn ̸= ˆz, its symmetry group Gv contains only the PHS,
with which the Kitaev vortex phase is the only possible
VLT following the tenfold-way classification [58]. In this
case, we can unambiguously conclude the existence of
Kitaev vortex by checking the Z2 JT of any π-junction
parallel to the vortex tube.
In other words, the JVC
relation is expected to be one-to-one.
When ˆn = ˆz, the CdGM modes inside the vortex are
categorized into four distinct 1D irreducible representa-
tions (irreps) of C4z, characterized by the ˆz-component
angular momentum Jz ∈{0, 1, 2, 3}. Specifically, Kitaev
vortex topology can arise from a band inversion of CdGM
states labeled by either Jz = 0 or 2. Each scenario will
contribute to a Z2 invariant, denoted as ζ0,2 respectively.
Meanwhile, Jz = 1, 3 sectors must form a pair of PHS-
related bands in the spectrum. They can cross to form
a pair of C4z-protected point nodes, which is dubbed a
nodal vortex phase and is characterized by a Z topolog-
ical charge Q1. Therefore, C4z enriches the VLT to a
(Z2)2 × Z topological class [29].
However, a π-junction parallel to the above vortex line
only respects a two-fold C2z due to its geometric struc-
ture.
The JT is captured by the strong Z2 index ν0.
Symmetry G Josephson Topology Vortex Topology
E
Z2
Z2
P
Z4
Z2
M
Z
Z
C2
Z2
Z2 × Z2
C3
Z2
Z2 × Z
C4
Z2
(Z2)2 × Z
C6
Z2
(Z2)2 × (Z)2
TABLE I. Classification of Josephson topology and vortex-
line topology when the bulk superconductor features a crys-
talline symmetry G. Note that G may be reduced in the pres-
ence of a π-junction or vortex geometry.
Therefore, the junction-vortex symmetry mismatch here
results in a JVC mapping that is not one-to-one.
For
instance, either ζ0 = 1 or ζ2 = 1 can correspond to a
non-trivial ν0 = 1, while ζ0 = ζ2 = 1 implies a trivial JT.
In addition, ν0 = 1 can also arise in a system with an
odd Q1. As a result, we find that
ν0 ≡ζ0 + ζ2 + Q1 (mod 2).
(6)
Similar JVC relations can be concluded for systems with
a two-fold, three-fold, or six-fold rotation symmetry. In
general, when the vortex line is rotational invariant, the
JVC does not definitively inform the explicit type of VLT.
Notably, when we tilt the vortex line to misalign with the
rotation axis, both ζ2 and Q1 become ill-defined, with
which JVC in Eq. 6 can always be reduced to the exact
mapping relation in Eq. 3.
III.
TOPOLOGICAL CRITICAL POINTS OF π
JUNCTIONS
We now turn to a key implication of the Joseph-
son–vortex correspondence (JVC): the evolution of their
topological character with chemical potential µ.
As
pointed out in Ref. [32], vortex lines can undergo topolog-
ical phase transitions as µ is tuned, marking the onset of
Majorana zero modes at critical values µc. If JVC gener-
ally holds, we naturally expect the topological physics of
the π-junction to exhibit similar µ-dependent behavior.
In particular, the π-junction and the vortex line should
undergo simultaneous topological transitions at matching
values of µc. The focus of this section is to analytically
derive the relations between JT and VLT critical points.
We now consider 3D phase space (k∥, µ), in which the
π-junction Hamiltonian is updated to H(k∥, µ) and k∥=
(ky, kz) for a π-junction along [100]. Unlike physical crys-
tal momentum, µ does not respond to the operation of ei-
ther TRS Θ or PHS Ξ, with ΘH(k∥, µ)Θ−1 = H(−k∥, µ)
and ΞH(k∥, µ)Ξ−1 = −H(−k∥, µ).
Therefore, if a JT
gap closes at (kc, µ(J)
c
) with kc /∈TRIM, there must exist
a second JT critical point at (−kc, µ(J)
c
). On the other
hand, such a “fermion doubling” of critical points can be
