8 
 
real part of the substrate's permittivity, while the decrease in the Q factor is attributed to substantial 
imaginary part of the SiO266–68. Consequently, the implementation of the far-infrared SPhPs 
necessitates the use of low-loss substrates or suspension of the membrane. 
 
We further demonstrate the thickness tunability of SPhPs in suspended SrTiO3 membranes.  Fig.4a 
shows a frequency-position map of the near-field signal obtained on a 50 nm thick suspended 
membrane, where multiple SPhP fringes can be seen in RB2. The spacing and spatial extent of 
these fringes are reduced compared to the 100 nm thick membranes, corresponding to increased 
confinement (or ) with 7 up to 12 (Fig.4c and Supplementary Fig.7). Notably, the 50 nm 
membrane maintains a high Q factor of up to 22, while the thickness is less than 0.2% of the free-
space wavelength (Fig.4d). We also detect the SPhPs in thinner, 30 nm membranes (Fig.4b), 
although these data show a significantly reduced signal-to-noise ratio due to limited signal from 
the membrane’s reduced thickness. This results in only one fringe in RB3, making the quantitative 
analysis difficult.  
 
Lastly, we analyze the SPhPs lifetime defined as  Q = R/ST ,  where R = 1/Im() is the 
propagation length and  ST = Re(U/U) is the group velocity. Using ST obtained from the 
analytical dispersion (Fig.1c) and experimentally extracted R (Supplementary Fig.9), we find Q =
8 ± 1 p=  for the 100 nm membrane and Q = 7 ± 1 ps  for the 50 nm membrane (Fig.4e, 
Supplementary Note 8). These ultralong lifetimes are comparable to those of the state-of-the-art 
phonon polaritonic materials, such as  mid-infrared PhPs in isotopically enriched hBN (Q = 2 ps)18, 
naturally abundant MoO3 (Q = 8 ps)22,25,69, and freestanding SiC thin films (Q = 8 −9 ps)59 as 
well as terahertz PhPs in MoO3 (Q = 9 ps)37 and GeS (Q = 2 −3 ps)35, further confirming the low-
loss nature of SPhPs.  
 
Conclusion and outlook 
Our study reveals that transferable functional perovskite oxide nanomembranes host low-loss 
highly confined far-infrared phonon polaritons with the lifetime reaching 8 ps when they are 
separated from a lossy substrate. Therefore, they represent a promising new platform for long 
wavelength nano-photonics. The energy of the surface phonon polaritons in the SrTiO3 membrane 
ranges from 30 to 50 meV, close to room-temperature thermal energy (25 meV), making them 
easily thermally excitable. Consequently, the discovery of the long-range propagating low-energy 
surface phonons in the oxide membranes offers significant advantages that higher-energy mid-
infrared phonon polaritons in traditional polaritonic materials cannot provide, which will enable a 
variety of intriguing applications, including sensing, photodetection, enhanced near-field energy 
transfer, enhanced in-plane thermal conductivity, and polariton-mediated coherent thermal 
emission. Oxide membranes provide a complementary approach to exfoliable vdW materials, 
offering distinct advantages such as enhanced chemical and mechanical stability, large lateral 
dimensions, and potential scalability in production. It is noted that the SrTiO3 used in this work 
was synthesized from naturally occurring elements, where a notable isotopic variation of strontium 
