Evidence for Intrinsic charm in the proton
67
3.1.1. The NNPDF4.0 charm PDF
The 4FNS charm PDF and its associated uncertainties is determined by means of a global QCD
analysis within the NNPDF4.0 framework. All PDFs, including the charm PDF, are parametrized
at Q0 = 1.65 GeV in a model-independent manner using a neural network, which is fitted
to data using supervised machine learning techniques. The Monte Carlo replica method is
deployed to ensure a faithful uncertainty estimate (cf Section 2.2.3). Specifically, we express
the 4FNS total charm PDF (c+ = c + ¯c) in terms of the output neurons associated to the quark
singlet Σ and non-singlet T15 distributions, as
xc+(x, Q0; θ) =

xαΣ(1 −x)βΣNNΣ(x, θ) −xαT15(1 −x)βT15NNT15(x, θ)

/4 ,
(3.1)
where NNi(x, θ) is the i-th output neuron of a neural network with input x and parameters θ,
and (αi, βi) are preprocessing exponents. A crucial feature of Eq. (3.1) is that no ad hoc specific
model assumptions are used: the shape and size of xc+(x, Q0) are entirely determined from
experimental data. Hence, our determination of the 4FNS fitted charm PDF, and thus of the
intrinsic charm, is unbiased.
The neural network parameters θ in Eq. (3.1) are determined by fitting an extensive global
dataset that consists of 4618 cross-sections from a wide range of different processes, measured
over the years in a variety of fixed-target and collider experiments (see [109] for a complete
list). The kinematic coverage of these cross-sections, is displayed in Fig. 2.11. Many of these
processes provide direct or indirect sensitivity to the charm content of the proton. Particularly
important constraints come from W and Z production from ATLAS, CMS, and LHCb as well as
from neutral and charged current DIS structure functions from HERA. The 4FNS PDFs at the
input scale Q0 are related to experimental measurements at Q ̸= Q0 by means of NNLO QCD
calculations, including the FONLL-C general-mass scheme for DIS [107] generalized to allow
for fitted charm [104] (cf. Section 1.4.2).
As we shall explain in Section 3.1.3, we have verified that the determination of 4FNS charm
PDF Eq. (3.1) and the ensuing three-flavor-number-scheme (3FNS) intrinsic charm PDF are
stable upon variations of methodology (PDF parametrization basis), input dataset, and values
of Standard Model parameters (the charm mass). We have also studied the stability of our
results upon replacing the current NNPDF4.0 methodology [109] with the previous NNPDF3.1
methodology [242]. It turns out that results are perfectly consistent. Indeed, the old methodol-
ogy leads to somewhat larger uncertainties, corresponding to a moderate reduction of the local
statistical significance for intrinsic charm, and to a central value which is within the smaller
error band of our current result.
A determination in which the vanishing of intrinsic charm is imposed has also been performed
(see also Section 3.1.2). In this case, the fit quality significantly deteriorates: the values of the
χ2 per data point of 1.162, 1.26, and 1.22 for total, Drell-Yan, and NC DIS data respectively,
found when fitting charm, are increased to 1.198, 1.31, 1.28 when the vanishing of intrinsic
