arXiv:2504.06433v1  [quant-ph]  8 Apr 2025
Tight bounds on depth-2 QAC-circuits computing parity
Daniel Pad´e
Stephen Fenner
University of South Carolina∗
Daniel Grier
IQC†
Thomas Thierauf
Ulm University‡
April 10, 2025
Abstract
We show that the parity of more than three non-target input bits cannot be computed by
QAC-circuits of depth-2, not even uncleanly, regardless of the number of ancilla qubits. This
result is incomparable with other recent lower bounds on constant-depth QAC-circuits by Rosen-
thal [ICTS 2021,arXiv:2008.07470] and uses diﬀerent techniques which may be of independent
interest:
1. We show that all members of a certain class of multivariate polynomials are irreducible.
The proof applies a technique of Shpilka & Volkovich [STOC 2008].
2. We give a tight-in-some-sense characterization of when a multiqubit CZ gate creates or
removes entanglement from the state it is applied to.
The current paper strengthens an earlier version of the paper [arXiv:2005.12169].
Keywords: multivariate polynomial, irreducible, indecomposable, justifying assignment, quan-
tum circuit, QAC, QACC, parity gate, fanout gate, entanglement lemma
1
Introduction
Quantum decoherence is a major obstacle to maintaining long quantum computations. Current
quantum computers confront short decoherence times and so must act quickly to do useful compu-
tations, and this limitation is likely to continue long into the future.
A reasonable theoretical model of such computations are shallow quantum circuits, i.e., quantum
circuits of small depth. The decoherence dilemma has inspired much theoretical interest in the
capabilities of these circuits, particularly circuits that have constant depth and polynomial size. To
solve useful problems, quantum circuits that are very shallow will require gates acting on several
qubits at once. A major question then is this: do there exist multiple-qubit gates that are both
potentially realizable and suﬃcient for powerful computation in small (even constant) depth?
It is known that, with the aid of fanout gates (a certain multiqubit gate deﬁned below), quantum
circuits can do a variety of important tasks such as phase estimation and approximate Quantum
∗Computer
Science
and
Engineering
Department,
Columbia,
SC
29208
USA.
djpade@gmail.com,
fenner.sa@gmail.com.
Part of the work was done while the ﬁrst author visited the fourth author in June and
July, 2019.
†Institute
for
Quantum
Computing,
University
of
Waterloo,
Waterloo,
ON
N2L3G1
Canada.
daniel.grier@uwaterloo.ca
‡Department of Engineering, Computer Science and Psychology, Ulm, Germany. thomas.thierauf@uni-ulm.de.
Supported by DFG grant TH 472/5-2.
1
