Prethermalization of light and matter in cavity-coupled Rydberg arrays
Aleksandr N. Mikheev,1 Hossein Hosseinabadi,1 and Jamir Marino1, ∗
1Institut für Physik, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz, Staudingerweg 7, 55128 Mainz, Germany
We explore the dynamics of two-dimensional Rydberg atom arrays coupled to a single-mode optical cavity,
employing nonequilibrium diagrammatic techniques to capture nonlinearities and fluctuations beyond mean-
field theory. We discover a novel prethermalization regime driven by the interplay between short-range Rydberg
interactions and long-range photon-mediated interactions. In this regime, matter and light equilibrate at dis-
tinct—and in some cases opposite—effective temperatures, resembling the original concept of prethermalization
from particle physics. Our results establish strongly correlated AMO platforms as tools to investigate funda-
mental questions in statistical mechanics, including quantum thermalization in higher-dimensional systems.
Introduction
Finding mechanisms to avoid rapid thermal-
ization in higher-dimensional quantum many-body systems
remains a major open challenge in quantum statistical me-
chanics [1–4].
Unlike their one-dimensional counterparts,
two- or three-dimensional quantum systems present signifi-
cant conceptual and practical challenges. Central to these dif-
ficulties is the lack of a definition of quantum integrability be-
yond one dimension [5–8]. The latter serves as a foundation
for understanding ergodicity through integrability-breaking
[9–11], which lies at the root of most of the experimental
demonstrations of prethermalization [12–15].
Currently studied models, such as the quenched two-
dimensional quantum Ising lattice, quickly thermalize, pre-
senting a plain dynamical phase diagram [16–23]. Notable
distinctions are confinement [24] and the intrusion of domain
walls [4, 25], which can trap the system into a long-lived non-
thermal state. While in one dimension prethermalization can
arise simply from weak integrability breaking [26–33], the sit-
uation appears more intricate in higher dimensions. To date,
explored scenarios include initial conditions with nontrivial
topological structure [34–37], kinetic constraints that restrict
access to the full phase space [38–44], and the emergence of
nonthermal fixed points that induce self-similar scaling in the
dynamics, thereby delaying thermalization [45–52]. Comple-
mentary to the latter, quenching a system at the critical point
(or across it) remains an ever-green option to induce prether-
mal dynamical scaling in the form of aging or coarsening [53–
58]. The intense focus on prethermalization is not only con-
ceptually significant: avoiding rapid thermalization is essen-
tial for implementing meaningful many-body quantum infor-
mation tasks.
In this work, we take a route inspired by strongly corre-
lated AMO physics to achieve prethermalization of light and
matter in a platform receiving increasing experimental atten-
tion for its quantum processing role [59–67]. Specifically,
we promote Rydberg atom arrays embedded in optical cavi-
ties (see Fig. 1(a)) as a paradigmatic model for exploring di-
verse thermalization dynamics in two dimensions. We demon-
strate that the competition between short-range Rydberg in-
teractions and photon-mediated long-range interactions leads
to diverse dynamical responses. Depending on their relative
strengths, the system either rapidly thermalizes or evolves into
long-lived, nonthermal states. Remarkably, in the Rydberg-
κ
κ
g
ω0
λ
fast thermalization
Tlight = Tmatter > 0
prethermalization
Tlight > 0, Tmatter < 0
(a)
(b)
λ
g
FIG. 1.
(a) A two-dimensional Rydberg atomic array in a
single-mode optical cavity.
Rydberg interactions λ induce anti-
ferromagnetism between spins on neighboring sites, which competes
against the long-range photon-mediated interaction of strength g.
Photons leak from the cavity at rate κ. (b) Cartoon of the dynam-
ical phase diagram. When photon-mediated long-range interaction
plays the dominant role, the model displays fast thermalization, with
matter and light quickly reaching the same temperature. In the oppo-
site regime, light and matter prethermalize at different temperatures,
featuring regimes where the atoms can stay trapped in a metastable
state characterized by a negative effective temperature.
dominated regime, we identify a novel prethermalization sce-
nario where matter and radiation equilibrate independently
at distinct temperatures, sometimes even reaching metastable
states characterized by spins equilibrating at negative temper-
atures while the photon field remains at positive temperatures
(see Fig. 1(b)). Intriguingly, this appears close to the original
concept of prethermalization in particle physics [68], where
distinct system components transiently equilibrate at separate
temperatures before achieving global thermal equilibrium (for
a related mechanism in one dimensional quantum conden-
sates, see Refs. [69, 70]).
This rich variety of dynamics emerges just through
a straightforward modification of the paradigmatic two-
dimensional quantum Ising model. The key difference is that
the transverse field, instead of being fixed, is determined self-
consistently by light-matter exchange, showing that even the
minimal inclusion of a photon in two-dimensional quantum
arXiv:2504.06267v1  [cond-mat.stat-mech]  8 Apr 2025
