4. Discussion
Using our modiﬁcation [17, 18] of the machine learning method proposed
in Ref. [11], we perform extrapolations to the inﬁnitely large model space of
the NCSM results for energies E and rms point-proton rp, point-neutron rn,
and point-nucleon (matter) rm radii of the 6He nucleus in the ground state
and in the three lowest states of the 6Li nucleus. The NCSM calculations
were performed using the Daejeon16 NN interaction in model spaces up
to Nmax = 18.
The training datasets for the neural networks consist of
the NCSM parameters Nmax and ℏΩalongside with corresponding computed
values of E (or rp, rn, or rm).
The key innovation of our method is the training of an ensemble of arti-
ﬁcial neural networks based on a preprocessing of training data, ﬁltering
trained networks according to rigorous selection criteria, and performing
statistical post-processing of the accepted predictions.
The extrapolation
algorithm is implemented using Python with open-source machine learning
libraries, including Keras [22], TensorFlow [23], and TensorFlow Addons [27].
The predictions for the ground state energies of 6Li and 6He exhibit a
good convergence. By extrapolations utilizing the largest training dataset
including the NCSM results in model spaces up to Nu
max = 18 we obtain
E(6Li) = −32.036 ± 0.003 MeV and E(6He) = −29.429+0.007
−0.005 MeV. The pre-
diction uncertainties are comparable to the numerical accuracy of NCSM
calculations (1 keV) and do not exceed the uncertainties of the machine
learning extrapolations ISU-a, ISU-b and TUDa. However, as it was shown
in Refs. [17, 18], at all values of Nu
max, our extrapolation results lie systemat-
ically higher than those of ISU-a including the uncertainties. This suggests
that diﬀerent machine learning extrapolation approaches may lead to sys-
tematically diﬀerent results. It is interesting that our prediction for the 6Li
ground state energy is consistent with the ISU-b prediction which uncertainty
is, however, nearly an order of magnitude larger. Notably, due to the larger
number of trained and selected neural networks in our study, the statistical
reliability of our predictions is higher than those of ISU-a and ISU-b. The
convergence trends of the TUDa approach for the energies is similar to ours
but the ﬁnal TUDa result suggests less binding of the 6Li nucleus and does
not overlap with ours accounting for the uncertainties.
The prediction uncertainty for rms point-proton, point-neutron and point-
nucleon (matter) radii is slightly larger, approximately 1%, yet the overall
convergence remains satisfactory.
Our results for the radii of 6He are in
14
