On the right-hand side of the dynamics for Passer and Mover [eq. (1e)], social force terms appear. First
two terms correspond to the confinement mechanism. One of the two is the returning force ⃗F return, which is an
elastic attraction towards the court. It acts independently along x and y axes, which are parallel to the court
boundary (Fig. 6). Along x direction, the returning force is modelled by Hooke’s law regarding the distance
from the origin, which is at the centre of the court, with the natural length of (L −Lbuff)/2:
F return
x
(x) :=







−sign(x)kr
|x| −(L −Lbuff)/2
Lbuff/2
,
|x| ≥L −Lbuff
2
0,
|x| < L −Lbuff
2
.
(4)
The same applies along y direction. The natural length of (L −Lbuff)/2, not L/2, reflects players’ tendency to
stand slightly within the court, not exactly on the boundary. We note that the displacement is normalized by
Lbuff/2. We chose Lbuff to be 50 cm throughout this study. The other component of the confinement mechanism
is the viscous force ⃗F viscous, which takes effect only in the neighbourhood of the court boundary (Fig. 6, gray
area). It acts on x and y directions independently as well, taking the form of nonlinear viscosity. Along x axis,
it is described as
F viscous
x
(x, vx) :=





−γ(vx)3,
|x| ∈
L −Lbuff
2
, L + Lbuff
2

0,
otherwise,
(5)
where vx stands for x component of the player’s velocity. The same holds along y direction. Buffer width
Lbuff is the width of the viscous region, centred around the court boundary. For a player’s outward motion, the
viscous force prevents the player from going out. For the inward motion, it reduces the influence of the returning
force on the dynamics inside the court. The remaining term ⃗G can be any function of the state vector ⃗un and
parameters ⃗θ and ⃗λn. In our model, two social forces were included: the evading force ⃗F evade and the following
force ⃗F follow. With the two terms, we incorporated dyadic interactions between OF and DF and among OFs.
The evading force ⃗F evade models OF’s tendency to stay away from DF. It resembles a linear spring with the
natural length of Le between DF and the focal player, who is either Passer or Mover (Fig. 6, orange dash-dotted
line):
⃗F evade(⃗x, ⃗xD) := −ke(∥⃗x −⃗xD∥−Le) ⃗x −⃗xD
∥⃗x −⃗xD∥.
(6)
The following force ⃗F follow aims to model OF’s behaviour to prepare for the next pass scene. As Receiver surely
gives the next pass, we assumed other OFs would adjust their positions in relation to Receiver. To keep our
model simple, we approximated this behaviour by a linear spring with the natural length of Lf (Fig. 6, blue
dotted line):
⃗F follow(⃗x, ⃗xR) := −kf(∥⃗x −⃗xR∥−Lf) ⃗x −⃗xR
∥⃗x −⃗xR∥.
(7)
Governing equations for Receiver, DF and the ball are first-order ODEs [eqs. (1a), (1b) and (1c)], which may
be regarded as the overdamped limit of Newtonian equations of motion, so as to reduce the complexity of our
model. On the other hand, the governing equations for Passer and Mover [eqs. (1d) and (1e)] take the form of
Newtonian equation of motion. This is because we are primarily interested in the offensive team performance,
which we expect to be strongly affected by the off-the-ball movements of Passer and Mover.
At step 3 (Fig. 2 b), the termination conditions are evaluated. If a condition is satisfied, the simulation
ends. We introduced three termination conditions: pass intercept, ball-out, and the maximum number of passes.
The n-th pass is considered to be intercepted, if the ball has been closer to DF than the threshold Lict during
tn ∈[0, T]. Similarly, we say the ball went out of the court during the n-th pass if the ball went further than
the threshold distance Lout from the court during tn ∈[0, T]. In these cases, the number of successful passes
of this game would be n −1. Finally, the simulation is terminated when the number of passes reaches 20 in
accordance with the experiment’s setting.
Step 4 concerns the transition from the n-th to (n + 1)-th pass scene. Pass-specific parameters and initial
conditions must be determined based on the state at the end of the previous pass scene. First, roles among
OFs switch. Obviously, Receiver of the n-th pass becomes Passer of the (n + 1)-th pass. Between the remaining
two OFs, we postulate that the one with a wider pass course is more likely to become the next Receiver. This
feature is implemented by defining the probability that the current Passer becomes the next Receiver as
pP→R :=
exp(β∠PRD)
exp(β∠MRD) + exp(β∠PRD),
(8)
13
