6
FIG. 4. a Effect of drive and pump power on Floquet frequency comb generation at m = −1, 0, +1(Red, purple, blue).The
colored regions indicate the generated regime, whereas the white areas represent the absence of a detectable frequency comb.
The green dashed line represents the power range selected for subsequent analysis. b Example frequency comb at m = −1:
frequency domain, time domain signals (Red: real part; Blue: imaginary part) and phase space trajectories.
c Effect of
modulation intensity on the relative magnitudes of the frequency comb components, with error bars representing standard
deviations.
The gray lines indicate the comb teeth corresponding to different drive powers.
The gradient-colored points
represent the peak values of the corresponding comb teeth. The numbers are annotated with m, and data points for the same
m are connected by black lines.
We further demonstrate the effect of modulation
strength for the m = −1 case with Pp = 0 dBm, shown
in Fig. 4c. As the modulation strength increases, the
Floquet cavity’s ability to scatter photons into higher-
order sidebands strengthens, resulting in a decrease in
the intensity of the peak at m = 0 and an increase in
the intensities of peaks at m = ±1, ±2, . . .. With fur-
ther increase in modulation strength, the intensity of the
lower-order sidebands stabilizes and begins to decrease,
while the effect of higher-order sidebands becomes more
pronounced. At higher Pd values, it is noteworthy that
the intensity of m = −1 exhibits an anomalous increase.
This deviation is due to amplifier modifications at high
powers, with the m = −1 mode overlapping with the
pump signal, preventing it from following the expected
intensity decrease in sync with m = +1.
Discussion
We have proposed and demonstrated a new type of fre-
quency comb via Floquet engineering. The approach de-
veloped in this work not only offers a threshold-less route
for frequency comb emission but also significantly broad-
ens the frequency tuning range. This advancement paves
the way for the efficient generation and control of fre-
quency combs, making them more suitable for low-power
regimes required by sensitive systems.
For example,
in superconducting quantum computing devices, com-
ponents such as superconducting resonators and qubits
cannot operate under high photon inputs and cryogenic
amplifiers have typically low saturation powers. More-
over, the generation of Floquet frequency comb is not lim-
ited to microwave optomechanical systems. Due to con-
straints on the extent to which the mechanical oscillator
is driven, our demonstration shows only a few character-
istic comb teeth. However, by optimizing stronger mod-
ulation sources, the number of frequency comb teeth can
be rapidly expanded, with potential for self-referencing.
Floquet frequency combs can be realized and applied in
various systems exhibiting periodic modulation, such as
SQUIDs [57], trapped ions, time crystals [58], and molec-
ular or atomic systems [59], particularly in the optical do-
main. This holds promise for extending the capabilities of
frequency combs in high dimensional quantum states [60],
entanglement generation [32, 33], and integrated multi-
frequency signal sources across more systems [57, 61].
Method
Floquet giant-mode cavity
Considering the Floquet Cavity Hamiltonian, the gen-
eral form of the steady-state solution |ψα, t⟩to the
Schr¨odinger equation can be written as
