Dynamics of critical cascades in interdependent networks
Dolev Dilmoney,1 Bnaya Gross,2, 3 Shlomo Havlin,1 and Nadav M. Shnerb1
1Department of Physics, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan IL52900, Israel.
2Network Science Institute, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115
3Department of Physics, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115
The collapse of interdependent networks, as well as similar avalanche phenomena, is driven by
cascading failures. At the critical point, the cascade begins as a critical branching process, where
each failing node (element) triggers, on average, the failure of one other node. As nodes continue to
fail, the network becomes increasingly fragile and the branching factor grows. If the failure process
does not reach extinction during its critical phase, the network undergoes an abrupt collapse. Here,
we implement the analogy between this dynamic and birth-death processes to derive new analytical
results and significantly optimize numerical calculations. Using this approach, we analyze three key
aspects of the dynamics: the probability of collapse, the duration of avalanches, and the length of
the cascading plateau phase preceding a collapse. This analysis quantifies how system size and the
intensity of the initial triggering event influence these characteristics.
Network science has experienced remarkable develop-
ment in recent decades, finding extensive applications
across various fields, including the study of neural, social,
metabolic, and communication networks [1, 2]. Within
this domain, the topic of interdependent networks has
gained significant attention in recent years [3]. This con-
cept has also found a wide range of applications, from
critical infrastructures and cybersecurity to the dynamics
of ecological communities [4–6]. Recent work has effec-
tively demonstrated the key features of interdependent
network collapse using a clear and physically straightfor-
ward experimental model, which involves thermally con-
nected layers of amorphous superconductors [7].
Interdependent networks are characterized by two
types of links: connectivity links within each network
and dependency links between nodes of different net-
works. Each link type serves a distinct role. Connectiv-
ity links are understood as in standard percolation prob-
lems, so nodes that disconnect from the giant connected
component (GCC) of their network are considered non-
functional. Dependency links, on the other hand, propa-
gate damage between the networks: if a node in one net-
work fails, its dependent node in the other network will
fail as well, even if it is still connected to the GCC of its
own network (see Figure 1(a)). When nodes are removed
from one network, the interplay between these two types
of links can trigger a cascading failure. Therefore, while
a single network experiences a continuous second-order
transition in which the GCC collapses when 1−pc of the
nodes are removed, interdependent networks undergo an
abrupt, first order transition, at ˜p > pc (Figure 1(b)) [3].
These cascading failures are a general characteristic of
avalanche phenomena [8], which have also been exten-
sively studied in recent decades in various contexts such
as magnetic materials, plastic distortions, crack propa-
gation, earthquakes, neural networks and so on [9–13].
In all these systems, a failure or change in the state of a
single component, such as a spin, imposes ’pressure’ on
adjacent components, and a critical point in parameter
space separates localized avalanches from widespread col-
lapses. Such cascades are mathematically analogous to
stochastic birth-death processes, where individuals can
produce a random number of offspring [11, 14–17].
In this Letter, we aim to examine the analogy between
demographic processes and the dynamics of cascading
failures. In particular, we will focus on the critical point,
where the corresponding dynamics begins as a neutral
birth-death process [18–21] but, over time, diverges from
neutrality.
We will implement this analogy to derive
novel qualitative and quantitative insights.
Specifically, our study addresses three crucial ques-
tions: First, how does the likelihood of a collapse change
in relation to the scale of the initial attack? Second, the
impact of this initial attack size on the ’plateau time’ —
the period of slow dynamics preceding the collapse (Fig-
ure 1(c)). Third, we examine how the initial attack size
impacts the mean ’avalanche time,’ the duration until an
avalanche ends, whether or not it causes collapse.
From Nodes to Generations:– As depicted in Figure
1(a), damage cascades reciprocally between dependent
networks, with each failed node having a chance P1→m of
triggering the failure of m nodes within the same network
in the subsequent iteration.
With a sufficiently large
number of nodes, N, and a small number of failed nodes,
failures are uncorrelated. Consequently, at the t-th step,
if the count of failed nodes is nt, then nt+1—the tally
of failed nodes in the subsequent step in the same net-
work—is the sum of nt independent variables, following a
probability distribution function of P1→m (see Appendix
A). Hence, this branching process mirrors a demographic
dynamics, where nodes represent individuals and iter-
ations are equivalent to generations (Figure 1(d)). At
p = ˜p, the process is neutral, meaning that during the
plateau (Figure 1(c)), the mean number of offspring per
node is one.
The “population dynamics” of nt is influenced by demo-
graphic stochasticity, namely the binomial noise associ-
ated with the randomness of the birth-death process, and
to deterministic forces that yield exponential growth (if
m > 1) or exponential decay (if m < 1). At ˜p the growth
rate vanishes, and the dynamics is neutral: the number
of failures in each generation, n, is (on average) time-
arXiv:2504.06862v1  [physics.soc-ph]  9 Apr 2025
