For derivative electron couplings, ref. [37] takes into account the loop-induced ALP-
photon interactions, while for pseudoscalar couplings between electrons and ALPs, we
show the tree-level-only result from ref. [37] as a gray dashed line in the right panel of
figure 10. However, omitting the loop-induced photon coupling in the latter case is not
a strictly conservative assumption since ALPs are not only produced through interactions
with photons but can also be reabsorbed before leaving the neutrinosphere, leading to
a weaker constraint for comparably large couplings. Hence, these constraints should be
viewed as an approximation indicating the order-of-magnitude at which SN constraints
become relevant.3
For interactions with muons, the cooling constraint on the derivative coupling was
presented in ref. [82]. The constraint is, in principle, different for pseudoscalar couplings
since the differing loop-induced photon coupling significantly affects the upper end of the
bound for 5 MeV ≲ma ≲2mµ ≃211 MeV. For this case, ref. [83] gives a rough estimate
of the cooling constraint in the “axion-sphere” approximation. They also derive an esti-
mated bound from the ALPs transferring energy into the mantle of the progenitor star,
which would contribute to the explosion energy of the circumstellar material. For typical
supernovae such as SN 1987A, this explosion energy is observed to be around 1051 erg. For
ma ≲10 MeV, ref. [83] estimates that ALPs decaying into photons in the progenitor mantle
yield a contribution larger than the observed value unless gaµ/mµ ≳0.91 · 10−3 GeV−1.
We show this constraint in the right panel of figure 11.
For ALPs coupled only to tau leptons, one can safely integrate them out, given that
the tau mass is much larger than typical temperatures reached in the proto-neutron star.
This leaves only a constant on-shell coupling to photons for the pseudoscalar case, which is
constrained by the usual analyses, while for the derivative case, the coupling is suppressed
by m2
a/m2
τ. In the universal coupling case, production from electrons, muons, and the
loop-induced photon interaction (also receiving a contribution from gaτ) have to be taken
into account, and the same holds true for reabsorption and decay events. Thus, neither of
the bounds on electron or muon couplings are accurate estimates for this case.
4.6
Proton beam-dump experiments and forward-physics detectors
Proton beam dump experiments provide sensitive probes of the effective ALP-photon cou-
pling [84, 85]. A detailed reinterpretation of these constraints in the context of leptophilic
3In the final stages of this project, a preprint [44] was submitted to the arXiv, presenting a new analysis
of the SN constraints on ALP couplings to electrons. Importantly, the authors claim that the loop-induced
photon coupling is irrelevant in the SN plasma due to the thermal mass of electrons being larger than
its vacuum mass.
Consequently, they ignore the effective photon interaction for ALP production and
absorption. A discussion of the thermal quantum field theory of ALP interactions is beyond the scope of
this paper and to the best of our knowledge, the full one-loop determination of ALP-photon interactions
in thermal quantum field theory starting from either eq. (2.1) or (2.4) is not known so far. However, we
remark that in much of the relevant parameter space, as well as in important regions of the SN plasma, ALP
mass and/or temperature are significantly larger than the thermal electron mass. Thus, even if the thermal
electron mass is naively plugged into the vacuum ALP-photon interaction vertex in eq. (2.25), which seems
to be the suggestion in ref. [44], the effective photon coupling should not be suppressed but instead take on
its constant, maximal value in the case of a derivative coupling, see sec. 2.2.
– 22 –
