3.1
Standard resetting
The ﬁrst question a practitioner might ask is whether resetting would accelerate a stochas-
tic process. In the context of enhanced sampling this would mean reducing the MFPT for
transitions between two metastable states separated by a free energy barrier. Fortunately,
Reuveni et al. derived a universal suﬃcient condition to answer such questions, requiring lit-
tle knowledge of the ﬁrst-passage process.43,71 The ﬁrst two moments of the FPT distribution
determine whether resetting would be beneﬁcial: if the standard deviation σ is larger than
the mean µ, introducing a small ﬁnite resetting rate is guaranteed to lower the MFPT for
any stochastic process. This condition is often written in terms of the coeﬃcient of variation
(COV),
COV = σ
µ > 1,
(1)
which is known as the COV condition, or the COV test. As it only depends on the ﬁrst
two moments, a few samples of ﬁrst-passage events without resetting provide an adequate
estimation of the COV, and are enough to assess whether resetting should be used.
Next, we would like to know what resetting rate to use. We summarize results for the
two best-studied protocols of resetting. The ﬁrst is Poisson resetting, where time durations
T between resets are taken from an exponential distribution with rate r, f(T) = r exp(−rT).
The MFPT under Poisson resetting is related to the FPT distribution without resetting f (τ)
through72
⟨τ⟩r = 1 −˜f(r)
r ˜f(r)
.
(2)
Here, ˜f(r) is the Laplace transform of f (τ),
˜f(r) =
Z ∞
0
e−rτf (τ) dτ = ⟨e−rτ⟩≈1
N
N
X
i=1
e−rτi,
(3)
which, in the context of enhanced sampling, is estimated numerically from i = 1, 2, . . . , N
FPT samples τi.
A second common resetting protocol is sharp resetting, where the time duration T = 1/r
between restarts is constant. The MFPT under sharp resetting is73
⟨τ⟩T =
1
1 −S(T)
T
Z
0
S(t)dt,
(4)
where S(t) is the survival function of the process without resetting,
S(t) = 1 −
t
Z
0
f(τ)dτ ≈1 −N {τ|τ < t}
N
,
(5)
with N {τ|τ < t} being the number of samples for which τi < t. Thus, given some samples
of ﬁrst-passage events without resetting, one can estimate the MFPT under resetting for any
6
