Johanna Müller-Horn et al.: HIP 15429: a newborn Be star on an eccentric binary orbit
tation used for both line-broadening mechanisms is an adaption
of the Fortran code rotin3 to Python, and the best-fitting pa-
rameters for each absorption line were determined from a least-
squares fit.
For a fixed macroturbulent velocity of vmac = 0 km s−1, the
resulting weighted mean and standard deviation over all lines
of the best-fit rotational velocities is vrot sin i = 29 ± 1 km s−1.
In contrast, for vanishing rotation (vrot sin i = 0 km s−1), we find
vmac = 33 ± 1 km s−1. Leaving both parameters to vary freely
produces degenerate results, with vrot sin i in the range of 5 to
19 km s−1 and values for vmac between 26 and 49 km s−1. The
results are illustrated for the Si III 4552 Å line in Fig. E.1 in the
Appendix.
Given the degeneracy between macroturbulent and rotational
broadening, we only place an upper limit on the rotation of the
B star at vrot sin i ≲30 km s−1 and proceed with median values
of vrot sin i = 10 km s−1 and vmac = 30 km s−1 for the rest of the
analysis. If the B star were tidally synchronised from a recent
mass transfer phase, it would be expected to rotate with vrot ≡
2πR∗/P ≈2 km s−1 , with R∗the stellar radius.
6.1.4. Stellar abundances
The initial comparison with a reference star of approximately
solar metallicity and composition (Sect. 3) suggested a peculiar
abundance pattern in the narrow-lined star. In particular, it indi-
cated significant carbon and oxygen depletion in the star’s pho-
tosphere. Spectral analysis confirms this and further shows that
nitrogen is enhanced in the narrow-lined star, evident from the
stronger nitrogen lines in the disentangled spectrum compared
to the solar abundance model (Fig. 7). The enhanced nitrogen
was not clearly visible in the composite spectrum (Fig. 2) due to
the Be companion’s flux contribution but becomes apparent from
the disentangled spectrum. The observed abundance pattern – ni-
trogen enhancement along with carbon and oxygen depletion –
is consistent with that seen in other bloated stripped stars (Bo-
densteiner et al. 2020a; El-Badry & Quataert 2021; Villaseñor
et al. 2023; Ramachandran et al. 2024).
The Balmer lines are well reproduced in the model spectra
by construction, since they were used to determine the flux ra-
tio. However, the helium lines in the disentangled spectrum are
significantly stronger than in the solar abundance model, indi-
cating an elevated helium mass fraction and corresponding hy-
drogen depletion. To estimate the degree of hydrogen depletion,
we computed additional model spectra for the best-fit Teff and
log g, varying the hydrogen mass fraction between X = 0.01 and
X = 0.7 in steps of 0.1 (see Appendix D for details). We adopted
the X = 0.3 model as our fiducial model, as it best reproduces the
observed equivalent widths of helium lines (see Figures 7 and
D.1). This corresponds to a helium enhancement factor of 2.8
relative to solar values, higher than what has been reported for
other bloated stripped stars (Bodensteiner et al. 2020a; El-Badry
& Quataert 2021; Villaseñor et al. 2023; Ramachandran et al.
2024). The He abundance estimate is sensitive to the flux ratio
of the two components. Our reported flux ratio uncertainty of ap-
proximately 0.08 translates to an uncertainty in the estimated He
mass fraction of about ±0.1.
Regarding the individual metal abundances, our stripped-star
models assume a carbon depletion factor of 0.29 and a slightly
subsolar oxygen abundance (factor of 0.86). The carbon and
oxygen lines in the observed spectrum are weaker than in the
models, indicating even lower actual abundances for these ele-
ments. In contrast, the nitrogen lines are well matched by the
models, with an assumed enhancement factor of 10, implying
a carbon-to-nitrogen ratio at least 34 times lower than the solar
value. Other elements, such as silicon and magnesium, appear to
be at approximately solar levels, with their absorption lines well
reproduced in the models.
Overall, the observed abundance pattern suggests the pres-
ence of material processed via the CNO cycle in the convective
core during the main sequence. This is consistent with the sce-
nario where the donor star’s core was exposed in the photosphere
when the star lost its outer layers during a mass-transfer phase.
6.2. The broad-lined Be star
The Be nature of the secondary star is apparent from the broad-
lined emission in the Balmer lines. However, spectral analysis is
complicated by the otherwise shallow absorption lines. The only
clear absorption lines in the spectrum come from the H Balmer
lines, He I absorption and a Mg II line at 4481 Å.
We started by qualitatively comparing the disentangled spec-
trum to the archival spectra of classical Be stars with known
spectral types. A comparison of the HIP 15429 Be star spectrum
to HD 45871 is shown in Fig. 8. HD 45871 is a B3Ve star with
measured temperature of Teff = (20 ± 0.5) kK, surface gravity
of log g = 3.72 ± 0.10 and vrot sin i = (275 ± 15) km s−1 (Lev-
enhagen & Leister 2006). The similarities between the absorp-
tion lines and the line profiles suggest a similar spectral type and
properties for the HIP 15429 Be companion.
For a more quantitative fit of the stellar parameters, we
compared the disentangled spectrum to the BSTAR2006 grid
of Tlusty model atmospheres (Lanz & Hubeny 2007). We
continuum-normalised the model spectra in the same way as the
observed spectra and resampled them to the same wavelength
grid as the disentangled spectrum.
6.2.1. Temperature and surface gravity
Similarly to what was done for the analysis of the narrow-lined
star, we estimated the effective temperature based on the equiv-
alent width ratios of different absorption lines. In the absence of
suitable Si II, Si III or Fe lines, we opted for the ratio of Mg II
to He I at 4481 and 4472 Å, respectively. For the narrow-lined
B star, we could estimate the surface gravity on the basis of the
width of the Balmer line wings. As explained in Sect. 5, this is
not feasible for the broad-lined Be star because the Balmer lines,
including Hγ and Hδ, in the disentangled spectrum are likely
compromised by variable emission from the circumstellar disk.
Instead we assume that the Be star has surface gravity typical of
a B-type main-sequence star on the order of log g ≈4.0. From
Figures 6 and F.2, we see that for a plausible range of surface
gravities 3.5 ≲log g ≲4.5, the best-fit temperature is in the
range 16 to 19 kK. We assumed these parameter ranges for the
further analysis, but point out the substantial uncertainties.
6.2.2. Rotational velocity
Following the same approach used for the narrow-lined star, we
determined the rotational velocity of the Be star by fitting in-
dividual absorption lines in the spectrum. We used the Tlusty
model spectrum with Teff = 17 kK, log g = 4.0 and convolved
it with a rotational kernel (Gray 2005) with varying values of
vrot sin i. A best fit is determined by minimising least squares.
Because of the low S/N and strong rotation, the macroturbulent
velocity of the Be star cannot be meaningfully constrained. We
therefore set it at a fixed value of 50 km/s (following, e.g., Ra-
Article number, page 9 of 28
