7
Eq. 5. Following the discussion in Sec. III A, we conclude
that the mapping relation in Eq. 10 should still hold.
2.
Same kz
Meanwhile, the π-junction can feature two critical
points at opposite ky, yet the same kz.
For example,
kc = (k0, 0). It is convenient to assign a new valley in-
dex to the low-energy Dirac fermions associated with the
JT gap closures at ky = ±k0, respectively. We employ
the Pauli matrix σi to denote the valley degree of free-
dom. Then an effective Hamiltonian for the critical pair
is given by
hp,0(k∥, µ) = σ0 ⊗hs,0(k∥, µ),
(11)
which is compatible with the valley-flipping TRS Θ =
iσx ⊗τ0 ⊗syK and PHS Ξ = σx ⊗τx ⊗s0K.
The next step is to complete the dimensional reduc-
tion.
Under the low-energy Dirac basis, the ˆy pairing
domain generally takes the form of hp,1 = ˜∆sgn(y)Ω.
Notably, the ˆy translational symmetry breaking of hp,1
arises from the domain-wall structure of the sign func-
tion sgn(y), instead of the projected pairing matrix Ω.
Physically, this implies Ωto be intra-valley and hence
Ω∼σ0,z.
Following both symmetries constraints and
Clifford algebra, it is quite straightforward to show that
the only reasonable choice is
hp,1 = ˜∆sgn(y)σ0 ⊗τx ⊗sy.
(12)
Remarkably, hp = hp,0+hp,1 exactly consists of two iden-
tical copies of hs = hs,0 +hs,1. Hence, the corresponding
VLT transition is given by
˜hp(kz, µ) = σ0 ⊗˜hs(kz, µ),
(13)
which describes two independent CdGM gap closings at
the same µ(J)
c
.
From a different perspective, ˜hp(kz, µ) is a 4-fold-
degenerate 2D Dirac fermion that is generally unstable.
Indeed, we can perturb ˜hp(kz, µ) with δσx ⊗ρz and split
its high degeneracy without (i) breaking any of the key
symmetries such as PHS. The CdGM states then dis-
perse following E(kz, µ) = ±
p
k2z + (µ ± δ)2, where we
find two VLT transitions at
µ(v)
c,+/−= µ(J)
c
± δ.
(14)
Here, the splitting δ is a material-dependent parameter,
which should be small compared to other energy scales
such as Fermi energy and bandwidth.
C.
Effect of rotation symmetries
When the π-junction and the vortex line both respect
a two-fold rotation symmetry C2z, we could make a
stronger statement regarding the nature of the above µ-
splitting VLT transitions from an off-TRIM JT critical
pair. To see this, we can simply repeat the dimensional
reduction procedure in Sec. III B 2 by including an addi-
tional C2z operation.
Starting from the JT effective theory in Eq. 11, we note
that a proper choice of C2z for the π-junction is given by
C2z = iσx ⊗τz ⊗sy, which not only exchanges the valley
indices but also fulfills [C2z, Θ] = {C2z, Ξ} = 0. Cru-
cially, the ˆy-direction domain-wall term hp,1 also com-
mutes with this representation of C2z. After the dimen-
sional reduction, we arrive at the VLT transitions de-
scribed by Eq. 13. Upon a similar zero-mode projection
to that in Sec. III A, we find that the two-fold rotation for
the vortex modes is C2z = σx⊗ρ0. Since the vortex phase
winding introduces a π-twist in the fermionic boundary
condition, we have dropped a factor of i in the repre-
sentation of C2z to ensure (C2z)2 = 1 and [C2z, Ξ] = 0.
Together with Eq. 14, we find that each of the VLT tran-
sitions manifests as the crossing of two CdGM bands with
the same C2z index, one with C2z = 1 and another with
C2z = −1.
If the vortex line only respects C2z (but not a higher-
fold rotation), a VLT transition with C2z = +1 or −1
triggers a change of Z2 VLT topology in the Jz = 0 or
1 sector, respectively. In other words, with C2z, the off-
TRIM JT critical pair will correspond to two subsequent
Kitaev vortex transitions, one in the Jz = 0 sector and
another in Jz = 1. Meanwhile, when the vortex line is
C4z-symmetric, the VLT transition with C2z = 1 could
occur in Jz = 0 or 2 sector, both of which describe a
Kitaev vortex transition. Meanwhile, the VLT transition
with C2z = −1 is a nodal vortex transition with Jz = ±1.
Therefore, we arrive at a remarkable conclusion that will
play a crucial role in our later discussions:
• An off-TRIM JT critical pair necessarily implies
a Kitaev VLT transition and a consecutive nodal
VLT transition for a C4z-symmetric vortex line.
Finally, when the vortex line respects C6z, the VLT with
C2z = 1 can arise from either Jz = 0 (a Kitaev transition)
or Jz = ±2 (a nodal transition) sector. Similarly, the
VLT with C2z = −1 can arise from either Jz = 3 (a
Kitaev transition) or Jz = ±1 (a nodal transition) sector.
In this case, however, we are unable to precisely identify
the nature of VLT transitions based on the knowledge of
JT critical points.
D.
Criticality relations between JT and VLT
Let us now summarize our findings.
The analytical
results in Secs. III A and III B have together implied a
criticality conservation relation that generally holds:
• Every transition of the Josephson topology corre-
sponds to a vortex topological transition.
