Quantifying the electron delocalisation time
By decomposing the decay spectrum into its normal Auger-Meitner and spectator
components (Fig. 2), the characteristic delocalization time (often simply called the
charge transfer time), τD, for the X-ray excited Ar 4s electron can be determined[26]
(see Methods, Figs. S3, S4, and the accompanying discussion in the supplementary
information file). When adsorbed directly on a metal, the value of τD measured in
a
b
d
2S
2D
2,4P
shake-up
1S
1D
3P
Thick Ar@C60 film
On-resonance
ℏ𝜔= 245.3 eV
X-ray absorption:
Ar 2p3/2→ 4s 
FWHM: 
0.28 ± 0.01 eV
Spectator: 
fixed binding 
energy
Normal Auger-Meitner:
fixed kinetic energy
26
28
30
32
34
25
30
35
Binding energy (eV)
Binding energy (eV)
c
Ar 3s
Fig. 2 Timing electron delocalization in Ar@C60. (a) Ar 2p3/2 →4s partial electron yield
X-ray absorption spectrum (filled circles) with Lorentzian fit (red line). (b) Resonant Auger-Meitner
map showing intensity of decay spectra as a function of photon energy. Note that the X-ray absorption
spectrum shown in (a) both shares its photon energy axis with the resonant Auger-Meitner map
and is also the line-by-line integral of the map. (A total electron yield spectrum is included in the
Supplementary Information (Fig. S2)). Normal Auger-Meitner transitions are at fixed kinetic energy
and therefore disperse diagonally with photon energy (red dashed lines), whereas the spectator peaks
are at fixed binding energy (blue dashed lines). For clarity, the dispersion (or lack thereof) of all peaks
is not shown. (c) Auger-Meitner electron spectra spanning ±400 mV either side of the resonance
condition (black line), in 100 mV increments. The Ar 3s peak intensity does not resonate and is
constant to within 5%, highlighting the negligible contribution of participator transitions to Ar core
hole decay. (Note that the map in (b) and the set of spectra in (c) were acquired from different, but
similarly prepared, Ar@C60 samples.) (d) On-resonance decay spectrum showing decomposition into
the various normal Auger-Meitner and spectator components. Following Karis et al.[37], we associate
the shake-up features at ∼32 eV and ∼34 eV binding energy with spectator intensity of 3p45s1
character. See S.I. for more detail on the fitting process. The map in (b) shares its binding energy
axis with the on-resonance spectrum shown in (d).
5
