where c0 and c2 must be positive in order to avoid tachyons. Note that, c0, c2 ≫1 gives m0, m2 ≪
Mp, which imply the existence of new physics beyond GR in the sub-Planckian regime. In fact,
as already mentioned, the quadratic curvature coefficients are expected to be large in order to
have a well-behaved QFT perturbative expansion. This feature can have extremely important
phenomenological implications, as we will show in Sec. 3.
Running couplings. Unlike Newton’s constant and the cosmological constant, which are not
characterized by a physical running [69,70], the quadratic curvature coefficients run as a function
of the physical energy or momentum. First computations of beta functions in quadratic gravity
trace back to forty years ago [41–43]. However, it has been recently claimed by [71, 72] that
these old results do not capture the true physical running of the couplings due to the fact that
tadpoles (that do not carry any physical momentum dependence) were inappropriately included
as contributions in the one-loop beta functions and infrared terms (that can be relevant in four-
derivative theories) were not taken into account. It is believed that further investigations are still
needed to definitively settle the question of what the physical gauge-independent beta functions
are for the quadratic curvature coefficients.
It is worth mentioning that both old and new calculations show the existence of asymptotically
free solutions for the couplings g0 and g2. Despite the fact that these couplings can flow to zero in
the infinite energy limit, it can be shown that the exclusive cross sections in quadratic gravity still
grow as a function of the energy [54]. In other words, the suppressed behavior of the interaction
couplings seems not to be sufficient to obtain a suppressed behavior of the amplitudes at high
energies. This might suggest that the concept of asymptotic freedom and the meaning of the UV
limit need to be rethought in a quantum-gravitational context; see Sec. 4 for further discussion.
All these theoretical aspects that we have briefly discussed completely distinguish quadratic
gravity from the EFT of GR. However, some skeptics may still wonder why these two theories
are so different if they both contain quadratic curvature operators in their actions (see Eqs. (7)
and (6)). Indeed, this question and its answer are often a source of confusion and misunderstand-
ing. Therefore, to better grasp the key features of quadratic gravity and the main differences
with the EFT of GR, we will now make an instructive comparison between the two theories.
2.2
Quadratic gravity vs EFT of general relativity
Let us imagine that we are interested in some physical process whose characteristic energy scale E
is much lower than the EFT cutoff, e.g. the Planck mass in pure Einstein’s gravity. Furthermore,
consider a quadratic curvature truncation of the EFT expansion (6), so that any EFT prediction
can be made up to an accuracy of the order of (E/Mp)4. Up to boundary terms, this truncated
EFT action has the same structure as that of quadratic gravity in (7). Then, an obvious question
to ask could be: Do these two actions describe the same physics in the sub-Planckian regime, i.e.
for energies E ≪Mp? The answer is NO, as we will now explain in detail.
8
