1 
AI analysis of medical images at scale as a health disparities probe: 
a feasibility demonstration using chest radiographs 
 
 
 
Authors: Heather M. Whitney*1, Hui Li1, Karen Drukker1, Elbert Huang2, Maryellen L. Giger1 
 
Affiliations 
1The University of Chicago, Department of Radiology, Chicago, IL, USA 
2The University of Chicago, Department of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA 
 
*first author 
 
Corresponding author: Heather Whitney (hwhitney@uchicago.edu),  
The University of Chicago 
Department of Radiology 
MC 2026 
5841 South Maryland Avenue   
Chicago, Illinois 60637 
(773) 702-6778 
ORCID 0000-0002-7258-1102 
 
Objectives: Health disparities (differences in non-genetic conditions that influence health) can be associated with 
differences in burden of disease by groups within a population. Social determinants of health (SDOH) are domains 
such as health care access, dietary access, and economics frequently studied for potential association with health 
disparities. Evaluating SDOH-related phenotypes using routine medical images as data sources may enhance health 
disparities research. We developed a pipeline for using quantitative measures automatically extracted from medical 
images as inputs into health disparities index calculations. 
Methods: Our study focused on the use case of two SDOH demographic correlates (sex and race) and data extracted 
from chest radiographs of 1,571 unique patients. The likelihood of severe disease within the lung parenchyma from 
each image type, measured using an established deep learning model, was merged into a single numerical image-based 
phenotype for each patient. Patients were then separated into phenogroups by unsupervised clustering of the image-
based phenotypes. The ‘health rate’ for each phenogroup was defined as the median image-based phenotype for each 
SDOH used as inputs to four imaging-derived health disparities indices (iHDIs): one absolute measure (between-
group variance) and three relative measures (index of disparity, Theil index, and mean log deviation). 
Results: The iHDI measures demonstrated feasible values for each SDOH demographic correlate, showing potential 
for medical images to serve as a novel probe for health disparities.  
Conclusions: Large-scale AI analysis of medical images can serve as a probe for a novel data source for health 
disparities research. 
Advances in knowledge: We have demonstrated the feasibility of using data extracted from medical images as 
inputs to health disparities indices, making possible their future use in data dashboards.  
 
Keywords: AI, health disparities, medical imaging, SDOH, health disparities 
 
