ix
Preface
Introduction.
Protons are the building blocks of the universe, and describing their dynamics
has been one of the main challenges in modern physics. The interpretation of the proton as
a composite state made of quarks and gluons is now firmly established and provides one of
the key elements behind the understanding of high energy physics measurements. The main
subject of this thesis are the collinear Parton Distribution Functions (PDFs), which enable
an effective description of the proton’s content in terms of the momentum carried by its
constituents. Their study lies at the intersections of theory and data analysis, requiring both
a precise understanding of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) and an accurate treatment of
experimental data. If beyond Standard Model phenomena will show up in collider experiments
only via indirect effects through complex patterns, having a clear understanding of the proton
substructure is indispensable. Hence, PDFs constitute a necessary ingredient to improve the
accuracy of high energy phenomenology and eventually detecting tiny but consistent deviations
from the Standard Model.
This thesis presents a collection of works aimed at providing more precise PDF determinations
by improving the accuracy of the theoretical calculations employed.
Outline of the thesis.
The thesis can be divided into two main parts: in the first part,
Chapters 1 and 2, I introduce the fundamental tools adopted in the studies I carried out during
my PhD, some of which are presented in the second part, Chapters 3 to 5. The latter are all
based on different projects I worked on within the NNPDF collaboration.
In Chapter 1, I review the theoretical formalism which is currently used to describe the high
energy scattering of lepton-proton and proton-proton systems. This is mainly based on QCD
and on the Factorization theorem, which allow the separation of quantities computable with
perturbative methods from non-perturbative objects encoding the long-distance dynamics
between the proton components. Collinear PDFs are an example of such objects: they are
currently not computable a priori but have to be fitted from high energy scattering data.
Chapter 2 focuses on the computational tools and methodological aspects of the NNPDF PDF
fitting framework. Specifically, I summarize the features of two main tools used to compute
PDF evolution and Deep Inelastic Scattering (DIS) cross-sections. I also discuss the treatment of
uncertainties and the fitting methodology, which employs an artificial neural network to model
the PDF functional form.
Chapter 3 contains a summary of my studies about intrinsic charm [1, 2]. The phenomenon of
intrinsic charm is purely a quantum mechanics effect that entails a non-vanishing contribution
