an efficient and systematic algorithm to compute indices for these lower order algebras3, espe-
cially for sixth-order traces. By contrast, we were able to do so for n ≥6, and the results may
be found in Appendix B (see [56] for an algorithm to compute trace identities of the defin-
ing and adjoint representation matrices for these untreated lower-order algebras). Therefore,
this work does not explicitly rule out algebras for n ≤5. These lower-order algebras could
be interesting to analyze, since the number of representations increases while the number of
constraint equations decreases with n due to accidental trace relations. We hope to return to
this in the future.
We will now give a few more details and the additional traces present in this case and
how have we dealt with them. Unlike the exceptional algebras just worked out, the classical
algebras do not share the same simplification of trace identities. The sixth-order trace of an
arbitrary representation r of SU(n) is
trr F 6 = u(1)
r tr F 6 + u(3)
r tr F 4 tr F 2 + u(5)
r (tr F 3)2 + u(8)
r (tr F 2)3,
(3.25)
with the coefficients u(i)
r
matching those introduced before in the factorization of Chern char-
acters (up to an irrelevant normalization). Similarly, for the fourth-order trace, we have
trr F 4 = u(12)
r
tr F 4 + u(14)
r
(tr F 2)2.
(3.26)
Our problem here amounts to exactly finding solutions to the homogeneous system (3.12).
Afterwards, we have to go through the inhomogeneous one, (3.13).
We have explicitly solved this problem for An≥5, ruling out all solutions except those that
can be straightforwardly embedded in M-theory. These solutions are listed below, although
their anomaly polynomials are not explicitly written down. To do this, one can follow the
same reasoning as in the previous Section of exceptional algebras which was fully worked out,
and the necessary Casimir invariants are found in Appendix B. Note that, in table 5, complex
representations r always appear together with their complex conjugate ¯r, as needed for them
to give rise to a real one as required in ten dimensions. Unlike for exceptional groups, we
have restricted ourselves to positive chirality representations only.
As is clear from the table, we found no solutions of positive chirality except the ones that
embed in E8. This mirrors what was happening in the exceptional groups.
3.5.2
Cn algebra
We now explore the simple algebra Cn for n ≥3, including a summary of results and their
embeddings within M-theory. We leave for future analysis the algebra Cn=2 for the same
reason previously mentioned in Section 3.5.1 (there is a lot of representations).
The set of homogeneous conditions that we have to solve comes from (3.12) with the
linear equation for u(5)
ri
trivially satisfied. This can be seen from (3.25) since the (tr F 3)2
3Except for SU(2) algebra, which does not have indices greater than order two, this analysis could in
principle be carried out. However, for computational reasons, we provide only a brief discussion in Subsection
3.5.4.
– 16 –
