Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
outputs, thereby enabling predictions based on past fluid data(Rao et al., 2023). For example, Deep-
ONet (Lu et al., 2021a), which is derived from the universal approximation theorem, employs a
branch-trunk architecture. FNO (Li et al., 2020) approximates the integral operator by employing
linear transformations in the Fourier space. U-FNO (Wen et al., 2022) and U-NO (Rahman et al.,
2022) enhance FNO with U-shaped multi-scale frameworks. Geo-FNO (Li et al., 2023b) handles
complex geometries by transforming irregular input physical domains into latent spaces with uni-
form grids. F-FNO (Tran et al., 2023) improves FNO through separable spectral layers and residual
connections. Additionally, MWT (Gupta et al., 2021) introduces a multiwavelet-based neural oper-
ator. LSM (Wu et al., 2023) decomposes complex nonlinear operators into multiple base operators,
using neural spectral blocks to solve high-dimensional PDEs. However, these methods do not ex-
plicitly model latent physical quantities, leading to a lack of physical interpretability. Overlooking
the fluid dynamics, they perform poorly in temporal extrapolation and spatial generalization.
Latent physical quantity modeling methods. This category of methods is based on existing NS
equations and explicitly models the required physical quantities, such as velocity, for fluid predic-
tion. One approach is to directly incorporate the NS solutions as parameters of the deep model and
formalize the constraints, e.g., PDEs, corresponding initial and observed data, as a loss function
(Raissi et al., 2019; 2020; Lu et al., 2021b). enabling the inference of latent physical quantities from
observed data. However, this method is not effective for predicting future fluid behavior. Another
approach is to approximate and simplify NS equations and estimate the fluid velocity field, then
use the velocity field and the simplified equations to predict future fluid behavior. For instance,
Zhang et al. (2022) initially provided estimates using an optical flow predictor constrained by the
NS equations. DVP (Deng et al., 2023) combines vortex particles with a vortex-to-velocity dynam-
ics mapping to capture complex flow dynamics. HelmFluid (Xing et al., 2024) integrates learned
Helmholtz dynamics to generate future fluid behavior. However, this method does not achieve ex-
plicit incorporating of the NS equations, lacking intuitiveness. In addition, since fluid dynamics is
a complex system involving the coupling of multiple physical quantities, models that rely solely on
the velocity field have inherent limitations.
3
PHYSICS-INFORMED NEURAL PREDICTOR
Let us consider a scenario: the transport of dye in water. The dye is transported and diffused with the
flow of water, and it does not affect the flow of the water. Under normal temperature and pressure,
water approximately satisfies the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations. We aim to predict the
future evolution of the dye concentration only based on observed dye concentration data, while also
estimating the unobserved velocity and pressure fields of the water as interpretable evidence.
Figure 2 illustrates the overall architecture of our PINP model. Herein, the dye flows from left to
right through a pipe with obstacles. The observed data includes dye concentration c and spatial
information ψ. Using these observed data, and based on a physics-informed neural network, we
simultaneously estimate the concentration field at time t′, as well as the underlying velocity and
pressure fields which are unmeasured. With these inferred fields and the Discrete PDEs Prediction
Network, we can predict the concentration field ˆc′ for the next time step.
In the Discrete PDEs Prediction Network, we construct the predictor using discretized PDEs. Since
this discretization naturally introduces numerical errors, we use a correction network to refine the
predicted concentration field, resulting in the final prediction ˆc′. Additionally, the simultaneously
estimated velocity and pressure fields at time t′ serve as interpretable evidence.
Notation. Throughout the paper, ∇= ∇x denotes spatial gradients, ˙c =
dc
dt time derivatives,
∇· u = tr(∇u) divergence, and · tensor inner product. k ∈{1, 2, ..., N} denotes the k-th frame,
tk the time of k-th frame, and ∆t the time interval between tk and tk+1.
3.1
DISCRETIZATION PDES
We considered the transport of a passive scalar c(x, t) ∈RH×W by a flow velocity field u(x, t) ∈
R2×H×W . The passive scalar is advected by the flow and diffused but has no dynamical effect on
the fluid motion itself, which satisfies the incompressible NS equations:
˙c(x, t) = −u(x, t) · ∇c(x, t) + Pe−1∇2c(x, t),
(1)
3
