9
−2
−1
0
1
2
E/∆0
0.0
1.5
3.0
4.5
6.0
7.5
9.0
10.5
g/ν0
(a)
N=24
N=32
N=48
N=64
N=96
N=128
N=192
−2
−1
0
1
2
E/∆0
(b)
FIG. 8. Order of taking the imaginary part. Density
of states of (a) d-wave and (b) nodeless anisotropic s-wave
superconductors computed using the mRes prescription where
the imaginary part in Eq. (9) was taken before applying the
prescription. The result should be insensitive to the order of
taking the imaginary part; which they are for larger N, vide
Figs. 5(a2) and (b2). Since Eq. (9) is ln-divergent, the results
for low values of N differ whilst still being an improvement
over the RSum method, vide Figs. 5(a1) and (b1).
B.
The order of integration and taking imaginary
part
We have seen in the examples above that it is the imag-
inary part of the integral that maps to the physical re-
sponse. In principle, there is a question whether the or-
der of taking the imaginary part and the integration are
interchangeable. The short answer is yes. This is guar-
anteed by the fact that the regulator η keeps everything
finite, in which case the order of operations commute.
Although the exact result (limit of N →∞) is the same
when computed in either ordering, it requires some care
when making an estimate with a discrete sum. And this
is of concern to us because our objective is to achieve
acceptable results in coarser grids.
To this effect, if the integral that led to I(ω, θ) is con-
vergent at the upper limit of the integration, then once
again we would not have to worry about the order of ac-
tions. However, if the integral is divergent at the upper
limit in the real part (the imaginary part still has to be
convergent as it is the physical result), at low N’s this
divergence may not effectively cancel itself out and can
lead to relatively worse performance if we retain both
real and imaginary parts in the prescription, taking the
imaginary part only of the final result.
This can be improved by explicitly taking the imag-
inary part of I(ω, θ) right from the beginning.
In our
example for Raman scattering I ∼
R Λ dε /ε2 ∼1/Λ →0
for Λ →∞and, hence, the order of taking imaginary
parts do not matter. However, for the example of the
density of states, we have I ∼
R Λ dε /ε ∼ln(Λ) →∞for
Λ →∞. We exemplify this in Fig. 8, where we show the
results of computing the density of states by first taking
the imaginary part of the response function and then ap-
plying the mRes method. Whilst for low N’s, the order
of taking the imaginary part produces different results,
vide Figs. 5(a2) and (b2), the result is still in the vicinity
of the expected result and an improvement over RSum.
V.
CONCLUSION
We have presented a numerical prescription to calcu-
late integrals that have a singular integrand, which can
also result in singular features after integration. What
sets it apart from other available prescriptions is that it
handles and reproduces the singular features without the
need of an adaptive mesh while outperforming conven-
tional methods on a coarse grid. This scenario is common
to many practical calculations, particularly of dynamical
correlation functions, where the number of subdivisions
cannot be made arbitrarily small due to the computa-
tional cost of the problem. In such scenarios, a Riemann
sum prescription to carry out integrations becomes the
only possibility for performing the integration.
Our prescription offers a way to better estimate the
true result even with limited grid points.
We demon-
strated its validity in a number of scenarios. We calcu-
lated the dynamical correlation functions that are rel-
evant for Raman scattering from superconductors for
various structures of the order parameter and also to
a density-of-states calculation. We demonstrated its ef-
fectiveness even in a realistic calculation of the Raman
response including many-body effects that result in col-
lective modes.
We also identified the two primary limitations of this
method. First, one needs to know the nature of singular-
ity of the integrand. The second, is that there is a lower
limit to the size of the sub-interval beyond which it stops
outperforming the conventional prescriptions. The for-
mer limitation is not really limiting given recent advances
in theory [22] that allow us to infer the local asymptotic
forms of singularities. The latter is also shown to only
be a limitation for impractically small sub-interval sizes.
These considerations allow for a rather wide applicability
of this technique. We also resolved a potential issue with
divergent integrals where the order of taking imaginary
part and doing the integration could matter.
Looking ahead, on the materials-science front, we
believe that this prescription can improve analyses of
anisotropic superconductors using not only Raman spec-
troscopy, but also infrared spectroscopy and THz pump-
probe spectroscopy, where similar correlation functions
are needed to model the response. One can also foresee
the incorporation of this scheme into techniques based on
fRG and on generalized RPA to calculate response func-
tions after computing the ground states (which is what
they are usually set-up to do). On the numerical side, one
can investigate a possible incorporation into the Monte
Carlo techniques of integration and possibly extend sim-
ilar singularity-based integration to higher dimensional
integrals.
