deviate further from the ground truth. Comparing the two guidance strategies, classifier-free guidance
consistently demonstrates superior performance. At timestep T = 1000, it maintains a structure match rate
of 14.7% and a composition match rate of 58.7%, significantly outperforming classifier-based guidance’s
match rates of 0.07% and 2.95%, respectively.
In Fig. 2, we present the distribution of formation energies per atom for the structures generated in Table 1
at T = 1000. Structure relaxation and formation energy calculations for all structures are performed using
Orb-v2 [38], an accurate and efficient universal machine learning force field (MLFF). The ground truth
distribution corresponds to the original 10,158 structures from the test set. The results in Fig. 2 show that
structures generated with classifier-free guidance closely match the ground truth distribution of formation
energies, exhibiting significant overlap. Notably, the majority of these structures—relaxed or unrelaxed—
have formation energies below 0 eV/atom, indicating a reasonable range of thermodynamic stability. In
contrast, structures generated with classifier-based guidance are noticeably shifted toward higher forma-
tion energies and deviate further from the ground truth distribution. The distribution plots for structures
generated at T = 200 and T = 500 are provided in Appendix B.
(a) Classifier-based guidance
(b) Classifier-free guidance
Figure 2: Distribution of formation energies per atom (eV/atom) for structures conditionally generated at
T = 1000 using (a) classifier-based guidance and (b) classifier-free guidance. All generated structures are
relaxed using the Orb-v2 interatomic potential. The ground truth distribution corresponds to the formation
energies of the original test set structures, with all energies predicted using Orb-v2.
From Table 1 and 2, it is clear that classifier-free guidance consistently outperforms classifier-based guid-
ance. It achieves lower MAEs across all starting timesteps, and maintains significantly higher structure and
composition match rates at T = 1000. While classifier-free guidance excels in generating structures that
align closely with the ground truth both structurally and compositionally, it is important to recognize that
such strong alignment can be a double-edged sword. On one hand, it naturally leads to structures which
match better to the desired DOS, which is central to our conditional generation approach. On the other
hand, this convergence towards the ground truth structures may come at the cost of reduced diversity in
the generated structures, which would be detrimental to the goal of finding novel materials. Based on our
evaluation, we find the classifier-free version of DOSMatGen yields good agreement with the desired DOS
while having a moderate match rate which is neither too high nor too low, making it suitable for materials
discovery tasks. Next, we will apply DOSMatGen to three different types of constrained generation tasks
to further assess the model.
3.2
CONSTRAINED GENERATION
Here, we evaluate DOSMatGen’s ability to achieve fine-grained control over atomic structure generation by
applying targeted constraints to a specific subset of atoms within a single structure. Classifier-free guidance
is utilized in all constrained generation. The three constrained generation tasks are 1) masked generation,
2) template guided generation and 3) fixed atom type generation. A visual representation of the three con-
strained generation tasks is shown in Fig. 3. For demonstration, we employ the nickel DOS from Au3Ni1
as the target DOS for conditional generation across all three tasks. Au3Ni is chosen as a characteristic ex-
ample of an alloy where the minority element, Ni in this case, exhibits “free-atom like” (d-)states which are
sharply localized in energy. Materials with sites exhibiting free-atom like states can have unique physical
and chemical properties, including in applications towards catalysis [39, 40, 41, 42]. Prior studies have
shown that free-atom like states can induce strong chemisorption and facile bond activation, though ma-
terials which exhibit this property can be relatively rare. Therefore, using DOSMatGen to generate other
1Materials Project ID: mp-976806.
5
