 
1 
Layer-dependent field-free switching of Néel vector in a van der Waals 
antiferromagnet 
Haoran Guo1†, Zhongchong Lin1,2†, Jinhao Lu1, Chao Yun3,1*, Guanghui Han4, Shoutong 
Sun1, Yu Wu1, Wenyun Yang1, Dongdong Xiao5, Zhifeng Zhu6, Licong Peng4,7, Yu 
Ye1,7, Yanglong Hou3,4,7*, Jinbo Yang1,7*, Zhaochu Luo1,7* 
1State Key Laboratory for Mesoscopic Physics, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 
100871, China.  
2Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Quantum Manipulation and New Energy Materials, College 
of Physics and Energy, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou 350117, China.  
3School of Materials, Sun Yat-Sen University, Shenzhen 518107, China.  
4School of Materials Science and Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.  
5Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China.  
6School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 201210, 
China.  
7Beijing Key Laboratory for Magnetoelectric Materials and Devices, Beijing 100871, China.  
*Correspondence to: zhaochu.luo@pku.edu.cn (Z.L.); jbyang@pku.edu.cn (J.Y.); 
hou@pku.edu.cn (Y.H.); yunch@mail.sysu.edu.cn (C.Y.).  
†These authors contributed equally: Haoran Guo, Zhongchong Lin. 
Abstract:  
Two-dimensional antiferromagnets, combining the dual advantages of van der Waals 
(vdW) and antiferromagnetic materials, provide an unprecedented platform for 
exploring emergent spin-related phenomena. However, electrical manipulation of 
Néel vectors in vdW antiferromagnets—the cornerstone of antiferromagnetic 
spintronics—remains challenging. Here, we report layer-dependent electrical 
switching of the Néel vector in an A-type vdW antiferromagnet (Fe,Co)3GaTe2 
(FCGT) with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy. The Néel vector of FCGT with odd-
number vdW layers can be 180° reversed via spin-orbit torques. Furthermore, we 
achieve field-free switching in an all-vdW, all-antiferromagnet heterostructure of 
FCGT/CrSBr in which the noncollinear interfacial spin texture breaks the mirror 
symmetry. Our results establish layer-controlled spin symmetries and interfacial spin 
engineering as universal paradigms for manipulating antiferromagnetic order, 
paving the way for realising reliable and efficient vdW antiferromagnetic devices.  
