4
FIG. 3: The detailed transient population dynamics of (a)
neutral particles (blue), (b) negatively charged particles (red)
and (c) positively charged particles (black) within single pulse
(Pulse#04: 80-100 µs) with pulse energy 0.2 mJ. The parti-
cle size is 100 nm.
The qualitative features of such single
pulse transient dynamics of particle populations are generic
for all pulses. The transient population dynamics consists of
three phases as shown in the ﬁgure. Phase-1 corresponds to
the EUV-ON case and remaining phases correspond to the
EUV-OFF cases. The qualitative changes of population dy-
namics between phase-1 and phase-2 is shown in the inset.
The detailed description is mentioned in the text.
processes, the ﬂuctutaions of population dynamics can
also be impacted by single particle charge ﬂuctuations.
This impact is taken into account with simplistic assump-
tion with a ﬁxed charge ﬂuctuation window between -5e
to +5e for neutral particles. Particles with charge above
+5e are considered positive and those with below -5e are
considered negative.
To get better insight of population dynamics develop-
FIG. 4: Transient population dynamics of (a) neutral parti-
cles (blue), (b) negatively charged particles (red) and (c) pos-
itively charged particles (black) for 4th and 5th pulses. The
particle size is 100 nm. The average population of neutral
particles decreases fast at the expense of negatively charged
particle generation. However, the average population of pos-
itively charged particles remains constant over time. The ar-
rows represents illustration of the population dynamics fea-
tures. The detailed description is mentioned in the text.
ment, the single-pulse scenario is extended for 2-pulses
scenario (4th and 5th pulses) as shown in Figure 4. Dur-
ing this time period, the population of neutral particle
decreases from 93.4% to 91.7% at the expense of steady
population rise of negatively charged particles of same
magnitude from 6.5% to 8.2%.
Although the popula-
tion of positively charged particles varies within a sin-
gle pulse, but such variation remains steady over multi-
pulse time frames. Also it is to be noted that the max-
imum population of positively charged particle reaches
only ∼0.5% of total population. To get detailed insight
