Similar changes are seen for other contributors such as silicon, magnesium, carbon and nitrogen
(See Methods, subsection Theoretical opacity computations). The origin of these variations is
found in the treatment of the Stark effect for the lighter elements, whereas additional plasma
effects, the number of transitions and energy levels as well as the Partially Resolved Transi-
tion Arrays used in the computation impacts the results for heavier elements such as iron (see
Methods, subsection Theoretical opacity computations for details of the opacity codes). Com-
parisons between OPAS, OPLIB and OP opacities show much smaller differences, mainly for
iron and oxygen, but remain comparable throughout the model except for the BCZ where larger
deviations appear. The case of iron in OPLIB is remarkable as the deviations start at relatively
high temperature. This trend follows the one seen for heavier elements in the OPLIB compu-
tations. As the oxygen, neon and iron revision by Magg et al. (2022)31 is at the origin of the
improved sound speed agreement of their standard solar models using OP opacities, our results
show that this agreement is unlikely to hold if other opacity tables were used in their calibration
of the solar models. This statement is conﬁrmed by the seismic opacity determined for Model
10, discussed in the Methods section. Hence, the differences between OP, OPLIB, OPAS and
SCO-RCG in the same thermodynamical conditions call for further investigations before the
solar modelling problem can be considered solved.
Discussion
Opacities have long been seen as an important source of disagreements between theoretical solar
models and helioseismic data. Following the recent experimental results40;41;42 and the debate
related to solar surface abundances, we provide a “seismic opacity”, i.e. stringent constraints
on solar opacity by combining seismic reconstruction techniques based on the solar models of
Eggenberger et al. (2022)32 reproducing lithium, helium and the internal solar rotation. Our in-
ference results highlight an opacity shortage of about 10 ± 2% at the BCZ in solar models with
14
