Methods
Ball possession game experiments
Participants
Twelve male college football players were divided into two groups: the high-level group (N = 5;
age: 22.2±0.3 years, height: 176.6±4.3cm, weight: 70.1±9.0kg) and the low-level group (N = 7; age: 20.9±3.0
years, height: 172.3±5.8cm, weight: 69.3±5.3kg). All participants had over 10 years of competitive experience.
Participants trained according to their respective groups, engaging in six days of training per week, with each
session lasting approximately two hours.
All participants were healthy, without any muscular dysfunction
or surgical/medical conditions.
The purpose of the study and the risks associated with participation were
thoroughly explained to the participants, and informed consent was obtained prior to the study. The study
design was approved by an ethics review board (the Ethics Committee in National Institute of Fitness and
Sports in Kanoya for human experimentation, #11-101) and conducted in accordance with the Declaration of
Helsinki.
Experimental design
All measurements were conducted indoors on artificial turf (Grand Grass HD, Mizuno).
For both groups, the task involved ball possession training within a square court with 6 m on each side, with
three offensive players (OFs) and one defensive player (DF), as depicted in Fig. 5. OFs were instructed to
complete 20 passes, with a maximum of two touches per player, while preventing DF from intercepting the ball.
DF was tasked with intercepting the ball from OFs or kicking it out of the court before OFs could complete 20
consecutive passes. The trial ended when OFs completed 20 passes, DF intercepted the ball, or the ball went
out of the bounds. At the end of each trial, one OF and DF were substituted, and the next trial commenced.
Measurement of players’ location
Position data on (x, y)-coordinate for each player were measured with
local positioning system (ZXY Sports Tracking, Chyronhego, New York, USA) at a sampling frequency of 20 Hz.
A belt with a sensor (approx. 20 g) was attached to each player. To prevent the belt from shifting during a
trial, it was secured to their training wear with safety pins.
Calculation of the area formed by the three offensive players
The area among the three OFs was
calculated from the coordinates of the three OFs. The data were processed with Matlab (Mathworks R2021,
New York, USA). An exemplary video recording of the experiment and the visualised tracking data are available
as Supplementary Video S5.
Details on the dynamical model
Step 2 (Fig. 2 b) in our model concerns the dynamics during a single pass scene. We denote the positions of
Receiver and the ball at the start of the n-th pass scene by ⃗sn
R and ⃗sn
B, respectively. We also introduce the
destination of the n-th pass ⃗dn
B, i.e. the position of the ball when this pass scene ends as long as the game is not
terminated. During the n-th pass scene, the ball runs from ⃗sn
B to ⃗dn
B. Since Receiver must reach the ball at the
end of this pass scene, Receiver moves from ⃗sn
R to ⃗dn
B. We note that the final positions of the ball and Receiver
coincide. For each pass scene, DF chooses one of the two motion mode: ‘chase’ and ‘wait’. When ‘wait’, DF
remains centred among OFs during the pass scene. When ‘chase’, on the other hand, DF attempts to intercept
the pass by chasing the ball. Passer and Mover can move more freely than other players, since they need not to
reach the ball. In the model, their motion is driven by social forces [55], which describe a player’s interactions
with other players and environment. A major constraint on their motion is that they must remain within, or
at least in the vicinity of, the court during a game. We designed two social forces to confine Passer and Mover
within the court. While the confinement mechanism must keep players from leaving the court, it should have
little influence on the dynamics inside the court, since players are likely to care about the court boundary only
when they are at the periphery. This requirement made it challenging to design the confinement mechanism.
The dynamics of the five agents described so far are represented by the system of ODEs (1).
The motion of DF is governed by eq. (1c). Binary parameter ζn ∈{0, 1} represents the motion mode, with
ζn = 0 corresponding to ‘wait’. The destination of DF at time t is either ⃗dD,chase(t) or ⃗dD,wait(t). When DF
‘chases’ the ball, the destination is in the middle of the ball and Receiver:
⃗dD,chase(t) := ⃗xR(t) + ⃗xB(t)
2
.
(2)
When DF ‘waits’ for an opportunity, the destination is the incentre of the triangle formed by OFs:
⃗dD,wait(t) := ∥⃗xR(t) −⃗xM(t)∥⃗xP(t) + ∥⃗xP(t) −⃗xM(t)∥⃗xR(t) + ∥⃗xR(t) −⃗xP(t)∥⃗xM(t)
∥⃗xR(t) −⃗xM(t)∥+ ∥⃗xP(t) −⃗xM(t)∥+ ∥⃗xR(t) −⃗xP(t)∥
.
(3)
11
