and the Z3 cyclically permutes the three elements. Our unbroken symmetry group is thus continuous
and non-abelian.
We note that, in contrast to the Rødland, Hosono-Takagi, and KKSS-type models, the dimension
of the vacuum manifold is less than three, so we will not get a threefold by constructing geometries
that are determinantal varieties inside the vacuum manifold or branched covers thereof. To obtain
the low-energy effective theory, we have to turn on fluctuations of the X, Y, Z-fields. This generates
a potential
Wζ<0 = ⟨P i⟩Gi(X, Y, Z) = Aijk(⟨P⟩)XiYjZk,
(2.28)
where ⟨P i⟩signifies that the pi are constrained to the vacuum. We recover the structure of a hybrid
model, i.e. a Landau-Ginzburg model fibred over a geometric base. The unbroken symmetry group
acts non-trivially on the fibre fields. Since we have a continuous unbroken gauge symmetry, this
is not a standard Landau-Ginzburg orbifold. Mathematically, this means that the hybrid model
lives on an Artin stack rather than a Deligne-Mumford stack. In addition, it turns out that the
gauge degrees of freedom do not decouple. Indeed, following an analysis6 in [9, §4.2], the low-energy
effective theory suffers from a Coulomb branch. When the symmetry is broken and the p-fields
have a VEV, the low energy effective theory consists of two vector multiplets Σ1, Σ2 associated to
the two U(1)s and the chiral multiplets X, Y, Z. As can be seen from a change of basis in (2.5), the
gauge charges of the chiral fields are
Xi
Yi
Zi
FI
U(1)1
1
0
−1
0
U(1)2
0
1
−1
0
(2.29)
These fields are massive for large Σi and can be integrated out, leading to an effective potential
(see §2.3 below for more details)
Weff = −3σ1(log σ1 −1) −3σ2(log σ2 −1) −3(−σ1 −σ2)(log(−σ1 −σ2) −1)
(2.30)
The critical locus is at σ2 = e± 2πi
3 σ1, so we indeed have a Coulomb branch and the theory be-
comes singular in the IR. This renders the phase non-regular. There is no real separation of scale
between the Coulomb and the strongly coupled branch and methods like the Born-Oppenheimer
approximation do not apply, making the phase hard to analyse.
At this point it is not clear to us how to describe the CFT in the IR, nor how to exhibit any
relevant type of geometry. Ignoring the issues around non-regularity and the Coulomb branch for
the moment7, we investigate one possible source for a geometry emerging on the strongly coupled
branch. The fibre fields x, y, z do not have a mass term, so, in contrast to previously studied models
involving quadrics, we cannot expect to obtain a geometry from the behaviour of a mass matrix.
We note however that the cyclically symmetric three-tensor Aijk(⟨p⟩) can be interpreted as an array
of coupling constants for the interacting theory. Some couplings will vanish when the rank of this
tensor drops, leading to the expectation that at some loci of the vacuum manifold there will be a
free theory. We thus suspect that the low energy effective theory will change its physical properties
when the hyperdeterminant8 of Aijk(⟨p⟩) vanishes.
6We thank K. Hori for explanations and correspondence.
7We will explain in §2.3 why this is justified for negative finite FI parameter.
8We thank S. Hosono for suggesting to consider the hyperdeterminant locus. We are also aware of similar consid-
erations by T. Schimannek [41].
10
