TiI3Tl
CoLaSnGd
CuCl2Bi
PdF5As2
Figure 6: Density of states (DOS) for generated materials with the first atom constrained to Ti, Co, Cu
or Pd. The orange curve represents the DOS of the first atom in each generated material, conditioned on
Ni’s DOS from Au3Ni (shown in blue). Visualizations of the corresponding structures are of a 2 × 2 × 2
supercell.
3.3
POST-PROCESSING WORKFLOW
The results provided so far provide illustrative examples of the capabilities of DOSMatGen for generating
well-conditioned crystal structures under various constraints. Here, we show how DOSMatGen can be
further incorporated into a more comprehensive materials discovery workflow to generate large quantities
of high-quality materials. The workflow involves using DOSMatGen to first conditionally generate many
candidate structures (i.e. 10,000 or more), followed by structural relaxation using a universal machine
learning force field (MLFF) to yield local minimum structures. After relaxation, the formation energy
per atom (in eV/atom) is calculated for all structures based on MLFF energies. Structures with formation
energies (or optionally, energy below hull) below a desired threshold are then filtered. From this subset, the
predicted DOS of the generated materials is compared against the ground truth DOS, and the best-matched
structures are then selected for further evaluation with DFT calculations. These post-processing steps help
ensure the generated materials will all be locally minimum, stable, and well-matched in terms of the DOS.
We select the DOS of Ir from rutile IrO2 as the target, which presents more a complex target DOS than the
previous example. IrO2 is widely considered to be a state-of-the-art electrocatalyst for oxygen evolution
[43, 44, 45]. Designing new materials which exhibit the electronic structure of Ir could help lead to similarly
well-performing catalysts. Here we first generate 10,000 candidate structures, with number of atoms in the
unit cell within the range Natoms ∈{4, 5, 6, 7, 8}. For each value of Natoms, 2,000 structures are generated,
ensuring an even distribution across the possible values. We then use Orb-v2 [38] as the MLFF for
structure relaxation and for calculating the formation energy per atom for all structures. Structures with
formation energies ≤−1.5 eV/atom are then selected.
Fig. 7 shows the distribution of formation energies per atom for the 10,000 unrelaxed and relaxed structures.
As expected, the distribution for the relaxed structures is shifted to the left compared to the unrelaxed
structures, demonstrating that structural relaxation with an MLFF effectively lowers the formation energies.
Notably, both distributions closely resemble Gaussian distributions centered around zero, with significant
overlap between them. This indicates that DOSMatGen can conditionally generate relatively stable crystal
structures even without structural optimization, and the the MLFF is mainly used for providing further
refinement.
Applying a formation energy threshold of ≤−1.5 eV/atom yields a total of 108 candidate structures, from
which 8 are selected for further DFT validation based on closeness to the target DOS. Fig. 8 compares
the target DOS with the generated DOS, obtained using either the surrogate GNN model or computed
from DFT. While the 8 selected structures do not perfectly reproduce all features of the target DOS, they
generally show strong resemblance, capturing key peaks and overall trends. This remains true under DFT
validation as well. Visualizations of the eight selected structures are provided in Appendix C. Here, we
note that the final materials all tend towards containing Ir in some rutile or rutile-like configuration. It is an
unsurprising result, given the target DOS is derived from Ir in rutile IrO2, though it fails to yield the desired
earth-abundant alternative materials. This may be attributed to the fact that matching the DOS of Ir exactly
may be too strong a constraint leading to low diversity, whereas it may only be necessary to match certain
regions in the DOS (i.e. near the Fermi level). At the same time, it may also suggest the intrinsic difficulty
of this particular problem, which we leave for future investigation.
4
CONCLUSION
In this work, we introduced DOSMatGen, an E(3)-equivariant joint diffusion framework for the condi-
tional generation of crystalline materials guided by quantities from electronic structure such as the DOS.
DOSMatGen excels in generating compositionally diverse and stable structures while maintaining strong
8
