the trivial representation dominate because in the higher representations some of the instantons
form bound states and therefore have a lower dimensional moduli space.
The holographic emergence of semiclassical spacetime is the process by which matrix degrees
of freedom construct their own geometry rather than living in a pre-existing background. The
previous paragraph suggests that in the polarised IKKT partition function such physics occurs
only within sub-dominant matrix configurations. Perhaps this was to be expected: it has recently
been emphasised that good semiclassical gravity backgrounds can have negative Euclidean modes
[25], indicating that they also arise as a sub-dominant configuration in some microscopic theory.
In the spirit of that paper, one way to access the sub-dominant geometries may be to ask relational
questions of the theory. These would condition the partition function on the value of specific
observables. A natural class of observables to consider are supersymmetric quantities that can
be computed within the localisation framework that leads to the partition function (1). Such
observables are discussed in [3]. A relational approach to the matrix partition function also has
the potential to generate an emergent quantum mechanical Wheeler-DeWitt time.
A weaker notion of emergent geometry is realised by the probe branes that we have discussed
above. Here the matrices do not manage to gravitate, but are able to create a semiclassical geom-
etry that supports collective excitations, including worldvolume gauge fields. One may wonder
whether the gapless worldvolume excitations, described in [1], are ‘matrix’ Goldstone bosons,
associated to spontaneous symmetry breaking in the large N matrix integral. In particular, the
spherical probe D1-brane that dominates at large Ωhas an excitation spectrum that goes to zero
with the angular momentum quantum number l. The l = 0 mode is a rotational zero mode,
which acts nontrivially on the fuzzy sphere matrix configuration. Recall that the fuzzy sphere is
classical at large Ω, with radius squared P10
a=8
1
N TrX2
a ∼N2 (again, in units where the matrix
action has an overall factor of Ω4). These two facts — a manifold of vacua and a tower of low-
action excitations emanating from the zero modes — both suggest spontaneous breaking of the
SO(3) symmetry of model. The story is further enriched by the additional U(N) symmetry. This
symmetry also acts nontrivially on the fuzzy sphere configurations. A U(N) transformation can
be used to undo the rotational zero mode, but acts as a combined Maxwell gauge transformation
and area-preserving diffeomorphism on the low-lying excitations.
In contrast, any spontaneous symmetry breaking of the SO(7) symmetry by the probe five-
branes is less manifest. The classical degrees of freedom in this case are not the matrix com-
ponents but rather the collective field (34). While the collective field does pick out a direction
in SO(7), this is because the localising term in the action breaks the symmetry explicitly (by
construction, this localising term does not alter the partition function). Given that the five-
branes also admit worldvolume fields, it would be good to understand the symmetry dynamics
better in this case. The collective field furthermore describes the supergravity regime, as we have
discussed in §6, and therefefore a matrix symmetry-breaking understanding of this regime may
also shed light on the emergence of gravity.
We will end with a comment on the relationship between the cavity geometry, discussed
in [1] and §6, and the bubbling geometries constructed in [2]. It was noted in [2] that the cavity
geometry can be obtained by dualising the asymptotic expansion of the bubbling geometries.
However, in §6 the radius of the (p, q) fivebrane in the cavity matched — as a function of the D1,
NS5 and D5 charges — with a radius in the bubbling geometries for low-lying representations.
17
