Learning strategies for optimised fitness in a model of cyclic dominance
Honghao Yu1 and Robert L. Jack1, 2
1Yusuf Hamied Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge,
Lensfield Road, Cambridge CB2 1EW, United Kingdom
2Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics,
University of Cambridge, Wilberforce Road, Cambridge CB3 0WA, United Kingdom
(Dated: April 9, 2025)
A major problem in evolutionary biology is how species learn and adapt under the constraint
of environmental conditions and competition of other species. Models of cyclic dominance provide
simplified settings in which such questions can be addressed using methods from theoretical physics.
We investigate how a privileged (“smart”) species optimises its population by adopting advantageous
strategies in one such model. We use a reinforcement learning algorithm, which successfully identifies
optimal strategies based on a survival-of-the-weakest effect, including directional incentives to avoid
predators. We also characterise the steady-state behaviour of the system in the presence of the
smart species and compare with the symmetric case where all species are equivalent.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Ecological systems consist of large numbers of indi-
viduals, interacting through cooperation or competition,
and surviving under complex environmental constraints
such as limited resources and space. As such, they are
naturally studied by statistical mechanical models where
populations of several (or many) species interact via com-
petition or co-operation [1–4].
An interesting class of
these models involves three species with a relationship of
cyclic dominance, analogous to the game of rock-paper-
scissors [5–7]. This situation can be realised in exper-
iments on E. coli [6, 8–11], and is also relevant more
generally [12–19].
Models of cyclic dominance support spiral patterns
which arise from the combination of “diffusion” (indi-
viduals’ motion) with local “reactions” (for example pre-
dation and reproduction) The spirals are formed by the
species chasing one another, as may be generically ex-
pected in systems with non-reciprocal interactions [20–
25]. Such patterns are also relevant in the biological set-
ting [26–31]. The pattern formation has been studied in
detail for simple models, focussing in particular on the
case where the species all have equivalent behaviour, so
that the system is invariant under their cyclic permu-
tation [7, 10, 32–37]. Such models also support a fixa-
tion transition between a biodiverse state (with all three
species present) and an absorbing (fixed) state where only
one species survives [7, 9, 11, 33, 38]. Particles’ mobility
plays a crucial role in this transition [7, 39, 40].
In the context of these simplified ecological models it
is also natural to consider how individuals or species can
learn and optimize their behaviour [41–44], or adapt to
their environment [45–49]. (This is the subject of evo-
lutionary game theory [3, 50–52].) Even in simple sys-
tems with three cyclically dominating species, complex
and counter-intuitive phenomenon can emerge. For ex-
ample, when three species have different predation rates,
the species with the weakest predation tends to domi-
nate: this counter-intuitive behaviour is referred to as
the survival of the weakest [36, 53]. To address the com-
plexity of spatial models, reinforcement learning (RL)
techniques [54] are naturally applied to species optimiza-
tion and learning [41, 55, 56], as well as being fruitfully
exploited in more general non-equilibrium physical set-
tings [42, 45, 57–61].
This work applies these ideas to a model of cyclic dom-
inance.
Understanding how individual species survive
and evolve is of fundamental interest to evolutionary bi-
ology [3, 10]. Starting from the model of [7], we introduce
several new features, to arrive at a situation in which one
privileged (“smart”) species seeks to increase its popula-
tion, for which it faces a complex optimisation problem.
We address this via an RL scheme in which the species
changes its behaviour incrementally, to adapt to its en-
vironment.
The modifications to [7] include a natural
(spontaneous) death process that acts on all species, and
a hunger level for each particle, which provides an incen-
tive for predation. For the parameters that we consider,
this means that species can only survive if their prey
is also present, so the smart species must optimise its
population while maintaining a biodiverse state.
This
aspect makes the optimisation problem challenging. To
solve it, the smart species can learn by adjusting its pre-
dation rate, and by adopting directional strategies that
bias individuals’ motion. For example, they may choose
to evade their predators, or hunt their prey.
The RL algorithm successfully improves the fitness
of the smart species, by exploiting the survival-of-the-
weakest effect. (This effect is robust, despite the addi-
tional features of hunger and natural death in our model.)
We optimise the parameters of the smart species under
two sets of external conditions which differ strongly in
their total population densities, due to different natural
death rates. In both cases, the smart species gains an
advantage by evading its predators.
In the less dense
case, it also benefits from spreading into empty regions.
We discuss the effects of these strategies on the pattern
formation and spatial correlations, and we use these re-
sults to interpret the competitive advantage of the smart
species.
arXiv:2504.05886v1  [cond-mat.stat-mech]  8 Apr 2025
