GRAPHICAL FUNCTIONS WITH SPIN
20
=
+ O(ǫ)
1
3
2
3
2
1
1
2
1
2
Figure 6. The interactions in Yukawa-ϕ4 theory (the Gross-Neveu-Yukawa model).
The three-point Yukawa interaction is rational in four dimensions (uniqueness)
10. Constructible graphs
We combine the results of the previous sections to define a class of graphs with spin whose graphi-
cal functions in even dimensions ≥4 can be computed (subject to constraints from time and memory
consumption).
Graphical functions depend on the position of the external labels 0, 1, z. A permutation of external
vertices changes the graphical function in an explicit way, see Section 7.2. To decide whether a graphical
function is computable or not, the distinction between internal and external labels suffices; the assignment
of 0, 1, z to the external labels is insignificant. We may hence forget the labels on external vertices in
the following definition.
Definition 22 (An extension of Section 3.7 in [17]). We consider the following set of commuting reduction
steps for a graphical function f α
G(z):
(R1) Deletion of edges between external vertices, Section 7.1,
(R2) Product factorization, Section 7.3,
(R3) Integrating out two-point functions, Section 5,
(R4) Contraction of an isolated edge with spin α and weight 1 −k/λ + |α|/2λ, k = 0, 1, . . . , n + 1,
attached to any external vertex, Sections 7.2 and 8.
A graphical function is irreducible if it cannot be reduced by any of these steps. A two-point functions in
(R3) is a two-point insertion in G. Any such insertion is equal to a Feynman period times a propagator,
see Section 5. Maximum use of the reduction steps (R1) to (R4) maps a graph G to a set of Feynman
periods and irreducible graphical functions. The kernel of G is this unique set of periods and irreducible
graphical functions.
We recursively define constructible graphical functions and periods by
(1) A graphical function is constructible if, after using (R3), it is logarithmically divergent and its
kernel is the empty graphical function plus constructible periods.
(2) A Feynman period P α
G is constructible if it has two vertices or if there exist three vertices a, b, c
in G such that the graphical function G|abc=01z is constructible.
See Figure 5 for the construction of the cat eye two-point graph.
In [2] constructible graphical functions were defined for completed graphs (see [17]).
Completion
(adding a fourth external vertex ∞using conformal invariance) is only possible for theories whose
fermionic interaction is of Yukawa type, see Section 11.
In such theories the vertices are scalar, i.e.
they have no vector or spin index. In particular, QED and Yang-Mills theories are not amenable to
completion.
11. Primitive Feynman periods in Yukawa-ϕ4 theory
In this section we apply the results of the article to four-dimensional Yukawa-ϕ4 theory which has a
spin 0 boson with a four-point ϕ4 interaction (the Higgs in the standard model) and a spin 1/2 fermion
with a three-point Yukawa coupling to the boson, see Figure 6. In physics, this Yukawa-ϕ4 theory has
the name Gross-Neveu-Yukawa model. The beta functions of the interactions have been calculated with
classical momentum space IBP methods to loop order four [28].
As a consequence of conformal symmetry, the Yukawa vertex is rational in position space for ϵ = 0.
This results in the star-triangle (Y −∆) identity that is depicted in Figure 6. Such identities are called
uniqueness relations in physics [14]. Note that the right-hand side of the star-triangle identity is not a
subgraph of Yukawa-ϕ4 theory. The star-triangle identity operates on a more general set of Feynman
graphs that also has spin 1/2 particles of weight 1/2. In the following, we work in this set of generalized
Feynman graphs.
