7
This process is analytically solvable (e.g., using characteristics). The chance that the lineage goes extinct before
the t-th generation is
Q(t) =
t
1 + t ≈1 −1
t ,
(C2)
where the last approximation is for large t. Thus, the probability of survival for t generations is
S(t) = 1 −Q(t) ≈1
t .
(C3)
Conditioned on survival, the chance that the population has size n at time t is
Pn(t) = 1
t

t
1 + t
n
≈e−n/t
t
(C4)
and therefore, the mean population size (conditioned on survival) is n(t) = t.
Since n(t) = t, the accumulated number of birth until t, M(t), is proportional (again, for surviving populations) to
t2.
One may also approach the neutral process using the corresponding Fokker-Planck equation,
dP(n)
dt
= σ2
2
∂
∂n (nP(n)) ,
(C5)
where σ2 is the variance of the number of offspring per generation. A simple scaling argument shows that for a general
distribution of offspring number, as long as the process is neutral (i.e., its mean is unity),
n(t) = σ2t
2 .
(C6)
These features are demonstrated in Figure 4.
FIG. 4.
Growth of n(t) with t in a neutral process. The left panel depicts several histories of nt as a function of t.
in all cases, n0 = 1, and nt+1 was drawn from a Poisson distribution whose mean is nt. Each gray line represents a single
history. Most of these histories went extinct in the first steps, in agreement with Eq. (C2). The surviving histories reach higher
population levels, and the mean (over the surviving populations) population size grows linearly with t (blue line, average taken
over 106 histories). Here we implemented a Poisson process for which σ2 = 1, therefore the slope of the blue line is 1/2. The
right panel presents a heat map, where the color of nt corresponds to the number of visits at n at time t, divided by the number
of processes that survive until t and multiplied by t.
Appendix D: Simulation procedure
To map the dynamics of interdependent networks to a birth–death process, we monitor the number of “decedents” per
failed node, Pm. When both networks are statistically identical, there is no need to track the process on interdependent
