Scattering Protons
19
Figure 1.2: Representative three-loop squared DIS diagrams of the flavor class FC2, FC02, FC11, FCg
2
and FCg
11 for quark and gluon DIS scattering. All diagrams can contribute to NC, while FC11 and FCg
11
are not present for CC as single W ± boson cannot couple to a fermion loop. From Refs. [62, 66].
as
Cj
i,k(y, Q) =
∞
X
l=0
al
s(Q2) Cj,(l)
i,k (y) ,
(1.80)
having assumed µF = Q, with the dependency on the scale Q fully contained in the as running.
Their expressions are known up to three-loop (l = 3) both for NC [61, 62, 63] and CC [64, 65,
66] coefficients, with some partial results at four-loop (l = 4) [67]. Here and in the following
we call LO coefficient function the contributions O(a0
s) irrespective of the first non-vanishing
order.
Flavor decomposition.
To simplify further the quark sector in Eq. (1.79), and factorize
the electroweak coupling g(j)
k
from the coefficient function, one can observe that massless
diagrams with nf active flavors obeys a SU(nf) flavor symmetry [68], and distinguish different
contributions. Up to one-loop all the squared diagrams belong to the same flavor class, FC2,
where all the coefficients are proportional to the quark-electroweak boson coupling squared
g(j),2
k
= diag(g(j)
d , g(j)
u , g(j)
s , . . . )2. Two-loop corrections can introduce diagrams of the flavor
class FC02, where both electroweak boson legs are attached to the same internal quark loop.
These diagrams are then proportional to Tr(g(j),2
k
)1. From three loops the situation is more
complex, as visible in Fig. 1.2 for some representative diagrams. At this order, another flavor
class, FC11, can be present. The latter collects all the diagrams where one boson is attached to
a quark loop and the other one to an open quark line. These diagram contribute with a weight
given by Tr(g(j)
k )g(j)
k . Finally, gluon initiated contributions always couple with the average
coupling of the quarks running in the loop, so FCg
2 and FCg
11 diagrams weight Tr(g(j),2
k
) and
Tr(g(j)
k )2 respectively.
The FC2 diagrams can contribute to the projections along the λa generators of SU(nf) symmetry,
and their associated coefficient functions are usually called non-singlet, Cj
i,ns; instead, the loop
suppress contributions from FC02 are called pure-singlet, Cj
i,ps (or pure-valence, Cj
i,pv for parity
violating structure functions), as they contribute the same for all quark flavor lines. By contrast,
FC11 diagrams do not follow this classification. Eventually these diagrams are fully proportional
to the QCD constants (da
bc)2 and can be easily isolated. Since they contain loops coupled with a
single electroweak boson, this flavor class cannot contribute to CC DIS.
