arXiv:2504.06441v1  [physics.gen-ph]  8 Apr 2025
Statistical Gravity and entropy of spacetime
Riccardo Fantoni∗
Universit`a di Trieste, Dipartimento di Fisica, strada Costiera 11, 34151 Grignano (Trieste), Italy
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
We discuss the foundations of the statistical gravity theory we proposed in a recent publication
[Riccardo Fantoni, Quantum Reports, 6, 706 (2024)].
Keywords: General Relativity; Einstein-Hilbert action; Statistical Physics; Path Integral; Entropy; Ergodic-
ity
I.
INTRODUCTION
We propose a new horizontal theory which brings to-
gether statistical physics and general relativity.
We give statistical physics [1] foundation basis in order
to determine the consistency of our theory, already put
forward in Ref. [2], for a statistical gravity description.
From a philosophycal point of view [3] we should ask
about the mathematical issues of existence and unicity
of the Universe as well as some anthropic questions like
the ﬁne tuning for life in our Universe or the natures of
existence. We may think that before creation it was only
chaos for which one could agree that between the two
signatures of the metric of spacetime (the Euclidean and
the Lorentzian) the one describing statistical physics (the
Euclidean) would be the most appropriate. At creation,
between before and after, it could be that one has to deal
with inﬁnite energy densities or maybe density. From a
description point of view we are already accustomed to
deal with inﬁnities. I am here thinking at the evolution
of a Dirac delta into a Gaussian in a diﬀusion process.
But there are many others.
The key logical point in the Theory we are proposing
to explain the origins of gravity from the statistical ap-
proach, is the connection between thermodynamics and
statistical physics made possible by the statistical con-
cept of entropy and its derivative with respect to energy.
This deﬁnes the temperature. In our statistical gravity
theory the energy content is due to matter and electro-
magnetic ﬁelds and the entropy is a count of the quantum
states of a quasi closed subregion of spacetime which can
be considered closed for a period of time that is long
relative to its relaxation time, with energy in a certain
interval. Feynman will describe this in chapter 1 of his set
of lectures [4] saying “If a system is very weakly coupled
to a heat bath at a given ‘temperature,’ if the coupling
is indeﬁnite or not known precisely, if the coupling has
been on for a long time, and if all the ‘fast’ things have
happened and all the ‘slow’ things not, the system is said
to be in thermal equilibrium”.
Our Eq. (2) has long been studied by John Klauder
[5] and the form chosen here is just representative and
in substitution of the much more rigorous one oﬀered by
∗riccardo.fantoni@scuola.istruzione.it
that author. Other alternative points of view are also
present today [6–9].
This theory based on the mathematical properties of a
Wick rotation would open a new sight of the statistical
properties of spacetime as a physical entity.
Our theory can be considered a ﬁrst step towards a
more sophisticated and digniﬁed description of space-
time.
II.
GENTROPY
Let us deﬁne a subregion of a macroscopic spacetime
region as a part of spacetime that is very small respect
to the whole Universe yet macroscopic.
The subregion is not closed. It interacts with the other
parts of the Universe. Due to the large number of degrees
of freedom of the other parts, the state of the subregion
varies in a complex and intricate way.
In order to formulate a statistical theory of gravity we
need to determine the statistical distribution of a subre-
gion of a macroscopic spacetime region. We know from
General Relativity that each spacetime subregion has a
metric so our statistical distribution will describe the sta-
tistical properties of these metric tensors gµν.
Since diﬀerent subregions “interact” weekly among
themselves then:
1. It is possible to consider them as statistically in-
dependent, i.e. the state of a subregion does not
aﬀect the probability of the states of another sub-
region. If ˆρ12 is the density matrix of the subregion
composed by the subregion 1 and by the subregion
2 then
ˆρ12 = ˆρ1ˆρ2,
(1)
where ˆρi is the density matrix of the subregion i. 1
1 General relativity is fundamentally a classical theory, while the
density matrix is inherently quantum mechanical. This apparent
contradiction will be solved in our discussion leading to Section
III when we will clarify which is the main actor that is in ther-
mal equilibrium. As it will become clear then we think the met-
ric tensor itself to be in thermodynamic equilibrium at a given
temperature. Of course since the metric tensor determines the
distances between events of the spacetime then this also implies
that the spacetime itself is ﬂuctuating due to thermal agitation.
