Sherlock: A Dataset for Process-aware Intrusion Detection Research on Power Grid Networks
CODASPY ’25, June 4–6, 2025, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
consumes substantial bandwidth and exposes the IIDS to manipu-
lated data. Given that the centralized control center typically serves
as a data sink, it provides an ideal vantage point, offering a com-
prehensive overview of the network. Sherlock also provides data
from alternative vantage points for further insights when desired.
In total, we simulate 35 days of power grid behavior, split into
training and test sets of three different scenarios for Sherlock.
3.2
Scenarios
Sherlock contains three different scenarios of different size and
complexity, each consisting of a power grid topology, an ICT net-
work topology, and configurations regarding the coupling of both
domains, i.e., responsibilities of remote terminal units (RTUs) along
with communication protocol information. For each power grid
topology, we use PowerOwl [5] to automatically detect facilities
and derive a realistic ICT network, resulting in a simulation sce-
nario compatible with Wattson. The power grid itself comprises
multiple stations, i.e., several distribution substations (DSSs) and one
transforming substation (TSS). Each station contains one or multiple
buses that are connected by lines and transformers and further link
with assets such as storages (batteries), generators, and loads.
The ICT network comprises multiple subnets, with each scenario
including at least two OT subnets for RTUs: one for the TSS and one
or more for the DSSs. Additionally, there is a Control Center subnet
hosting the master terminal unit (MTU) and multiple office subnets
for servers and workstations. The subnets are interconnected via
routers using the OSPF protocol and further include switches to link
individual facilities and multiple hosts within these facilities. The
topologies are part of Sherlock’s documentation and are explained
further on the dataset website. Beyond the topologies, each scenario
specifies the communication behavior of key assets, such as the
MTU and RTUs, as well as the operational behavior of power grid
components like loads, storage systems, and generators.
For the IEC 104-based communication between the control cen-
ter and the RTUs, we define an interval of 10 s for periodic mea-
surement transmissions such that each RTU transmits measured
voltages, currents, and power values unsolicitedly. Discrete values,
such as binary states of circuit breakers, are only transmitted when
explicitly requested and every time the value changes.
The power grid behavior is determined by the pre-defined be-
havior of loads, generators, and storages, further influenced by
control operations executed by the grid operator. These operations
involve sending control commands to RTUs. Depending on the in-
dividual scenario, the respective power profiles target all assets and
vary across asset types. For instance, a load representing a house-
hold exhibits different behavior compared to that of a supermarket.
Whenever possible, we utilize profiles provided by the power grid
scenarios; otherwise, we rely on a generic load curve as a fallback.
Next, we briefly introduce the three different scenarios featured
in the Sherlock dataset.
3.2.1
01-Basic: The Cigre MV Reference Grid. This scenario com-
prises 12 medium voltage (MV) DSSs connected to a high voltage to
medium voltage (HV/MV) TSS. It includes 13 generators, 2 storages,
18 loads, and 2 HV/MV transformers. With 32 RTUs distributed
across two operational technology (OT) subnets, each substation
supports remote monitoring and control via a single MTU. We
apply a generic load profile to all 18 loads, while storages and
generators operate with static power infeed or consumption. The
scenario adopts the Cigre MV power grid topology provided by pan-
dapower [27], based on the CIGRE Task Force C6.04.02 paper [25].
3.2.2
02-Semiurban: Simbench MV Semi-urban. Complementing
the 01-Basic scenario, the Sherlock dataset incorporates two
larger, more realistic scenarios derived from Simbench [21]. The
Simbench MV Semi-urban models an HV/MV distribution grid sup-
plying a semi-urban city area. It features a central TSS with two
transformers connecting to two double-busbars. Its 118 DSSs follow
a multi-ring topology and, like the Cigre MV scenario, connect a
future-oriented number of renewable generators. The OT network
includes 9 of 17 subnets, with all 72 RTUs linked to a single control
center. Unlike the Cigre MV scenario, this setup applies scenario-
specific load and generation profiles to all relevant assets. The power
grid topology is based on the simbench key 1-MV-semiurb–2-sw.
3.2.3
03-Rural: Simbench MV Rural. Transferability of IIDSs to
similar yet different scenarios is a crucial research objective. To
support this, Sherlock includes a third scenario that shares similar-
ities with the 02-Semiurban scenario’s topology but differs in size
and asset count. The power grid topology is based on the simbench
key 1-MV-rural–2-sw and compromises 95 DSSs and a single TSS,
representing a rural distribution grid. The combined nominal power
of all loads exceeds 30 MVA, while all generators provide 47 MVA.
With 12 OT subnets, 16 subnets in total, and 60 RTUs, the ICT
network is smaller compared to 02-Semiurban. Providing no train-
ing data, the Sherlock dataset encourages researchers to enhance
transferability by training their IIDSs with the 02-Semiurban sce-
nario and testing them against the 03-Rural scenario.
3.3
Commands and Measurements
In all scenarios, RTUs monitor and control power grid assets, in-
cluding buses, lines, transformers, circuit breakers, loads, gener-
ators, and batteries. Most floating-point measurements that are
expected to change gradually, such as voltages and currents, are
periodically transmitted to the control center using the IEC 104
protocol (Type ID=13, Cause of Transmission (CoT)=1). Other
data points, such as booleans (Type ID=1), are configured to be
transmitted spontaneously (CoT=3), i.e., when they are changed.
This includes tap positions on transformers, circuit breaker states,
and the connectivity of loads, generators, and storages.
For control commands, the MTU issues target values to the RTUs
with desired states, e.g., for circuit breaker positions or power infeed
set points. These commands are verified by the responsible RTU,
executed, and an acknowledgment is sent back to the MTU. In case
of invalid or unrealizable commands, a negative confirmation is
sent. During normal operation, the control center can reduce and
increase the power infeed of generators or change the topology—
either to reduce the load on transformers and lines or to allow
maintenance work in distribution substations or on power lines.
For the dataset, benign commands issued by the power grid operator
will not impede the power supply for customers.
