a
b
c
d
a
b
c
d
Figure 5: (Left) Number of molecules per species identified as per the QCI protocol. Initially, at t = 0, there
is a single vibrationally energetic CO2 impinging on the Ir(100) surface and no CO. At about ∼0.55 ps, the
CO2 count vanishes and the CO count concurrently rises to unity, indicating the conversion of CO2 to CO.
(Right) Configurational snapshots at selected times (a-d) that show the conversion is indeed related to the
dissociative adsorption of CO2 on the surface.
similarity, depending on the simulation goals. Whatever the chosen ground truth or training strategy, the
main requirement is that the results can be distilled into a relatively small number of weights to be combined
in a fingerprinting function via simple coherent arithmetic.
6.1.2
Surrogate classical molecular dynamics calculation
To test that our fingerprinting approach can detect various molecular species throughout our quantum
dynamics simulation, we perform a surrogate classical molecular dynamics for the dissociative adsorption
of CO2 on an Ir(100) surface. While such a surrogate classical calculation is not expected to be nearly as
accurate as the quantum one we develop in this work, it is suitable to test our QCI approach. That is
because at the core of the QCI is a fingerprinting that only involves simple functions of ionic coordinates.
On a FTQC, our fingerprinting is applied coherently in superposition on a wavefunction, and classically
we can apply fingerprinting on each element of an ensemble of classical trajectories. We simulate one such
trajectory here using a simple approximation for the ionic interactions using machine-learned interatomic
potentials parametrized for catalytic surfaces [89].
We construct a 4×4 Ir(100) slab with 3 layers and initialize the atomic velocities according to a Maxwell-
Boltzmann distribution at 300 K. Next, we add a CO2 molecule centered around a hollow Ir site, aligning the
CO2 major axis parallel to the Ir(100) surface, and imprint a large population of bond-stretching vibrational
modes to more quickly simulate a dissociation event. We then perform an MD simulation for 20 000 time
steps, with a time step of 0.2 fs. Next, we apply our QCI function on each frame of the MD trajectory,
and show the resulting classification in Fig. 5, together with a few snapshots of the corresponding molecular
configuration. Notably, the fingerprinting approach can successfully detect the breakdown of a CO2 molecule
into a CO molecule plus an oxygen atom. For completeness, we also include the parameter vector w and the
scalar b obtained from our logistic regression for defining the fingerprinting function I(u) = Θ(wT u + b) in
Table 7.
6.2
Sampling and coherent sampling
The initial state preparation presented earlier contains a range of adjustable parameters, including those
determining the reaction kinematics (initial positions, velocities, incident angles for each reactant CoM,
motifs on the catalyst surface). In many physical situations, we may be interested in knowing the reaction
rate suitably averaged over chemically relevant configurations (see Sec. 2.2). We abstractly define a finite
parameter space S, which includes a subset of configuration space (e.g. initial positions/velocities) and other
45
