ï¼22ï¼ 
 
lines), in (a) market economy (A1), the mean ğ‘ğœ‡ value is smaller, and the deviation ğ‘ğœ 
value is larger than in the other economies. This is because some nodes are prioritized 
owing to the enclosure, and the difference between these and other nodes is large. In 
(b) the power economy (B1), the value of mean ğ‘ğœ‡ becomes larger, and the value of 
deviation ğ‘ğœ becomes smaller than in (a) market economy (A1) due to the mitigation 
of enclosure. In (c) the gift economy (C1) and (d) the concession economy (D1), all 
nodes are treated equally, and the value of the deviation ğ‘ğœ becomes even smaller. 
Similarly to the graph density ğ· shown in Fig 4, the values of the mean ğ‘ğœ‡ and 
deviation ğ‘ğœ are approximately constant at ğ‘¡ =  200, where the total degree is limited 
by the mean degree ğ‘˜ğœ‡. The values of the mean ğ‘ğœ‡ and deviation ğ‘ğœ are stable in 
contrast to the dynamic fluctuations in the mean cluster coefficient ğ¶ in Fig 4, and it is 
considered that the equality of the nodes is maintained. 
 Regarding the Gini coefficient ğº (blue lines), (a) market economy (A2) has 
the highest value, and as the steps progress, the value decreases to 0.8. Wealth is 
propagated only between some nodes because of the enclosure. In (b) power economy 
(B2), the value decreases to 0.5 as the steps progress, owing to the mitigation of the 
enclosure. Incidentally, the global Gini coefficient has remained high at 0.7 over the 
years [1] and exceeded the threshold of 0.4 of the warning level for social unrest [35]. 
The values for (a) the market economy (A2) and (b) the power economy (B2) reflect 
the global situation. In contrast, in (c) the gift economy (C2) and (d) the concession 
economy (D2), all nodes are treated equally, and wealth is distributed; therefore, the 
value drops to 0.3. This value represents the level of economic health and social stability 
[35]. In addition, when comparing (c) gift economy and (d) concession economy, the 
changes in (d) concession economy are more rapid. This is because (d) the concession 
