We describe the, to our knowledge, ﬁrst example of an irrational Picard-Fuchs operator
in one variable that admits such an interpretation.
We argue that it corresponds to the
mirror of an almost generic degeneration of the Calabi-Yau threefold X(6,6) ⊂P5
1,1,2,2,3,3 with
Z5-torsion and a non-trivial B-ﬁeld topology. This allows us to ﬁnd a basis of periods that
has integral monodromies around all singular points in the moduli space. We also show the
integrality of the Z5-reﬁned Gopakumar-Vafa invariants for genus g = 0, 1, 2 and check the
modiﬁed expression for the constant map contributions at genus g = 2.
In all of our examples, the complex structure moduli space of the mirror exhibits a second
limit point of maximally unipotent monodromy (MUM-point). In each case this admits an
interpretation as being mirror to another Calabi-Yau background. In some cases the dual
Calabi-Yau is smooth while in others it is almost generic and carries itself a non-trivial B-
ﬁeld topology. 6 We denote the geometries that are associated to a second limit point in
the moduli space obtained from Xa for a = 1, . . . , 4 respectively by Ya, a = 1, . . . , 4. Their
properties are also summarized in Table 1. D-brane transport between the path is known
to imply equivalences of the associated categories of topological B-branes. This leads us to
conjecture the following twisted derived equivalences
Db( b
X1, [1]2) ≃Db(Y1) ,
Db( b
X2, [1]2) ≃Db(bY2, [1]2) ,
Db( b
X3, [±1]3) ≃Db(Y3) ,
Db( b
X4, [±1]3) ≃Db(bY4, [1]2) ,
(1.2)
where by [k]N we denote the equivalence class of k in ZN. A brief introduction to twisted
sheaves can be found, for example, in [15, Section 4.4] but will not be necessary for the
remainder of this paper.
A further motivation of our work is that one might ask if almost generic degenerations
are an exception that only occurs for special Calabi-Yau threefold. This is of course closely
related to the question whether torus ﬁbrations and double covers are somehow privileged in
this regard. With our construction of almost generic Calabi-Yau quintics we provide evidence
for the idea that almost generic degenerations are, in fact, generic and that for any given
Calabi-Yau threefold with a suﬃciently large number of complex structure parameters one
can expect that there exists a multitude of almost generic degeneration loci in the moduli
space.
Finally, the fact that the nodes in an almost generic Calabi-Yau threefold can be protected
against deformations by a non-trivial B-ﬁeld topology means that the Calabi-Yau background
(X, α) deforms in a moduli space of its own. The corresponding string vacua form a corner
of the string landscape that is largely unexplored. In particular, the fact that the B-ﬁeld
eﬀectively reduces the number of complex structure moduli without increasing the number of
K¨ahler moduli has potential phenomenological interest. However, exploring these questions
will be beyond the scope of this work.
6The properties of the geometries Ya for a = 1, . . . , 4 can again be inferred by following sequences of ﬂops
and conifold transitions. We have decided to omit this somewhat tedious discussion as the properties can also
be deduced from the integral periods.
– 4 –
