4
For the CSL case, the ﬂuctuation strength is proportional
to the microscopic collapse rate. Current experimental
constraints on this parameter, reported in [26], are ap-
proximately given by 10−20 s−1 < λ < 10−11 s−1. Cor-
respondingly, for these values, the time ﬂuctuation ∆t
at t = 1 year ranges from 10−31 s to 10−26 s. On the
other hand, for what regards the DP model, τmax is in-
versely proportional to the smearing length. Experimen-
tal bounds place a lower limit on the latter at 4.94×10−10
m [26]. Fig. 2 shows the uncertainty aﬀecting optimal
clocks corresponding to all the experimentally allowed
values of the CSL and DP parameters, from which one
can see the maximum uncertainties predicted by the CSL
and DP models.
We now compare these results with the highest preci-
sion achieved by modern clocks. All time-keeping devices
operate referencing a stable oscillatory phenomenon,
whether it is the swing of a pendulum, the periodic mo-
tion of celestial bodies or the vibration of a quartz crys-
tal. Fluctuations in time measurements due to noise pro-
cesses are then quantiﬁed by the fractional stability σy(t),
which characterizes the frequency stability of the clock
over a given period t. The corresponding ﬂuctuation in
the measured time is given by ∆t = σy(t)t/
√
3.
Atomic clocks - and potentially future nuclear clocks
[32] - are the most precise devices, relying on the ex-
ceptional frequency stability of the electromagnetic radi-
ation emitted during atomic transitions. Among these,
10−3
101
105
109
1013
1017
t (s)
10−34
10−31
10−28
10−25
10−22
∆t (s)
1 year
DP
CSL
FIG. 2: Time uncertainty for optimal clocks as a function
of time, extending up to the age of the universe. The
colored areas correspond to the experimentally allowed
regions.
The blue region encompasses all allowed val-
ues constrained by the lower bound on the DP smearing
length, σDP = 4.94 × 10−10 m. The orange region corre-
sponds to the range permitted by experimental bounds
on the CSL collapse rate, 10−20 s−1 < λ < 10−11 s−1.
The upper edges of both regions represent the maximum
time uncertainty predicted by the DP and CSL models.
optically trapped neutral-atom clocks currently set the
benchmark for frequency stability, leveraging large en-
sembles of atoms to reduce statistical noise beyond the
limits of single-ion clocks [33].
State-of-the-art optical
lattice clocks based on strontium or ytterbium atoms
achieve short-term fractional frequency stabilities on the
order of 10−17/
p
t/1s [34–36], corresponding to time ﬂuc-
tuations of approximately 10−17 s·
p
t/1s over periods of
hours or days.
Over longer time intervals (years or decades), clocks
based on millisecond pulsars can approach frequency sta-
bilities comparable to those of atomic clocks [37–39].
However, pulsar clocks are expected to be insensitive to
noise induced by SCMs, as this would be suppressed by
the extremely small ratio σ/R. Consequently, they could
serve as a tool for measuring this type of uncertainty in
atomic clocks.
Nevertheless, given these capabilities, it is evident that
the uncertainty associated with SCMs is entirely negligi-
ble compared to the performance of current time-keeping
technology.
Concluding remarks−In this letter, we addressed the
implications of spacetime uncertainty within the context
of spontaneous collapse models, focusing on their mass-
proportional versions.
In this class of models, which
includes the leading CSL and DP proposals, the wave
function collapse dynamics can be attributed to the con-
tinuous and spontaneous monitoring of the mass density
operator.
We highlighted that the stochastic ﬁeld deﬁning these
models can be interpreted as the Newtonian gravitational
potential, possibly relating this class of models to grav-
ity. As a direct consequence, ﬂuctuations in the gravita-
tional ﬁeld induce an intrinsic uncertainty in the ﬂow of
time. We emphasize that while our analyses rely on non-
relativistic collapse models, this eﬀect is fundamentally
relativistic in nature. For the ﬁrst time, we investigated
the impact of this time uncertainty on clock measure-
ments. Our results reveal that the eﬀect is maximized
for clocks with sizes comparable to the spatial resolu-
tion of the collapse (the smearing length σ), while for
larger clocks the ﬂuctuations average out, enabling them
to measure mean time with higher precision - at the price
of lower spatial resolution. Moreover, irrespective of the
ﬂuctuation strength, the uncertainty grows unavoidably
over time.
We conclude that while spontaneous collapse models
introduce a fundamental source of time uncertainty,
they do not impose any practical limitation on precision
time-keeping.
Our ﬁndings oﬀer a new perspective
on the interplay between quantum collapse models
and gravitational eﬀects, paving the way for further
exploration of their possible observational signatures.
Acknowledgments−This publication was made possi-
ble through the support of Grant 62099 from the John
