with no energy cost, rendering four-fermion interactions marginal [1, 2]. If the interaction grows
in the IR one has BCS superconductivity, much like confinement, instead of gapless free-fermion
excitations that would have otherwise been expected.
The leading order analysis of the relevance/irrelevance of an operator is no more than dimen-
sional analysis. For instance, for relativistic, massless, λϕ4 theory, the strength of the interaction
is set by the ratio of the quartic to quadratic terms in the Hamiltonian, ϕ4/(∂ϕ)2 ∼k−2ϕ2 ∼kD−4,
where D is the spacetime dimension. This holds in the vicinity of the vacuum; for a general state,
in which mode k has occupation number nk, we replace ⟨ϕ2⟩∼(nk + 1
2)/ωk, yielding (nk + 1
2)kD−4
for the strength of the nonlinearity. For a general nk there is not much more one can say. However,
suppose nk scales as a power law, nk ∼k−γ. Then, for large nk, this ratio becomes kD−4−γ. For
positive γ, the interaction shifts from being marginal in D = 4 to relevant.
The goal of this paper is to study renormalization group flows for marginal and nearly marginal
operators in states with scale-invariant occupation numbers, nk ∼k−γ ≫1. We will consider
several examples and in each ask the usual question: is the beta function positive or negative? A
negative beta function indicates that the state is significantly modified in the IR.
The scale-invariant, stationary, far-from-equilibrium states, nk ∼k−γ, are well-known in non-
linear physics [3,4], and have been extensively studied analytically, numerically, and experimentally
in a diverse set of examples such as: waves in the ocean [5–7], vibrations of elastic plates [8, 9],
Langmuir waves in plasmas [10], Bose-Einstein condensates [11–14], the early universe [15, 16],
heavy-ion collisions [17], and many others.
In Sec. 2 we consider the standard relativistic λϕ4 field theory, using the Keldysh formalism
to compute the beta function in scale-invariant states. In Sec. 3 we compute the beta function
in far-from-equilibrium states in theories with an arbitrary scale-invariant quartic interaction and
dispersion relation. In both Sec. 2 and Sec. 3, the scaling exponents of the interaction, dispersion
relation, and the state are such that the interaction is marginal in the chosen state. In Sec. 4
we consider nearly marginal interactions in states nk ∼k−γ, setting up an analog of the epsilon
expansion, commonly employed to study the flow from a free theory to a weakly interacting IR
fixed point. We conclude in Sec. 5. Appendix A reviews the construction of the scale-invariant,
stationary, far-from-equilibrium states. Appendix B shows how beta functions can be found by
summing the leading log-divergent diagrams.
2. Relativistic scalar field theory
We start with the standard relativistic, massless, scalar quantum field theory with a quartic
interaction,
L = 1
2(∂Φ)2 −λ
4!Φ4 .
(2.1)
2
