Using this, the approximated time the PBH-dominated phase lasts is computed as the
difference between eqns (3.11) and (3.19), that is
∆PBH = teva −tPBH =
M3
f
3AM4
pl
−Γ−1
ϕ
1 −ΩPBH(tin)
ΩPBH(tin)
2
.
(3.20)
The longer the PBH-dominated phase lasts, the higher the induced GWs produced (See
Sec. 4). In this sense, eqn. (3.20) clearly reflects the impact that the different parameters
of the model have on the production of GWs. For instance, a small decay rate (the scalar
field decays late in time), reduces the time the PBH dominate but can be compensated if
their abundance is large. On the other hand, a large mean PBH mass increases this time
since PBH evaporate later. In essence, eqn. (3.20) shows the rich interplay between the
parameters of the model.
3.4
Power spectrum of primordial black hole fluctuations
In this section, we compute the power spectrum corresponding to the PBH domination
phase. In order to do this, let us assume that PBH are randomly distributed in space,
meaning that the probability distribution of each PBH’s position is uniform and that the
locations of different black holes are uncorrelated. This assumption effectively corresponds
to Poissonian statistics. A key point to note is that this description breaks down at dis-
tances smaller than the mean comoving separation, ¯r, between neighboring black holes.
Below ¯r, the discrete nature of the PBH distribution becomes significant, making the fluid
approximation inadequate. This mean separation is computed as [62]
¯r =
3MPBH,0
4πρPBH
1/3
,
(3.21)
The fact that PBH are discrete objects introduces inhomogeneities, which can be quantified
with the power spectrum of PBH density fluctuations δPBH,k. For Poissonian statistics, it
is given by [62]
PδPBH(k) = 2
3π
 k
kUV
3
Θ (kUV −k) ,
(3.22)
where kUV = a/¯r is the ultraviolet cutoff of the power spectrum. For scales larger than
kUV, the PBH fluid can be treated as non-relativistic matter, but as k approaches kUV,
the discrete nature of the PBH leads to shot-noise effects and the fluid picture is no longer
valid [63, 64]. These energy density fluctuations correspond to isocurvature perturbations
when the PBH form. In other words, PBH form in this case from the perturbations of the
scalar field, and by conservation of energy, any missing part of the scalar field fluid that
ends up into a PBH is compensated by PBH themselves, so that the fluctuations in both
fluids are equal and opposite, i.e., δPBH,k = −δϕ,k, which is what mainly characterizes
isocurvature perturbations. Initially, these isocurvature PBH perturbations do not induce
GWs, but as the PBH become the dominant component of the universe, the isocurvature
PBH perturbations source curvature perturbations, which have a gravitational potential
associated, and this last is responsible for inducing GWs.
Note that these induced GWs
– 12 –
