Fourier Transform in essentially constant depth [HˇS05]. Are fanout gates necessary here? If one
only allows gates to act on O(1) qubits each, it is clear that any decision problem computed by
o(log n)-depth quantum circuits with bounded error can only depend on 2o(log n) bits of the input
(see Fang et al. [FFG+06] for a discussion). Thus without allowing some class of quantum gates
with unbounded width (arity), no nontrivial decision problem can be computed by such a circuit.
What if we restrict to constant-width quantum gates, but we allow measurement of several qubits
at the end, followed by post-processing by a polynomial-size classical circuit? Here the situation
is more complicated. For certain types of constant-depth circuits—particularly, for circuits with
constant-width gates followed by a classical AND applied to the measured results of all the output
qubits—one can compute in polynomial time the result, provided there is a wide enough gap in the
probabilities of getting a 0-result versus a 1-result [FGHZ05]. In contrast, Bravyi, Gosset, & K¨onig
presented a search problem1 that can be computed exactly by a constant-depth quantum circuit
with constant-width gates, and no classical probabilistic circuit of sublogarithmic depth can solve
the same problem with high probability [BGK18].
Another type of multiqubit gate that has a natural deﬁnition is the quantum AND-gate, which
ﬂips the value of a target just when all the control qubits are on.2 It is not clear whether such a
gate will be easy to implement, but it is a natural question to compare the power of fanout versus
quantum AND-gates with respect to constant-depth quantum computation.
A quantum circuit (actually a family of such circuits, one for each input size) using unbounded
quantum AND-gates and single-qubit gates is called a QAC-circuit. This is the quantum analogue
of a classical AC-circuit. Takahashi & Tani showed that the quantum AND-gate can be simulated
exactly in constant depth by a quantum circuit with single-qubit gates and fanout gates [TT16].
The converse of the Takahashi & Tani result—can a fanout gate be simulated exactly (or even
approximately) by a constant-depth QAC-circuit?—is still an open question, and is the main focus
of this paper. We conjecture that the answer is no, and our current results supply evidence in
that direction, proving a separation between fanout and depth-2 QAC-circuits. It is known that
quantum fanout gates are constant-depth equivalent to quantum parity gates [Moo99], and so the
question at hand is a reasonable quantum analogue to the already proven separation between parity
and AC0 in classical circuit complexity [Ajt83, FSS84] (the superscript 0 signiﬁes constant-depth
circuits). This analogy is not perfect; in classical circuit complexity, fanout is usually taken for
granted and used freely, and this is not the case with quantum circuits.
Conjecture 1.1. Constant-depth QAC-circuits cannot simulate quantum fanout gates.
Partial progress on this conjecture was made by Fang et al. [FFG+06], where it was shown that
no constant-depth QAC-circuit family (a.k.a. a QAC0-circuit family) with a sublinear number of
ancilla qubits can approximate a fanout gate. Subsequent progress on this conjecture then stalled
for several years. In 2014, E. Pius [Piu14] announced a result that parity (equivalently, fanout) of
more than ﬁve qubits cannot be simulated cleanly by a QAC-circuit with depth 2.3 We have been
unable to verify his proof completely. Nonetheless, some ideas in that paper have been helpful in
a new push to prove the conjecture.
1In a search problem (or relation problem) there may be several possible acceptable outputs, and the device is
only required to produce one of them.
2These gates are also called generalized Toﬀoli gates.
3We ignore single-qubit gates in determining the depth of a circuit, counting only those layers containing multiqubit
gates. See Section 2 for deﬁnitions.
2
