A Measurement Device Independent Quantum Key Distribution protocol in the
service of three users
Nikolaos Stefanakos,1, 2 Georgios Maragkopoulos,1, 2 Aikaterini Mandilara,1, 2 and Dimitris Syvridis1, 2
1Department of Informatics and Telecommunications,
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Panepistimiopolis, Ilisia, 15784, Greece
2Eulambia Advanced Technologies, Agiou Ioannou 24,
Building Complex C, Ag.
Paraskevi, 15342, Greece
Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) is the only theoretically proven method for secure key distribu-
tion between two users. In this work, we propose and analyze a Measurement Device Independent
(MDI) protocol designed to distribute keys among three users in a pairwise manner. Each user
randomly selects a basis, encodes bit values in the phase of coherent states, and sends the resulting
pulses to a central measurement unit (MU) composed of three beam splitters and three photon de-
tectors. When the three pulses arrive simultaneously at the MU and under the condition of succesful
detection of photons, a key bit is distributed to at least one pair of users. This protocol extends
the foundational phase-encoding MDI protocol introduced by [K. Tamaki, et al., Phys. Rev. A 85,
042307 (2012)] to three users, but this comes at the cost of introducing a systematic error in the
implementation of the honest protocol.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Four decades after the introduction of the first Quan-
tum Key Distribution (QKD) protocol, BB84 [1], the
field has evolved significantly, driven by the need for prov-
able unconditional security in realistic use cases. The in-
troduction of the first Measurement Device Independent
(MDI) protocol [2] marked a major advancement in the
QKD field for two reasons. First, the measurement unit
(MU) was moved to a third party, which can be untrusted
and potentially controlled by an eavesdropper, but whose
imperfections do not affect the security of the protocol.
Second, the MDI protocol increased the achievable dis-
tance between two users. This advancement is a key point
for current cutting-edge protocols like Twin-Field [3, 4]
and Mode-Pairing [5], which generalize the applicability
of the first MDI protocols [2, 6].
In this work, we extend the first of the two protocols
proposed in the seminal paper ”Phase Encoding Schemes
for MDI QKD with Basis-Dependent Flaw” [6] to a three-
user scenario.
Unlike protocols designed for Quantum
Conference Key Agreement (QCKA) [7–10]which aim to
establish a shared key among all usersthis protocol fo-
cuses on the pairwise distribution of keys among the three
possible user pairs formed by Alice (A), Bob1 (B1), and
Bob2 (B2). As in the original protocol, there is no need to
distribute entangled states; instead, the users send their
encoded coherent pulses to a central MU. When the MU
announces a successful measurement, the three users re-
veal their encoding bases. The users with matching bases
then append a bit to their shared key sequence. The key
feature of the protocol is the use of a single MU instead of
three, as would be required in a straightforward approach
(see Fig. 1). An additional benefit is that base matching
among all users is not necessary for pairwise key distribu-
tion, thereby reducing measurement discards by a factor
of two. In the straightforward scenario, a user discards
with a probability of 50%, while in the introduced sce-
nario, the probability of discarding is reduced to 25%.
However, this approach comes with practical trade-offs:
it requires the simultaneous arrival of signals from all
users at the MU, reduces the maximum achievable dis-
tance between users by a factor of
√
3/2 compared to
the straightforward approach, and introduces a system-
atic error in the honest protocol, ultimately impacting
the Secure Key Rate (SKR).
In this paper, we first present in Section II the re-
sources available to the users, the details of the MU unit,
and the overall optical setup of the protocol. In the fol-
lowing Section (Section III), we proceed with analytical
derivations of the outcomes, considering two cases: a)
Bases mismatch, where one user encodes the bit value in
a different basis than the other two, and b) Bases match,
where all users select the same encoding basis. The inves-
tigations aim to align the users’ encodings with distinct
measurement outcomes at the MU, ensuring that the en-
coded values remain private to the users, even when mea-
surement outcomes and information about the bases are
FIG. 1: (a) A straightforward scheme for distributing keys
to three users in a pairwise manner using MDI QKD. (b)
The scheme proposed in this work. Note that in scheme (b),
the central MU is necessarily more complex than those in
scheme (a). Assuming a fixed maximum average distance for
undistorted quantum signal propagation, the maximum
achievable distance between users in scheme (b) is reduced
by a factor of
√
3/2 compared to scheme (a).
arXiv:2504.06902v1  [quant-ph]  9 Apr 2025
