Evolutionary dynamics of continuous public goods games in structured populations
Jing Luo, Duozi Lin, and Xiaojie Chen∗
School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China
Attila Szolnoki
Institute of Technical Physics and Materials Science, Centre for Energy Research, P.O. Box 49, H-1525 Budapest, Hungary
Over the past few decades, many works have studied the evolutionary dynamics of continuous games. How-
ever, previous works have primarily focused on two-player games with pairwise interactions. Indeed, group
interactions rather than pairwise interactions are usually found in real situations. The public goods game serves
as a paradigm of multi-player interactions. Notably, various types of benefit functions are typically considered
in public goods games, including linear, saturating, and sigmoid functions. Thus far, the evolutionary dynam-
ics of cooperation in continuous public goods games with these benefit functions remain unknown in structured
populations. In this paper, we consider the continuous public goods game in structured populations. By employ-
ing the pair approximation approach, we derive the analytical expressions for invasion fitness. Furthermore, we
explore the adaptive dynamics of cooperative investments in the game with various benefit functions. First, for
the linear public goods game, we find that there is no singular strategy, and the cooperative investments evolve
to either the maximum or minimum depending on the benefit-to-cost ratio. Subsequently, we examine the game
with saturating benefit functions and demonstrate the potential existence of an evolutionarily stable strategy
(ESS). Additionally, for the game with the sigmoid benefit function, we observe that the evolutionary outcomes
are closely related to the threshold value. When the threshold is small, a unique ESS emerges. For intermediate
threshold values, both the ESS and repellor singular strategies can coexist. When the threshold value is large, a
unique repellor displays. Finally, we perform individual-based simulations to validate our theoretical results.
Cooperative behavior is widespread in nature, yet the
driving forces for the evolution of cooperation remain
poorly understood. While continuous game models have
been widely adopted to study the evolutionary dynam-
ics of cooperation, prior research predominantly focuses
on pairwise interactions in structured populations, leav-
ing the evolutionary dynamics of continuous multi-players
games with group interactions largely unexplored. To ad-
dress this gap, in this work we investigate the evolution-
ary dynamics of cooperation in structured populations us-
ing continuous public goods games, a paradigm of multi-
player games, with varying benefit functions (linear, satu-
rating, and sigmoid). By employing the pair approxima-
tion and adaptive dynamics, we derive the conditions for
different evolutionary outcomes, showing that cooperation
depends on the benefit functions. Our work advances the
quantitative understanding of the evolution of cooperation
in continuous multi-player games and highlights the piv-
otal role of nonlinear social returns in stabilizing collective
cooperation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Cooperation is a widespread phenomenon ranging from bi-
ological systems to human societies
[1–4].
However, the
emergence and maintenance of cooperative behavior among
selfish individuals remains an enduring conundrum. As an
alternative approach, evolutionary game theory, a significant
mathematical tool, offers a compelling approach to address
∗xiaojiechen@uestc.edu.cn (Corresponding author)
this challenging issue
[5–8]. The cooperation conundrum
has been studied by employing various game theoretical mod-
els. The Prisoner’s Dilemma game (PDG), Hawk-Dove game
(HDG), Stag Hunt game (SHG), and Snowdrift game (SG)
are often employed as the paradigms to study the cooperation
problem in a population involving pairwise interactions [9–
15].
However, these models have been traditionally limited to
two distinct strategies: cooperation (C) and defection (D). In
real-world scenarios, strategies are rarely discretely defined.
In contrast, continuous traits may better capture the flexibility
of behavior. Hence, the cooperative investment in the game
models can be treated as a continuous strategy, varying over
a defined range [16, 17]. In this context, Doebeli et al. an-
alyzed the evolutionary dynamics of the cooperative invest-
ments in the continuous snowdrift game [18]. Their study,
which focused on well-mixed populations, revealed that coop-
erative investments in SG can spontaneously diversify, leading
to the stable coexistence of both high and low contributions.
However, this study concentrated on well-mixed populations,
where all individuals interact equally likely with each other.
This assumption is an idealization since some individuals in-
teract more frequently than others. In reality, populations are
often structured
[19–23]. Recognizing the significance of
population structure, Hauert et al. turned attention to the evo-
lutionary dynamics of cooperative investments in structured
populations [24]. Utilizing the adaptive dynamics approach,
they found that diversification through evolutionary branching
is suppressed compared to well-mixed populations.
Although previous studies have investigated the evolution-
ary dynamics in continuous games, most of them mainly focus
on two-player games. Indeed, group interactions involving
multiple individuals rather than pairwise interactions are usu-
ally found in real situations. Such multi-player interactions
arXiv:2504.06769v1  [physics.soc-ph]  9 Apr 2025
