Machine Learning Approach towards Quantum Error Mitigation for
Accurate Molecular Energetics
Srushti Patil,1, a) Dibyendu Mondal,2, a) and Rahul Maitra2, 3, b)
1)NNF Quantum Computing Programme,
Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen, Jagtvej
155 A, Copenhagen N DK, 2200
Copenhagen, Denmark
2)Department of Chemistry,
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay,
Powai, Mumbai 400076, India
3)Centre of Excellence in Quantum Information, Computing, Science & Technology,
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay,
Powai, Mumbai 400076, India
Despite significant efforts, the realization of the hybrid quantum-classical algorithms has predominantly been
confined to proof-of-principles, mainly due to the hardware noise. With fault-tolerant implementation being
a long-term goal, going beyond small molecules with existing error mitigation (EM) techniques with current
noisy intermediate scale quantum (NISQ) devices has been a challenge. That being said, statistical learning
methods are promising approaches to learning the noise and its subsequent mitigation. We devise a graph
neural network and regression-based machine learning (ML) architecture for practical realization of EM
techniques for molecular Hamiltonian without the requirement of the exponential overhead. Given the short
coherence time of the quantum hardware, the ML model is trained with either ideal or mitigated expectation
values over a judiciously chosen ensemble of shallow sub-circuits adhering to the native hardware architecture.
The hardware connectivity network is mapped to a directed graph which encodes the information of the native
gate noise profile to generate the features for the neural network. The training data is generated on-the-fly
during ansatz construction thus removing the computational overhead. We demonstrate orders of magnitude
improvements in predicted energy over a few strongly correlated molecules.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Finding the exact ground state of general many-body
systems is computationally hard and belongs to classi-
cally intractable problems1,2. In fact, finding the ground
state of a k-local Hamiltonian is QMA-complete3. Nev-
ertheless, with recent advancements in developing Noisy
Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) devices4,5, handling
the exponential scaling of resources has become tractable.
Even though state-of-the-art quantum computers do not
offer substantial quantum advantages due to quantum
decoherence and a limited number of qubits, there has
been active research in developing quantum algorithms
and error mitigation techniques to harness the poten-
tial of quantum computing which might even allow us to
study emerging phenomena in physics and chemistry.
Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE)6 is a promis-
ing near-term application to find the ground state energy
as it is designed to run on noisy machines with low co-
herence time7. VQE takes the parameterized quantum
ansatz |Ψ(θ)⟩, and classically optimizes parameters to
reach the ground state of a given molecular Hamiltonian.
E(θ) = ⟨Ψ(θ)| ˆH |Ψ(θ)⟩
(1)
There has been an extensive study on the choice of ansatz
|Ψ(θ)⟩8,9. Within the domain of chemistry the unitary
a)These two authors contributed equally.
b)Electronic mail: rmaitra@chem.iitb.ac.in
coupled cluster with singles and doubles (UCCSD)8–10
ansatz has emerged as a prevalent choice for the trial
wavefunction where the unitary is expressed as:
U(θ) = eτ1(θ1)+τ2(θ2);
τ(θ) = T(θ) −T †(θ)
(2)
Here, T(θ) = θa,b,...
i,j,... a†
aa†
b...ajai is the excitation operator
where i, j, ... are the occupied orbital indices and a, b, ...
are the virtual orbital indices with respect to reference
Hartree-Fock (HF) state. In our implementations, we’ve
reduced excitation operators by focusing solely on the
dominant ones in the unitary, as detailed in section II A.
Although VQE has been proven to be resilient to noise
for smaller quantum systems, inherent noise present in
the current quantum processors deteriorates the perfor-
mance of VQE for larger many-body Hamiltonian and
complex quantum circuits. The sampling complexity of
the expectation value estimation within VQE scales as
O( 1
ϵ2 ) for given precision ϵ, leading to exponential run-
time and thus preventing it from going beyond proof of
principles11. The theory of quantum fault tolerance could
be used to deal with noise in the long run; however, in
the current NISQ era, focusing on mitigating the noise in-
stead of eliminating it is practically more realistic. The
most captivating feature of Quantum Error Mitigation
(QEM) techniques is their ability to minimize the noise-
induced distortion in expectation values calculated on
noisy hardware. Current methods such as Zero Noise Ex-
trapolation (ZNE)12, Dynamical Decoupling13,14, Prob-
abilistic Error Cancellation15, etc rely on modifying the
existing circuit into a logically equivalent circuit but with
arXiv:2504.07077v1  [quant-ph]  9 Apr 2025
