Coherence-decoherence interplay in quantum systems due
to projective stochastic pulses: The case of Rabi oscillations
Sushanta Dattagupta1 and Shamik Gupta2
1Sister Nivedita University, Kolkata, West Bengal 700156, India
2Department of Theoretical Physics, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Homi Bhabha
Road, Mumbai 400005, India
E-mail: sushantad@gmail.com,shamik.gupta@theory.tifr.res.in
Abstract.
The interplay of coherence and decoherence is played out in a three-level quantum
system, in which the third level is incoherently coupled to the second one which itself is in
coherent interaction with the first level. The study is based on a stochastic scenario in which
the coherent, unitary evolution of the system is randomly interrupted by a Poisson-driven
pulse sequence. In the absence of an external pulse, the system undergoes coherent, unitary
evolution restricted to the subspace spanned by the first level (level 1) and the second level
(level 2). The application of a pulse induces transitions between the second and the third level
(level 3), thereby introducing non-unitary effects that perturb the otherwise isolated two-level
dynamics. The pulses are assumed to have infinitesimal duration, with strengths modeled as
random variables that are uncorrelated across different pulses. A representative model for
the stochastically-averaged transition (super)operator mimicking the dynamics induced by the
application of pulses allows for an analytical derivation of the matrix elements of the averaged
density operator, especially, the element pertaining to the first level. When the system is
initially in level 1, we obtain in particular the temporal behavior of the stay-put probability,
that is, the probability P1(t) that the system is still in level 1 at time t. As a function of
time, the quantity P1(t) exhibits a coherence-to-decoherence crossover behavior. At short
times t ≪1/λ, where λ is the average frequency at which pulses are applied to the system,
coherent dynamics dominate. Consequently, P1(t) displays pronounced Rabi-like oscillations.
At long times t ≫1/λ, decoherence effects prevail, leading to an exponential decay of the
form P1(t) ∼exp(−λt).
The results are relevant in the context of well-established Rabi
oscillations, applicable to molecular beams and magnetic resonance experiments, as well as in
more contemporary frameworks including quantum information processing, quantum resetting
protocols, and the theory of quantum trajectories.
arXiv:2504.06579v1  [quant-ph]  9 Apr 2025
