 
Figure 2. Safe seeding and stopping criteria | a-b, MOBO of tapping mode on silicon calibration 
grating sample with 100 nm deep trenches. Here the drive amplitude, setpoint amplitude, and I 
Gain are chosen to be the controlling parameters to optimize. There are 10 initial random seeding 
points and 50 explorative active learning steps in this experiment, and the acquisition function of 
q-Noisy Expected Hypervolume Improvement (qNEHI) is used to determine the next parameters 
to try at each step. A fresh Tap300Al-G is used to optimize scan at 1 Hz in a 20 𝜇m area. a-b, the 
resulting a height and b phase maps taken with the optimal parameters given by the MOBO 
workflow. c-d, safe seeding with force-distance measurement. c, the threshold setpoints at 
different drive amplitudes are derived from corresponding FD curves as the intersection setpoint 
between phase-setpoint curve and the free-air phase in d. The measured threshold setpoints are 
interpolated in the full drive amplitude range and only setpoints greater than the threshold setpoints 
are considered as safe parameters. e, trajectory of MOBO exploration projected from 3D parameter 
space to the drive amplitude vs. setpoint 2D space with the I gain set to be its optimal value of 
66.78. Color map represents the iteration number of steps connected by dashed lines with 
corresponding colors. f, hypervolume gain curve at different iteration steps for the MOBO 
workflow. The dashed gay lines separate the initial seeding steps from the active learning steps.  
 
III. 
Optimization process 
The effectiveness of MOBO and its corresponding Pareto front analysis are first demonstrated 
on a silicon calibration grating sample from Oxford Instruments Asylum Research, as shown in 
Figure 2a-b. Before optimization, a safe seeding process is implemented to ensure robust 
exploration of the parameter space. This process begins with a series of force-distance 
measurements to identify the threshold setpoints at which the system transitions from the attractive 
