3.1
Transition rate
As a preliminary to entanglement harvesting, in this subsection we first analyze the transition rate of the detector for
different states.
The elements LAA and LBB in the density matrix ρAB represent the standard expressions for the detector responses
of detectors A and B, respectively, along a given trajectory. In contrast, the nonlocal term M contains the information
about entanglement between two detectors. In order to understand what a static detector detects, we define the response
rate to linear order in perturbation theory as [54]
˙F =
Z ∞
−∞
d∆τe−iΩ∆τW α
ψ (x(τ), x(τ
′)),
(63)
where we have switched on the detector smoothly for an infinite time 7. The above expression is just the Fourier transform
of the pullback of the two-point function along the detector’s trajectory. For a static detector, due to the timelike Killing
symmetry, the two-point functions discussed in section 2.3 depend only on the proper time interval ∆τ = τ −τ
′ and the
Schwarzschild radial coordinate ‘r.’ Using the two-point function given in Eq. (35), it can be seen that the transition rate
of a static detector with a sufficiently large energy gap, and kept initially in the ground state, in the Boulware vacuum
is 0. In contrast, the transition rate of a static detector in the Hartle–Hawking state, for both two-point functions W HHI
ψ,s
defined in (22) and W HHI
ψ,c
defined in (18), is given by
˙F(Ω) =
Ω
π(e4πκRSΩ−1)
(64)
(see Appendix B for detailed calculations), which describes a thermal bath of a bosonic field [40]. The factor π in the
above expression would not be present if we express it in terms of frequency rather than angular frequency. It’s worth
emphasizing that this transition rate is twice that of Hawking radiation associated with a massless scalar field, as we are
working with a spin-1/2 field [54]. The computation of the transition rate of the static detector in the Unruh vacuum is
detailed in Appendix C, and the result is
˙F = 1
2

2 ×
1
4π2RSκ log
e4πκRSΩ
(e4πκRSΩ± 1)

(65)
=
1
4π2RSκ

1
e4πκRSΩ± 1 −1
2

1
e4πκRSΩ± 1
2
+ 1
3

1
e4πκRSΩ± 1
3
+ ......

.
(66)
Here, the plus sign corresponds to the two-point function in the conformal frame tetrad, W Unruh
ψ,c
, as given in Eq. (26),
while the minus sign corresponds to the two-point function in the static frame tetrad, W Unruh
ψ,s
, presented in Eq. (30).
We write Eq. (65) in this form to remind that there is only an outgoing flux of particles, and we are dealing with the
spin-1/2 Dirac field. Remarkably, this is not proportional to the number density of Fermions/Bosons at frequency Ωin a
thermal bath. Nevertheless, one can understand it by looking at the Helmholtz free energy of Fermions/Bosons in length
L at temperature T [82], which is given by
H = 2L
Z ∞
0
dΩ
2π

−Ω+ T log

eΩ/kBT
eΩ/kBT ± 1

.
(67)
Here, the first term in Eq.(67) represents the zero-point energy. Hence, the transition rate of a static detector far from
the black hole in the Unruh state, Eq.(65), is proportional to the Helmholtz free energy density of Fermions/Bosons at a
temperature of 1/(4πκrS). This contrasts with the findings in [41], where it was observed that the response of UDW for
Fermions in Minkowski spacetime with a moving wall boundary exhibits Helmholtz free energy density with Fermionic
statistics. Here, the difference in statistics arises from the dependence on bµ
α(x)bν
β(x′) in the two-point functions for
different tetrads in the Unruh vacuum. Due to the dependence on bµ
α(x)bν
β(x′) if one doesn’t restrict the 2-bein to move
with the detector, one would obtain Fermionic statistics using the conformal 2-bein. Thus the nature of the statistics is
dependent on the 2-bein chosen. We can further compare the transition rates of a static detector coupled to both types of
interaction Hamiltonians, namely, the one associated with the tetrad moving with the detector and the other associated
with the conformal symmetry-preserving frame, in both the Unruh state and the HHI state. The corresponding plots
are displayed in Fig. 4, which clearly show that the transition rate in both of these vacua decreases as we move away
from the horizon. and in the Unruh state, the magnitude for high frequencies is consistently lower than that in the HHI
vacuum. However, the transition rate at low frequencies is greater for the Unruh state.
7We have dropped a factor that depends only on the structure of the detector.
16
