ing a smaller range of ℏΩvalues for the network training (ISU-b) [16], by
the approach of Refs. [14, 15] utilizing the ensemble of universal networks
(TUDa) [16], as well as the respective experimental data [30] and variational
minima in the NCSM calculations at Nmax = 18, i. e., in the largest model
space used for the training of neural networks. Our energy predictions lie be-
low those obtained by the extrapolation B clearly demonstrating inaccuracy
of this phenomenological approach.
Our previous studies [17, 18] showed that a proper selection of the training
dataset is essential for obtaining reliable predictions of extrapolated observ-
ables. For the energy extrapolations, we limited the training dataset to the
ℏΩvalues ranging from the variational minimum for each model space up to
40 MeV. The ISU-a predictions were obtained based on the NCSM data span-
ning the ℏΩrange from 8 to 50 MeV while the ISU-b results were obtained
with the same neural network model trained on the data from the ℏΩrange
from 10 to 30 MeV. As seen in Table 1, the choice of the training dataset
signiﬁcantly impacts both the convergence behavior and the ﬁnal predictions
for the energies. In the case of the 6Li ground state, our extrapolated en-
ergy lies above the ISU-a result and is consistent with the ISU-b estimation
which, however, is characterized by a much larger uncertainty. Notably, the
estimated ISU-a uncertainty interval does not overlap with those obtained by
other machine learning approaches indicating that that one should be very
accurate in applications of these approaches to extrapolating nuclear observ-
ables.
It is important to emphasize that our approach emploing a larger
ensemble of trained neural networks and strict selection criteria, yields pre-
dictions with higher statistical reliability and weaker dependence on Nu
max.
For the rms radii extrapolations. as follows from our studies in Refs. [17,
18], the optimal training datasets include the NCSM results obtained with
ℏΩvalues ranging from 12.5 to 40 MeV. The convergences of the extrapo-
lated rms point-proton, point-neutron, and point-nucleon (matter) radii of
the 6Li ground state as Nu
max increases, are presented in Fig. 3. The ﬁnal
results obtained using the largest training dataset which includes all NCSM
results from calculations in the model spaces Nmax ≤Nu
max = 18, can be
found in Table 2. Our predictions exceed both experimental values and the
phenomenological 2D twisted tape extrapolation (TTE) results [32] based
also on the NCSM calculations with Daejeon16.
The importance of a proper selection of the training dataset is clearly seen
in Fig. 3 where our results are compared with machine learning extrapolations
ISU-a [11] and ISU-b [16] which diﬀer only by the range of ℏΩvalues included
10
