5
by another round of Qiskit-L3 optimization. The final op-
timized circuit has 20 two-qubit gates, and we verified that
the aforementioned circuit optimization steps do not lead
to any loss in energy.
2.
Reducing the number of Hamiltonian terms
The Hamiltonian of the system contains terms to be mea-
sured.
In general, the number of terms in a molecular
Hamiltonian scales as D4, where D is the number of spin-
orbitals in the problem, and thus at most as many circuits
to measure. Carrying out this exercise on quantum hard-
ware would lead to error accumulation. Hence, we group
qubit-wise commuting Pauli terms in the Hamiltonian, and
each such set is termed as a clique. Every term is analyzed
qubit-wise and suitable gates are applied to each qubit so as
to rotate the state to the shared eigenbasis of the qubit-wise
commuting terms.
Thus, a single unitary is constructed
for a set of commuting terms. This drastically reduces the
number of circuit evaluations. In this work, cliques that
contribute equally to the energy are grouped under super-
cliques, and we measure a clique from the superclique set.
We find that 551 terms get grouped into 111 cliques, and
111 cliques are grouped under fewer supercliques, of which
only 6 of them contribute non-negligibly to the energy bud-
get. We pick the top 3 supercliques for our quantum hard-
ware computations. The energy that we obtain with all of
the resource reduction steps is −3.588074 Ha, which is less
than the HF energy (−3.570995 Ha) by 17.079 milliHa. It
is this small value of correlation energy that we seek to cap-
ture on a NISQ era quantum computer. The details of the
supercliques are given in Table I.
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
We first begin with the computational settings of the
IonQ Forte-I hardware during the time of executing our
target jobs: Average one-qubit gate fidelity: 99.98%, aver-
age two-qubit gate fidelity: 99.28%, and readout fidelity:
99.17%. We note here that the reason for concerning our-
selves more with two-qubit gate count over the one-qubit
ones is due to the fact that the two-qubit gate fidelities are
the lowest when compared with one-qubit gate or readout
fidelities, and thus have a big impact on the final results.
Furthermore, T1 = 100 seconds, T2 = 1 second (not to be
confused with the coupled cluster excitation operators ˆT1
and ˆT2), one-qubit gate duration = 130 microseconds, two-
qubit gate duration = 970 microseconds, and readout dura-
tion = 150 microseconds. For all of our calculations, we use
4000 shots, include error mitigation (debiasing [50]), and
for the reported results in this work, we average over 5 rep-
etitions for the dominant clique (clique 0), and 6 for the
Figure 3.
Quantum hardware results (with error mitigation)
for the ground state energy (in units of Ha) using our resource
optimized MRUCC-VQE circuit with optimal parameters and
by considering three supercliques.
other two (cliques 6 and 16). We also note that, the error
in measurement of clique 0 is substantially larger than the
error in measurement of clique 6 and clique 16 indicating
the presence of relative error from the hardware side which
seems to be dependent on the magnitude of value to be
captured. See Figure 3 for reference.
Upon executing the aforementioned tasks on the Forte-I
device, we implement a post-selection strategy for clique 0,
where only the bitstrings that conserve the particle num-
ber are retained in our final results.
We note that this
technique can be applied to Pauli terms which are only
in computational basis [51].
Figure 3 represents the ac-
tive space energy after error mitigation (for all cliques) and
post-selection (only for clique 0). The error in the active
space energy from the hardware is 11.61% with respect to
the expectation value of same Hamiltonian evaluated using
the statevector backend. When we account for the contribu-
tions from nuclear repulsion and core energies, the error in
total energy is 2.69%. The total energy itself is −15.052701
Ha (the HF energy is −15.452333 Ha, the one-parameter
VQE with dominant parameter yields −15.472073 Ha, en-
ergy after accounting for only three dominant supercliques
is −15.469413 Ha, and the full VQE energy is −15.538919
Ha).
However, when we go beyond the precision in the
total ground state energy and check the amount of corre-
lation energy that our computation has captured, that is,
E−EHF , where E is the computed energy with the reduced
