5
FIG. 5.
a) Time sequence.
b) Relative signal variation
[(MW ON signal - MW OFF signal)/ MW OFF signal] as a
function of MW frequency. Blue: IR beam absorption. Red:
Cold cloud fluorescence recorded 1 ms after turning off the
blue and MW fields. Same dotted lines as in Fig. 2
III.
MODELING
In the experiments, the MW frequency was scanned
over a range including the transition frequencies from
states 55D to states 56P and 54F. For simplicity, we
will present a model considering only the transitions
55D
→
54F (in the following we frequently refer
to these states as D and F states respectively).
As
such, our model is not expected to reproduce spectral
features for MW frequencies below the D →F transition
frequency (14.0 GHz), strongly affected by 55D →56P
transitions. In addition, the spectra shown in Figs. 2
and 5 reveal features extending over several hundred
MHz to the blue of the D →F transition frequency.
Such frequency range corresponds to energy shifts larger
than the fine structure splittings of 55D and 54F Rb
Rydberg levels (69 MHz and 1.0 MHz respectively). We
have consequently ignored the spin orbit coupling in the
model.
Some features present in the spectra cannot originate
from the response of independent atoms.
We have
therefore developed a model for individual atoms and
for atom-pairs dressed by a single MW field mode
of frequency ω containing N photons [33].
In the
corresponding dressed states basis we have numerically
determined the eigenstates and eigenenergies of the
total Hamiltonian including: the atomic Hamiltonian,
the MW field Hamiltonian, the atom (or atom-pair)
interaction with the MW and in the case of atom pairs,
the DDI. The transition amplitudes and probabilities
for Rydberg excitation by the optical fields of dressed
single-atoms or dressed atom-pairs eigenstates were
calculated using first-order or second-order perturbation
theory respectively.
The details of the calculation are
provided in the Appendix.
13
13.5
14
14.5
15
Microwave frequency (GHz)
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Energy (GHz)
FIG. 6.
Energies of the dressed Rydberg atom-pairs states
in the rotating frame evolving at frequency Nω as a func-
tion of the MW frequency. Green: energy of the uncoupled
states |D, D, N⟩taken as zero.
Red: energy of the uncou-
pled states |D, F, N −1⟩(|F, D, N −1⟩) Blue: eigen-energies
of the total Hamiltonian H.
The spreading of the parallel
asymptotic lines is due to the dipole - dipole coupling be-
tween |D, F, N −1⟩and |F, D, N −1⟩states.
The avoided
crossings are the consequence of the coupling to the MW
field. The horizontal pink-colored area represents the opti-
cal excitation bandwidth (± κ). [Parameters. Inter-atomic
distance: R = 2.2 µm. Polar angle: θ = π/2. Microwave
Rabi frequency: ΩMW = 2π × 43 MHz. Decoherence rate:
κ = 2π × 11 MHz.]
Figure 6 provides an example of the energy eigenvalues
of the total Hamiltonian for a specific atom-pair (cor-
responding parameters indicated in the figure caption)
represented in a reference frame rotating at frequency
Nω.
The uncoupled energies are the straight red and
green lines crossing at the 55D →54F transition fre-
quency. The coupling between the atoms and the MW
is responsible for the avoided crossings while the DDI is
responsible for the lifting of the degeneracies resulting
in many parallel asymptotic lines.
The displacement
above zero of the horizontal asymptotic lines is the
consequence of the vdW interaction within |D, D, N⟩
states assumed to be isotropic (see the Appendix). The
total number of energy curves is mainly dependent on
the dimension of the considered Hilbert space basis.
Most notable, the avoided crossings extend on each side
of the single-atom transition frequency over a broad MW
frequency range. Their actual positions depend on the
inter-atomic distance and the polar angle between the
inter-atomic axis and the quantization axis (see inset in
Fig.7), however the trend illustrated in Fig. 6 is general.
Considering that the optical fields only couple the
atomic ground state to the 55D3/2 level, 54F states
can only be excited near the avoided crossings where
mixing between D and F states occur. The excitation
