In an influential and enduring paper[1], Roald Hoffmann laid out a set of core
principles associated with the interaction of localised orbitals in molecular systems,
with a particular focus on the balance of through-space and through-bond coupling.
Over fifty years later, Hoffmann’s insights not only continue to underpin a great deal
of what is now essentially seen as chemical “intuition”, but multidisciplinary fields
of research such as molecular electronics, photovoltaic/solar cell development (and
photochemistry/photophysics in general), surface science, and nanoscience all owe a
great deal to his work.
Alongside what might be best described as the static coupling of orbitals explored
by Hoffmann, a central focus of each of those fields – molecular electronics in par-
ticular – is the measurement, control, and exploitation of the tunnelling of carriers
between, and through, units, contacts, and spacers in molecular and nanoscale
architectures[2]. In other words, it is the dynamic properties of charge delocalization
and motion[3–5], via mechanisms such as resonant, non-resonant, or superexchange
tunnelling, thermally-dependent diffusive transport, and/or variable range hopping
that are of especial interest [6–8]. These in turn determine the electrical conductance
of a molecular or nanoscale component/junction, as described, for example, by the
Landauer-Buttiker formalism (and subsequent modifications thereof) [9, 10].
We focus here on a molecular system that is unique in the context of through-space
versus through-bond transport: endohedral fullerenes. Although their “host-guest”
nature is of course not without chemical parallel[11–13], no other chemical system
– including clathrates, inclusion complexes, zeolites, metal-organic frameworks, and
supramolecular assemblies – involves total encapsulation and containment inside a
“seamless” framework, where the guest species cannot leave without covalent bonds
being broken, as is the case for endofullerenes. This has critical implications in terms
of the isolation of the encapsulate from its surrounding physicochemical environment
and, as we shall see, for the dynamics of charge transfer to/from the encaged species.
In this context, and despite its chemical “oddness”, Ar@C60 – a single argon atom
encapsulated within a C60 cage, Fig. 1(a) [14, 15] – is a particularly intriguing limiting
case. In the ground state, there is remarkably little hybridisation of the encapsulated
Ar with the frontier C60 orbitals (i.e. highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO),
lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), HOMO-1, LUMO+1 etc...) Although
Morscher et al.[16] provide compelling evidence for a hybrid Ar 3p-6T1u state, this
is located 8 eV below the HOMO binding energy, i.e. ∼10 eV below the Fermi
level, and therefore well outside the energy range for electron transfer that underpins
conductance in molecular electronics architectures. Given the marginal ground state
coupling of the Ar atom with the fullerene frontier orbitals, one might ask whether
this lack of overlap extends to excited states inside the cage. We have therefore
measured the delocalization rate of a photoexcited state of the encapsulated argon.
2
