3
a convenient framework for ab initio quantum chemical
calculations[36] [37, 38].
For the hydrogen dimer H2, we adopt the minimal
STO-3G basis set, where each hydrogen atom is described
by a linear combination of three Gaussian functions ap-
proximating the 1s atomic orbital. Despite its simplicity,
the STO-3G basis offers a tractable, yet accurate model
for exploring fundamental electronic properties of the hy-
drogen dimer.
To accurately determine the ground state of H2, we
adopt an Unrestricted Hartree–Fock (UHF) approach,
hence allowing different spatial orbitals for electrons of
different spins (α and β), which is crucial for avoiding
spin contamination [37, 38]. This is particularly impor-
tant in the dissociation limit, where a restricted method
would fail to describe the correct covalent bond break-
ing and yield unphysical results. Building upon the UHF
solution, FCI is then employed to solve the electronic
Schr¨odinger equation exactly within our STO-3G basis
set [39]. FCI provides our benchmark for electron cor-
relation, ensuring an accurate description of the ground
state of the system across all interatomic distances.
Results and Discussion—The FCI ground state of the
system is very well captured at any interatomic distance
by a state of the form
|ψ(θ)⟩= cos(θ) |1100⟩+ sin(θ) |0011⟩
(8)
with the ordering of the four fermionic modes given by:
(i) spin α molecular orbital 0, (ii) spin β molecular or-
bital 0, (iii) spin α molecular orbital 1, and (iv) spin β
molecular orbital 1. The second determinant corresponds
to the fully excited state whose contribution is crucial for
avoiding spin contamination in the large interatomic dis-
tance limit.
The angle θ ≡θ(ℓ) is a smooth function
of the interatomic distance ℓ, connecting the large dis-
tance limit in which the system factorizes into a pair a
independent hydrogen atoms to the interatomic distance
regime of covalent bond formation. Indeed, at these large
distances, the purely ionic contribution from the two de-
terminants precicely cancel each other, leaving solely the
purely covalent contribution. Around the bound state,
the Hartree-Fock contribution alone provides instead a
qualitatively good description of the ground state. The
reader will find in Fig. 1 the binding energy curve of the
H2 molecule, namely the FCI energy
Efci(ℓ) =
D
ψ(θ(ℓ))
 ˆH
 ψ(θ(ℓ))
E
(9)
as a function of the interatomic distance, translated by
the asymptotic contribution of two isolated hydrogen
atoms Efci(∞), as well as the angle θ defining the cor-
responding FCI ground state wavefunction.
Let us define the extrinsic curvature of the binding
energy curve as
κ(ℓ) =
|E′′
fci(ℓ)|
(1 + E′fci(ℓ)2)3/2 ,
(10)
FIG. 1.
FCI binding energy Efci and θ angle defining the
ground state wavefunction of the H2 dimer as a function of
the interatomic distance.
Let us denote by ℓ⋆the point of maximal extrinsic cur-
vature of the binding energy curve ℓ⋆= argmaxℓκ(ℓ).
For each value of the interatomic distance ℓ, we compute
the fermionic Wigner function of the ground state and
evaluate the magic proxies defined in the first Section of
the paper. The reader will find in Fig. 2 the behavior
of the stabilizer Renyi entropy S2 and the mana M as a
function of the interatomic distance ℓ.
Our results reveal a striking phenomenon: as the hy-
drogen atoms approach each other, the magic proxies
develop a pronounced peak precisely at the interatomic
distance where the extrinsic curvature of the binding en-
ergy curve is maximal.
This suggests that the bond-
ing process is accompanied by a significant increase in
non-stabilizerness, implying that the formation of a co-
valent bond requires the consumption of a large amount
of non-Clifford operations. As we discussed, a state with
low magic is efficiently classically simulable, while high
magic is a necessary ingredient for quantum computa-
tional speedup [6, 40]. Thus, our analysis indicates that
the H2 bond formation is not only a chemical process
but also a transformation that incurs a cost in terms of
quantum computational resources.
The angle θ defining the ground state wavefunction
adjusts smoothly with ℓ, reflecting the relative weight of
two determinants.
In regions where the determinants
contribute comparably, the interference between them
amplifies off-diagonal correlations in the Majorana basis,
leading to a more spread out fermionic Wigner function
and, consequently, to a higher value of our magic proxies
as defined by Lp norms of the fermionic Wigner function.
From the standpoint of molecular physics and quan-
tum chemistry, our results offer an intriguing reinterpre-
tation of chemical bond formation: in the dissociation
