Bibliography
197
Summary
This thesis investigates some fundamental questions about the proton, the most abundant
object we experience in our world. Protons are indeed complex systems made of tightly bound
elementary particles: quarks and gluons. Their interaction is among the strongest forces in
nature, making the proton a stable object of which we are all composed. Understanding how
these smaller components interact and distribute their energy within the proton is crucial for
advancing our knowledge of particle physics.
In particular, the proton’s substructure becomes relevant during high-energy collisions, such
as those at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). This inner structure is described by Parton
Distribution Functions (PDFs), which are the main tool adopted in our research. PDFs describe
how the proton’s energy is probabilistically distributed among quarks and gluons.
PDFs are thus essential for interpreting data from LHC experiments and making predictions
about the behavior of particles under extreme conditions. Like any physical quantity, PDFs are
subject to uncertainties, which can affect our ability to identify new particles or verify existing
theories, such as the Standard Model of particle physics.
The main goal of this thesis is thus to improve the current estimate of PDFs by adopting state-
of-the-art of theoretical calculations combined with machine learning techniques and a vast
amount of high energy data collected from various experiments.
Our key findings are presented in Chapters 3 to 5 and include:
Approximate N3LO QCD PDFs: we incorporate the current known next-to-next-to-next-to-
leading-order (N3LO) QCD corrections relevant for PDF evolution and Deep Inelastic
Scattering, within the NNPDF framework. This allows us to refine our knowledge of PDFs
accounting for suppressed effects and theoretical errors, which are usually neglected but
can be relevant in current and forthcoming LHC analyses.
Intrinsic Charm: we provide a first evidence of non-vanishing intrinsic charm contribution to
the proton structure. This is a phenomenon where virtual charm quarks are present also
in low energy protons and are not only generated by high energy splitting. This evidence
is supported by a comparison with the most up-to-date LHCb data and could be further
probed in the upcoming Electron-Ion Collider.
Polarized PDFs and proton spin: we revise the determination of spin-dependent PDFs by
including next-to-next-to-leading-order (NNLO) QCD corrections together with a large
number of data from proton-proton scattering not included in previous analyses. Our
study further suggests that quarks carry only a fraction of the total proton spin but remains
uncertain regarding the gluon contribution. In this respect, our study will be beneficial for
