arXiv:2504.06115v1  [hep-th]  8 Apr 2025
Prepared for submission to JHEP
In search of almost generic Calabi-Yau 3-folds
Thorsten Schimanneka
aInstitute for Theoretical Physics & Department of Mathematics, Utrecht University, 3584 CC Utrecht,
The Netherlands
E-mail: thorsten.schimannek@gmail.com
Abstract: We call a projective Calabi-Yau (CY) 3-fold almost generic if it has only isolated
nodes as singularities and the homology classes of all of the exceptional curves in an analytic
small resolution are non-trivial but torsion. Such a Calabi-Yau supports a topologically non-
trivial ﬂat B-ﬁeld and the corresponding A-model topological string partition function encodes
a torsion reﬁnement of the Gopakumar-Vafa invariants of the smooth deformation. Our goal in
this paper is to ﬁnd new examples of almost generic CY 3-folds, using both conifold transitions
as well as the integral structure of the periods of the mirrors.
In this way we explicitly
construct two quintic CY 3-folds with Z2-torsion, two octics with Z3-torsion and deduce the
existence of a complete intersection X(6,6) ⊂P5
1,1,2,2,3,3 with Z5-torsion. Via mirror symmetry,
the examples give new geometric interpretations to several AESZ Calabi-Yau operators. The
mirror periods of the almost generic X(6,6) with non-trivial B-ﬁeld topology are annihilated
by an irrational Picard-Fuchs operator. We describe how the usual integral structure of the
periods has to be modiﬁed and in all of the cases we calculate the monodromies around the
singular points to verify integrality. Additional points of maximally unipotent monodromy
in the moduli spaces lead us to ﬁnd several more examples of smooth or almost generic CY
3-folds and to conjecture new twisted derived equivalences. We integrate the holomorphic
anomaly equations and extract the torsion reﬁned Gopakumar-Vafa invariants up to varying
genus.
For our construction of the almost generic octic CY 3-folds, we also give a short
introduction to the subject of hypermatrices and hyperdeterminants.
