3
FIG. 2. Overview of research fields and potential applications in
artificial-spin-ice based magentization dynamics.
Adapted from
Refs. [20, 21, 23, 24, 28, 34, and 35].
.
materials33.
Therefore, the pursuit of a comprehensive theory is called
for, which is capable of bridging the intricate balance be-
tween atomic-scale exchange forces and macroscale dipolar
forces.
Take, for instance, the behavior of thin, infinitely
long ferromagnets, where spontaneous magnetization aligns
parallel to the elongated axis, resulting in a single domain.
Contrastingly, finite-sized ferromagnets provoke the emer-
gence of surface poles along their boundaries, giving rise to
magnetostatic energy (EMs). To mitigate EMs, alterations in
spin distributions become imperative, consequently reshaping
the single-domain behavior, and inducing an increase in
exchange energy (EEx).
The system reaches equilibrium
when both exchange and magnetostatic energies are mini-
mized. This quest for such explanation finds its answer in the
phenomenological theory of micromagnetics, pioneered by
Brown, which adeptly bridges these two length scales in a
compelling manner. The aim of micromagnetics is to develop
a formalism in which the macroscopic properties of a material
can be simulated by introducing adequate approximations
to the fundamental atomic behavior of the material36. This,
combined with an energy minimization method, forms a basis
for classical micromagnetics37.
Micromagnetics incorporates two key conventions:
1. The magnetization is treated as a continuous vector field
that varies with position, expressed as −→
M ≡−→
M(x,y,z).
2. The magnetization vector is normalized to have a unit
length, satisfying the condition M2 = 1.
A.
Energies and Magnetic Fields
In micromagnetics, the equilibrium configuration of mag-
netization under the influence of various forces is determined
using energy minimization principles. The free energy of a
ferromagnetic body has four key contributions: exchange en-
ergy, demagnetization energy, anisotropy energy, and Zeeman
energy (arising from an external magnetic field). The relation-
ship between the total effective magnetic field and the corre-
sponding energy is expressed as:
ETot = −
Z
µo ⃗M · ⃗Hef f dV
(3)
The effective field can be calculated using the following rela-
tion:
⃗Hef f = −
 ∂ETot
µo∂⃗M

(in SI units).
(4)
The micromagnetic form of various energy terms are de-
scribed in the following.
1.
Self-Magnetostatic or Demagnetizing Energy
Consider a FM thin film of finite size and net magnetization
M. Every magnetization component (at the film boundaries)
normal to the surface gives rise to uncompensated fictitious
magnetic charges (magnetic poles), and the resultant field of
these charges is called the demagnetizing field. The demagne-
tizing field ( ⃗HD) acts in the opposite direction to the magneti-
zation, ⃗M. Thus, the magnetic induction inside the bar magnet
after removing the external field becomes
⃗B = µo(⃗H + ⃗M) = −µo⃗HD + µo ⃗M
(in SI units). (5)
One can calculate the demagnetizing field (in micromagnet-
ics) using the following expression:
HDi = −NijMj,
i, j = x,y,z
(6)
where Nij is called the demagnetization tensor and is usually
written using a 3 x 3 matrix that has unit trace. In the case of
an ellipsoid, ⃗HD and ⃗M are collinear along the principle axes,
and the off-diagonal elements in the demagnetizing tensor are
zero37–41. Thus, Nx + Ny + Nz = 1 (in SI units), or Nx + Ny +
Nz = 4π (in CGS units). For an infinitely large thin film that
lies in xy plane, these demagnetizing factors become40
Nx = Ny = 0, Nz = 1.
(7)
The energy associated with the demagnetizing field is called
the self-magnetostatic or demagnetizing energy and can be
written as
EMs = −µo
2
Z
⃗HD · ⃗M = µo
2
Z
NDM2
(SI units). (8)
