3.9. DI quantum random number generation (DIQRNG)
The decay of the isotope that kills the Schroedinger’s cat is an event intrinsically random means that
|cat⟩= α |alive⟩+β |dead⟩, beyond the ignorance of the observer that would be otherwise ρcat = αρalive +
βρdead. Geiger counter, already in the 40s is based on this idea [256]. However, this ontological quantum
randomness, appearing in the off-diagonal terms of ρcat is difficult to witness from the randomness due
to the decoherence and the interaction with the environment causing experimental statistical noise [257].
The realism in BI’s hypothesis 1 denies this intrinsic randomness. But this is exactly what is required
to establish the security of any secret key, then BI violation can be used to generate randomness[258, 259]
More precisely, since the initial randomness for the choice of the settings before BI violation is classical
DIQRNGs expand randomness rather than produce it. Since then, the terms randomness expansion and
randomness generation have been used in the DIQRNG literature interchangeably. The initial randomness
needs to be independent of the state of the DIQRNG, e.g. |GHZ⟩, however, the numbers which are
produced will not be (for example, they can be stored in the device’s memory). Therefore, we cannot
feed the device back the numbers it produced as settings and after the whole randomness which was
initially at our disposal has been used up we can no longer produce certified random numbers. However,
this is only true if we have only a single device (composed of separated parts since it is supposed to be
used for nonlocality tests). In [260], it was shown that two such devices using the initial randomness
numbers generated by the other device in the previous step of the protocol, can be used for unbounded
expansion, i.e. producing any amount of bits from the initial finite random string. The first experimental
demonstration of randomness expansion was presented in [59].
The experiment there was based on
the violation of CHSH in a setup which used heralded entanglement generation through entanglement
swapping. Later, experiments also based on CHSH but involving direct production of entanglement were
performed [261, 262].
3.10. DI-QKD Experiments
In July 2022, three independent research groups (one based in the UK [51], one in Germany [53], and
one in China [52]) successfully implemented DIQKD, by generating pairs of entangled particles, which
could be either photon or atomic pairs. Alice and Bob each take one particle from the generated pairs and
perform measurements on some related quantum property to create KA = KB and verify the security
by computing S(p).
In the photonic experiments, the measured property is polarization (vertical or
horizontal) and in the atomic ones, the state of the atom (ground or excited). When S ≤2 they cannot
confirm the entanglement from the statistical correlation in p, indicating that the channel is no longer
secure and the process must be restarted.
3.10.1. All photonic experiments
The first successful photonic-based experiment [52] has demonstrated DIQKD over a fiber length
of d = 20, 100, 220 m and verified that the measured correlations between the entangled photons were
strong enough to guarantee a positive secret key rate, indicating the feasibility of secure key generation.
A high-efficiency entangled photon source is crucial for ensuring the security and reliability of the QKD
protocol. The authors achieved an efficiency of about 87%. To mitigate the risks associated with the
locality loophole, the experiment employs a shielding assumption. This assumption prohibits unnecessary
communications between untrusted devices and a potential adversary. Essentially, it ensures that the
information about the input choices and output results of one party remains unknown to the other party
and Eve.
3.10.2. Light-Matter based experiments
Proof-of-principle memory-based experiments reported in Oxford [51] and Munich [53] used entangled
strontium ions and entangled rubidium atoms, respectively. Each one has a different advantage, but when
using atoms or ions, it is possible to keep track of both particles in a pair, whereas this cannot be made
in the case of entangled photons. If one photon of the pair gets lost, this may lead to other problems in
the requirements for security.
The Oxford-based experiment was the only one to complete all the DI-QKD protocol, with a generated
secret key of 95 kbits between Alice and Bob over about 8 hours and with a distance of d = 2 m between
the two quantum memories. The Munich-based experiment was unable to complete an entire secure key
due to time limitations for the quantum communication system. Then, an asymptotic security analysis
was performed, and a secret key rate of 0.07 bits per entanglement generation event was obtained, over
75 hours and d = 400 m between the two atoms.
38
