Figure 17: Sagnac source of entangled photons: A pump laser is directed through a half-wave plate (HWP) to control
polarization, followed by a dichroic mirror (DM), which separates the pump beam by reflecting one wavelength while trans-
mitting the other. The beam enters a polarizing beam splitter (PBS), splitting it into orthogonal polarization propagating
paths. These paths pass through a periodically poled nonlinear crystal (PPKTP) inside the interferometer loop, generating
photon pairs via spontaneous parametric down-conversion (SPDC). Mirrors (M) guide the beams, which recombine at the
PBS. A HWP is placed in the reflecting path to adjust de polarization. The entangled photon pairs are separated using
dichroic mirrors and sent to high pass filters (green) to be detected at single-photon detectors.
(a) Basic concept
(b) Polarization mode
(c) Counting mode
Figure 18: Event–ready setups – a) Remote subsystems A and D of two entangled pairs are entangled via a Bell state
measurement on their entangled partners (B and C). 18b) Event ready scheme with stationary qubits and two photon
heralds. Stationary qubits are each entangled with the polarization state of a photon, which are are sent to a central station
for the two-photon Bell-state measurement (BSM). Joint detection events at pairs of detectors signal preparation of an
entangled state ψ± = |ψH⟩A |ψH⟩B ± |ψV ⟩A |ψV ⟩B. 18c) Stationary qubits each emit a photon with probability p. The
optical modes are coupled, so that detection of one and only one photon results in an entangled state of the stationary
qubits. Here, ψ± = |ψ0⟩A |ψ1⟩B ± |ψ1⟩A |ψ0⟩B
quantum memories (see next section).
The main parameters affecting performance of SPDC sources
for point-to-point DI-QKD are the detection efficiency η, the overall brightness B (pairs emitted/time)
and the quality of the entangled states reaching the measurement devices, which for simplicity we will
describe in terms of a general decoherence channel E, which may incorporate imperfections in the source
as well as noise in the optical channel. The detection efficiency η affects the obtainable bit rate of these
sources, since not only do both photons need to be detected to establish a key bit, but also through the
obtainable loophole-free CHSH violation (see Section 3). Decoherence E can affect both the QBER as well
as the CHSH violation. In some cases, decoherence is due to random unitaries operations (such as phase
fluctuations or polarization rotations), which can be monitored and corrected. The source brightness B
affects only the raw bit rate.
6.3.2. Heralded or Event Ready Setups
Event-ready sources use entanglement swapping to herald the creation of a remote entangled pair [164–
166], as illustrated in Fig. 18 a). While event-ready setups can be realized in all-photonic experiments,
the near-unity detection efficiencies achievable with stationary quantum systems such as ions, atoms,
quantum dots or NV centers, and the possibility to use them as quantum memory, make these systems
most attractive for DI-QKD and quantum networks as a whole. For generality, let us refer to these
stationary systems as “nodes”. Through the application of external fields, the node qubit can be entangled
with a flying qubit, in the form of emission of an optical pulse that can be coupled into an optical
channel (fibers). When the pulses emitted from two nodes are combined at a beam splitter, a Bell state
measurement (BSM) can be realized resulting in an entangled state of the two nodes A and B. A BSM
with 50% efficiency can be realized with linear optics (see section 5.3.1 and Fig. 16), where classical
communication from the BSM station to A, B is required for heralding. Optical decoherence E in the
73
