5
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIG. 2. We plot the canonical visualization of the three torsion fields (35), (36), and (37). The background streamplot shows
the torsion field, and we implemented nine samples of the canonical visualization at various points throughout the plots. Due to
the geometric nature of this visualization that does not make any reference to spacetime signature, the diagrams are identical
for both the spacetime case (ϵ = +1) and the purely spatial case (ϵ = −1). At each sample point, the straight arrows represent
the fiducial vector field U = (1, 0) and its parallel displaced copy along the other fiducial field V = (0, 1); analogously, the
dashed arrow corresponds to the second fiducial field V and its parallel displaced copy along U. Finally, the dotted arrow
visualizes the torsion tensor projected to the two vector fields at the given point. Observe that this vector is parallel to the
streamplot at each observation point (highlighted in bold).
B.
Holonomy visualization (semi-local)
While the canonical visualization is convenient and
easy to implement (since it only utilizes local informa-
tion) this is precisely its shortcoming. Namely, it does
not make any statements about properties beyond the lo-
cal limit. An important object in geometries with torsion
are autoparallel curves that parallel propagate their own
tangent vector. For this reason, we develop the above
visualization further and define spacetime or spatial “cir-
cuit” that is constructed from two fiducial vector fields
U and V . The presence of torsion, as we will see, will
prevent this circuit from being closed.
We begin with an autoparallel curve starting at a point
x0 whose initial tangent vector is U and follow this au-
toparallel for a certain amount of proper time δλ, arriv-
ing at a point x1. There, we define another autoparallel
starting instead with the velocity V . Arriving at x2 af-
ter some proper time δλ, we return along an autoparallel
with velocity −U to arrive at point x3, and finally, for the
last leg of the journey, we leave that point along direction
−U for another amount of proper time δλ.
In order to avoid acausality in the spacetime case, we
define the circuit via four timelike vectors, two of which
are past-directed and two of which are future-directed.
As a result, one may think of starting at point x2 and
sending two future-directed timelike autoparallels that
end up at points x0 and x4. This ensures that an opera-
tional understanding of this measurement of torsion can
be given in a straightforward manner: two observers, fol-
lowing first the vector field U and then the vector field
V for a fixed amount of proper time (and the other way
around for the second observer), will not meet at the
same place if the torsion of space(time) is nonvanishing.
Since in both cases we are travelling around an almost
closed loop, a straightforward visualization consists of
plotting the four autoparallels as well as the defect vec-
tor between the two points x0 and x4. Since this method
is semi-local it will not give an exact result, but we will
see that for small amounts of proper time δλ the de-
fect vector will be a simple linear combination of torsion
coefficients. Before computing their theoretical form to
leading order, see Fig. 3 for a visualization of the spa-
tial circuit as well as the spacetime circuit utilized in the
“holonomy visualization” of torsion.
x0
x1
x2
x3
x4
x0
x1
x2
x3
x4
x1
x2
x3
x4
U
spatial circuit
spacetime circuit
V
U
V
FIG. 3. We sketch the circuits utilized in the holonomy vi-
sualization of torsion based on the two fiducial vector fields
U and V . In the spatial case, we utilize two vectors normal-
ized to U · U = v · V = +1, simply given by U = (0, 1) and
V = (1, 0). In the spacetime case, however, we make use of
timelike vectors, U ·U = V ·V = −1 with the parametrizations
U = (
√
1 + v2, −v) and V = (
√
1 + v2, +v), where v ∈(0, 1)
is the coordinate velocity of the observers. The distance be-
tween the points x0 and x4 is related to the presence of torsion.
