reasoning as above, inflation should happen after the breakings of 422, 422D and 3221D, and
thus cannot be probed through GW background. However, in the 3221 case, inflation can
strategically be placed between the breaking of the GUT and the 3221 gauge group, and thus
strings can in principle be observed through SGWB.
Following the analysis of [121], the tension of cosmic strings generated from the breaking
of 3221 to the SM is given approximately by
Gµ ≃
1
2(α2R(MI) + α1(MI))
M 2
I
M 2
Pl
,
(145)
where α2R(MI) and α1(MI) are the gauge coefficients of SU(2)R and U(1)B−L at MI, re-
spectively. Substituting the results of the 2-loop analysis, the tension is predicted at Gµ ≃
2.0 × 10−17 and is compatible with the bounds set by Super-K. Again, should Huper-K not
observe proton decay, this channel is excluded and any Gw signal should not be associated
with it.
From the above we summarize that the channels 422D and 3221D are excluded from
Super-K data, while 422 survives both Super-K and Hyper-K, but has no GW signal and
thus cannot be probed through observation of SGWB. 3221 satisfies the Super-K proton
lifetime bounds and produces cosmic strings that emit potentially detectable GW signal.
However, it could be excluded by the non-observation of proton decay in Hyper-K. Even
if observed, the signal has no memory of the discussion above the unification scale, so CG
cannot be probed this way.
8
Conclusions
In the present paper, we have presented a quite complete scenario of the possible unification
of gravity with internal interactions. It is based mostly on the suggestion of [48], namely
that such a unification can be achieved by gauging an enlarged tangent Lorentz group. The
latter possibility results as a positive option of the observation of [49], that the dimension of
the tangent space is not necessarily equal to the dimension of the corresponding curved man-
ifold. The scenario described here is also based on the very attractive fact that gravitational
theories can be described by gauge theories as the SM of Particle Physics pointing in fur-
ther examination of a possible common origin of gravitational and internal interactions. The
description of gravity as gauge theory raises the question of the equivalence among diffeo-
morphism and gauge invariance. Indeed, an infinitesimal correspondence can be guaranteed
if certain conditions are imposed. This issue has been discussed rather widely in the present
paper.
The gravity theories that have been discussed here are the CG and the FG, both based
on gauging of the conformal group SO(2, 4) (FG requires the gauging of an additional U(1)).
Very interesting findings are that CG can be spontaneously broken to either EG, or WG,
which, in a similar way can eventually be broken to EG.
Furthermore, we examine in detail the unification of both CG and FG with internal
interactions in four dimensions, using the higher-dimensional tangent group SO(2, 16), which
is eventually led, after various SSBs, to EG and the SO(10) GUT. Inclusion of fermions and
suitable application of the Weyl and Majorana conditions result in a fully unified scheme.
34
