Figure 6: (a) A trajectory in a two-state system. The inlet zooms in on the DTT. (b) A
schematic two-state system. The black dotted lines in both panels mark the thresholds that
deﬁne the DTT.
cause ST-iMetaD does not require the entire rescaled FPT distribution, it is also suitable
for simulations with resetting. In that case, resetting does not bias the survival function at
times shorter than the resetting rate and we take the short time ﬁt of the survival function
in a similar manner. Moreover, resetting minimizes the amount of long simulations with bias
over-deposition, so they do not contribute to the ST-iMetaD ﬁt.
5.3
Direct transit times
When considering inference of the MFPT from biased simulations, there is always a tradoﬀ
between speedup and accuracy.5,42,87–89 Signiﬁcant accelerations often carry errors of or-
ders of magnitude in the MFPT estimation.39 However, there are other important kinetic
properties that are less sensitive to bias and can be reliably assessed even at high accel-
erations. One such property is the direct transit time (DTT), which is the time duration
between the last crossing of some predeﬁned high-dimensional surface, to the ﬁrst crossing of
a second predeﬁned surface.91 It is often deﬁned using two thresholds of some CV, centered
around the transition state,92 estimating the barrier-crossing time. DTTs were measured
experimentally for biological macromolecules93–95 and were studied both theoretically92,96
and computationally.97,98 To better illustrate what is a DTT, Figure 6(a) shows a typical
trajectory in a two-state system along some CV. The system remains in the lower state for
a long period of time, before showing a quick transition to the upper state. The DTT is
the duration of just the transition between the two states (see inlet), which is signiﬁcantly
shorter than the FPT. It is deﬁned by the black dotted lines, which are plotted against a
schematic two-state free energy surface in Figure 6(b).
Because DTTs are intrinsically shorter than FPTs, if the MetaD bias over the transition
state is minimal, DTTs are much less vulnerable to inference errors that originate in bias
over-deposition. They are also less sensitive to resetting at random times, since the time
17
