A Self-Supervised Framework for Space Object Behaviour Characterisation.
12
Figure 10: Sampling the latent space of our fine-tuned Perceiver-VAE. (A) Initial exploration of noise scaling in synthetic data
generation. As in VAE training, at inference time we can offer a reference real light curve into the forward pass of the model.
Once this has been encoded, we capture the latent vectors that respond highest to this reference curve, apply gaussian noise at
different scales to these scalar values (0.25-1.0), and then decode the results. As expected, this results in synthetic light curves that
adhere to the general global feature of the input curve, but differ on local features, and at increasing variance as you increase the
distance from the latent activation. (B-C) Our synthetic data generation querying approach. Here we use the fine-tuned motion
classifier, but this could also readily be the anomaly tuned classifier from Section 2.6. D-I To generate informed synthetic data, we
first classify a held out test set using the motions described in Fig 9. Selecting a desired motion (e.g., Tumbling), we isolated test
samples with high confidence class likelihood of belonging to tumbling, before using those as our latent space activating samples.
As in (A), we then generate synthetic samples using a gaussian noise with noise scale of 0.75 around the latent activations.
Pre-training was conducted with a batch size of 32 and an initial
learning rate of 1e−3, with gradient clipping at 0.5 to prevent
exploding gradients. We implemented a learning rate sched-
uler that reduced the rate by a factor of 0.5 when validation
loss plateaued for 5 consecutive epochs. We pre-trained for 50-
200 epochs, implementing early stopping with a patience of 50
epochs to ensure proper convergence while preventing overfit-
ting.
3.4
Fine-tuning
For fine-tuning, we provide an additional constraint on the
model. In addition to the Variational autoencoding task (Equa-
tion 3), the model also minimises binary cross entropy loss
(Equation 9, or categorical cross entropy loss in the case of the
multi-class motion prediciton problem). This results in an over-
all loss term of:
Lfine-tune = Ltotal + Lclass,
(8)
