magneto-genesis before the structure formation sources the seed magnetic ﬁeld, which, after
astrophysical dynamo and compression ampliﬁcation mechanisms, forms the large-scale
magnetic ﬁeld observed today, see [9, 10] for a review. The strength of the seed magnetic
ﬁeld remains unclear due to uncertainties in the details of the dynamo mechanisms, which
typically vary from 10−12 G to 10−22 G [11, 12]. It is diﬃcult to produce such magnetic
seeds through the primordial magneto-genesis process within classical electromagnetism
and conventional cosmology [13].
Inﬂation is believed to be a major candidate for the production of a large-scale magnetic
ﬁeld. Over the past years, vast inﬂationary magneto-genesis models have been proposed
in the literature [14–26]. All of these models share a key ingredient, namely, the breaking
of conformal invariance [13]. One of the most well-studied ideas is the Ratra theory [27],
in which a scalar ﬁeld couples to the ﬁeld strength f(φ)2FµνF µν. Most of these models
potentially suﬀer from the strong coupling problem [28] or the back reaction problem [29].
Additionally, a recent study reveals an overproduction of baryon isocurvature perturbations
in any magneto-genesis scenario above the electroweak (EW) scale [30], arguably ruling out
most inﬂationary magneto-genesis scenarios.
In this paper, we propose a novel mechanism free from all the above problems. We
will instead consider a new scalar ﬁeld charged under U(1) gauge symmetry, and the
conformal invariance is broken due to the eﬀective mass term of the electromagnetic (EM)
ﬁeld generated due to a non-trivial vacuum expectation value (VEV) of the scalar. The
magnetic ﬁeld is then induced by the scalar currents in the early universe. In contrast to
the previous work we assume that the scalar ﬁeld is very light and is extremely weakly
coupled, and therefore, the scalar particles are not thermalized before the EW scale. Very
weakly coupled fermion particles (milli charged particles) have been extensively discussed
in the literature as a potential candidate for dark matter [31, 32] and could arise as a
low-energy limit of a new light U(1)′ gauge ﬁeld which kinetically mixes with the Standard
Model (SM) U(1).
The baryon isocurvature problem becomes irrelevant as long as the magneto-genesis
takes place below the EW scale. In the literature, the condition is conventionally fulﬁlled
by working in a low-scale inﬂation scenario [33–36], namely the reheating temperature is
way below the EW scale, at the cost of being contrary to the standard thermal history
of the universe. In our work, we instead assume that the magneto-genesis happens in the
standard radiation dominated epoch. The problem of baryon isocurvature can be evaded as
long as the primordial magnetic ﬁeld is generated after the electroweak symmetry breaking
(EWSB) phase, without altering the standard thermal history of our universe. Additionally,
in the radiation dominated epoch, the universe is eﬀectively a plasma, in which the induced
electric ﬁeld is diluted away by the high conductivity. Thus, we will not need to worry
about the over-production of electric ﬁelds.
One may worry about the feasibility of producing suﬃcient magnetic ﬁelds in our setup,
as the inﬂationary magnetogenesis in scalar QED theory is argued to be ineﬀective [37–41].
For instance, Ref. [41] reports a seed magnetic ﬁeld of order 10−29 G on O(1)Mpc−1 scale
from the coupling of inﬂaton with gauge ﬁeld, which is marginally acceptable assuming
a highly eﬃcient astrophysical ampliﬁcation mechanism. In radiation dominated epoch
– 2 –
