Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Human Activity Recognition using RGB-Event based Sensors
7
module for feature aggregation, the current problems in event camera pattern
recognition are solved. Li et al. [14] propose a new pattern recognition frame-
work that integrates semantic labels, RGB frames, and event streams, utilizing
pre-trained large-scale visual language models to address the semantic gap
and small-scale backbone network issues present in existing methods. TSC-
Former proposed by Wang et al. [45], which is a relatively lightweight CNN
and Transformer model. By bridging the Transformer module and interactive
feature fusion module, it achieves the capture of large-scale global relation-
ships between RGB-E modalities while maintaining a simple model structure.
For all that, the above studies have been evaluated primarily on the power-
ful global modeling capability of the Transformer network. However, due to
the quadratic complexity of the attention mechanism, especially when multi-
modal data are input, it will impose a heavy computational burden on the
network during both the training and testing phases.
2.3 Biology and Physics Inspired Models
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are widely adopted and applied
across various visual tasks [46–48]. To overcome the inherent limitation of
CNNs, which have a local receptive field, a milestone visual Transformer [49]
network was developed to create a global receptive field for images. However,
Transformers are often constrained by the quadratic complexity of their atten-
tion mechanisms. As a result, visual Mamba models [50, 51], which are based
on state space models and offer linear complexity, have gained popularity for
a range of visual tasks. Despite their efficiency, the parallelization of the selec-
tive scanning mechanism in Mamba lacks interpretability on GPUs and fails to
deliver optimal performance. In addition to the various popular neural network
models mentioned above, biology and physics-inspired visual network models
have also been widely explored. Spiking Neural Networks(SNNs) [52, 53] aim
to bridge the gap between neuroscience and machine learning by using models
that best fit the mechanisms of biological neurons for computation, closer to
the mechanisms of biological neurons for simple visual applications [54]. Diffu-
sion Models [55, 56] inspired by non-equilibrium thermodynamics, the theory
first defines the Markov chain of diffusion steps to slowly add random noise
to the data and then learns the reverse diffusion process. QB-Heat [57] uti-
lizes the heat conduction equation for self-supervised learning, especially in
the field of image feature learning. vHeat [32] treats image patches as heat
sources and computes their correlation as the diffusion of thermal energy. The
high computational efficiency and the global receptive field are achieved. In
this paper, we design a novel multi-modal human activity recognition method
based on the heat conduction model with physical principles, which has high
interpretability and lower complexity.
