Johanna Müller-Horn et al.: HIP 15429: a newborn Be star on an eccentric binary orbit
10
1
100
mass ratio q = Md/Ma
101
102
orbital period P [d]
fully
non-conservative
fully conservative
initial
conditions
final period
= 0.0
= 0.5
= 0.7
= 0.9
Fig. 12: Period vs. mass ratio evolution models for HIP 15429
assuming isotropic re-emission. The estimated present-day pe-
riod is shown as the grey dashed line, the range of tested initial
parameters of the pre-mass transfer system are indicated as the
grey-shaded region. Theoretical tracks for the case of fully (non-
) conservative mass transfer are shown as (dashed) dotted black
lines. They are chosen to match the estimated present-day bi-
nary properties. Coloured lines indicate binary evolution models
computed with varying initial periods, mass ratios and mass ac-
cretion efficiencies β, see models M3a to M3d in Table G.1. Time
evolves from left to right, with the left-most point representing
the initial values.
This yields a minimum companion mass of MBe,dyn ≥7.0 M⊙,
assuming a stripped star mass of MB,spec = 0.69 M⊙and would
imply an RV semi-amplitude of KBe ≤7.5 km/s.
All three mass constraints (spectroscopic, evolutionary, dy-
namical) and the inclination dependence of the inferred dynami-
cal companion mass are illustrated in Fig. 11. Note that the min-
imum implied dynamical mass is slightly higher than the evolu-
tionary luminosity-based mass estimate. This suggests that the
system is probably observed close to edge-on, and that the Be
star is less luminous in the optical than expected for its mass.
This could be due to recent accretion or self-absorption from a
circumstellar disk, or the star could be slightly inflated, with a
lower temperature and larger inferred radius compared to typical
main-sequence stars, possibly as a result of recent mass transfer
(Kippenhahn & Meyer-Hofmeister 1977; Lau et al. 2024).
8. Evolutionary history
We aim to constrain both the properties of the progenitor sys-
tem and the future evolution of the HIP 15429 binary. To do so,
we created binary evolution models for the system using the 1D
stellar evolution code Modules for Experiments in Stellar Astro-
physics (MESA; Paxton et al. 2011, 2013, 2015, 2018, 2019;
Jermyn et al. 2023, version 24.03.1). In a small grid of models,
we varied initial masses, mass ratios, and initial orbital periods
trying to match the current observed values. A detailed descrip-
tion of the simulation setup can be found in Appendix G.
We denote the initial parameters of the simulated binary
stars with the subscript "initial" and refer to the post-mass trans-
fer properties of the stripped and Be stars with the subscripts
"stripped" and "Be". The donor and accretor stars are indicated
with the suffixes "d" and "a", respectively. The present-day prop-
erties of the stripped and Be stars were extracted at the model
step after mass transfer where the difference between the simu-
lated and observed effective temperature of the stripped star was
minimized. At any point during the evolution, we define the bi-
nary mass ratio as q ≡Md/Ma. Since the donor star is initially the
more massive one, we have qinitial > 1.
In response to the changing mass ratio, the system’s orbital
period evolves. We computed mass transfer during Roche-lobe
overflow using the implicit mass transfer approach proposed by
Kolb & Ritter (1990) and adopted the α, β, γ, δ formalism as
described in Tauris & van den Heuvel (2006). We chose to set
α, γ, δ to zero and tested different values of the parameter β, that
is, the fraction of mass lost from the vicinity of the accretor as a
fast wind. This scenario, known as isotropic re-emission (Tauris
& van den Heuvel 2006; van den Heuvel et al. 2017), is a com-
mon assumption in binary stable mass transfer modelling and has
been proposed as the evolutionary channel also for other stripped
star + Be star binaries (e.g., HR6819, Bodensteiner et al. 2020a).
However, the actual physics underlying binary mass transfer and
angular momentum loss remain highly uncertain. Our models do
not include tides, rotation or its related effects (e.g., rotational
mixing, rotation-limited accretion), allowing the accretion effi-
ciency to be treated as a free parameter4. Under the assumption
of circular orbits and for a constant mass transfer efficiency, the
period evolution can be analytically derived by solving the equa-
tion of angular momentum balance (Soberman et al. 1997). In
the limit of fully conservative mass transfer, that is β = 0.0, the
period as a function of mass ratio is given by
P
Pinitial
=
 qinitial
q
!3  
1 + q
1 + qinitial
!6
.
(3)
Using the estimated current values of P ≈221 d and q ≲0.14,
this implies an initial period of less than 30 d, assuming an ini-
tial mass ratio of qinitial ≤2.0. For fully non-conservative mass
transfer (β = 1.0), the period evolution is described by
P
Pinitial
=
 qinitial
q
!3  
1 + q
1 + qinitial
!−2
exp (3 (q −qinitial)) .
(4)
In this case, a lower initial period is required to match the ob-
served values. The evolution of the period for both mass transfer
regimes is illustrated in Fig. 12, along with four MESA models
for intermediate values of β and initial periods ranging from 5
to 30 d. To avoid unstable mass transfer and common envelope
evolution that result in short-period systems, the initial mass ra-
tio must be comparable to or smaller than a critical value, on the
order of qcrit ≈4.0 (Temmink et al. 2023).
We first iterated through a grid of initial masses for the donor
star from 4 to 7 M⊙. We found that an initial mass of approx-
imately Md,initial = 5.5 M⊙reproduces the estimated luminos-
ity, temperature, and surface gravity of the stripped star. Fixing
the initial mass of the primary star to 5.5 M⊙, we then com-
puted a second set of models and chose values for β and Ma,initial
such that the final mass of the Be star matched our estimate of
Ma,Be ≈6 −8 M⊙. Given that the current mass of the compan-
ion star is Ma,Be = Ma,initial + (1 −β)(Md,initial −Md,stripped), this
requires less conservative mass transfer for higher initial masses
of the companion. The parameter values for all models are sum-
marised in Table G.1 in the Appendix.
4The evolution of the stripped star, which is the primary focus of
our models, is not expected to be significantly affected by rotation (Göt-
berg et al. 2018). However, we note that this simplification introduces
substantial uncertainties in the envelope structure of the Be star (e.g.,
Ramachandran et al. 2023).
Article number, page 13 of 28
