2
GIT channel is completely characterized by two analytically
computable parameters: the transmissivity η and the effective
thermal occupation number N. The non-classicality of ther-
mal attenuators has been extensively studied within the con-
text of quantum communication theory [13]. For example,
it is known that a quantum attenuator is not entanglement-
breaking if and only if η ≥(1 −η)N [18–20]. Moreover, in
the asymptotic limit of many uses, the same non-classicality
condition enables the perfect transmission of quantum infor-
mation (nonzero two-way quantum capacity) [21].
Other protocols for testing the quantum nature of grav-
ity have been proposed in the literature [22–34] (see also
[35] for a recent review).
Most of them are based on the
generation of entanglement between two gravitationally cou-
pled systems initially prepared in a separable state [22–31].
Recently, it has been argued that the hypothesis of classi-
cal gravity could be falsified even without generating entan-
glement, by simply showing that the dynamics of gravita-
tionally coupled mechanical resonators is inconsistent with
a classical description of the gravitational interaction [32–
34].
In the same spirit, our work does not aim at gener-
ating gravitationally-induced entanglement, but at assessing
whether a gravitationally-induced quantum channel is non-
classical (in the sense of non-entanglement-breaking). This
is a weaker requirement than observing entanglement genera-
tion, but still sufficient for ruling out a classical model of grav-
ity. For example, even in a regime in which the GIT channel is
non-classical, entanglement is typically absent in the station-
ary quantum state of the optomechanical systems.
The model— We consider two independent laser-driven op-
tomechanical systems that we call S 1 and S 2 (see Fig. 1).
Each system S j is composed of an optical cavity mode of
frequency ωA driven by an external coherent laser pump of
frequency ωpump and interacting with a mechanical resonator
of frequency ωB (e.g. via radiation pressure). Assuming the
system is driven into a stable semi-classical steady state and
linearizing the dynamics around the classical mean-field solu-
tion, the effective optomechanical Hamiltonian of S j is [14–
16]
H j = ℏ∆a†
jaj + ℏωBb†
jbj + ℏg(a†
j + a j)(b†
j + bj),
(1)
where a j and bj are the annihilation operators of the optical
and mechanical modes respectively, ∆= ωA −ωpump is the op-
tical detuning, and g is the effective optomechanical coupling
(proportional to the driving pump amplitude). For simplic-
ity, we use the same parameters for H1 and H2, but similar
results also hold for asymmetric parameters, as discussed in
Supplemental Material S.II. We assume that S 1 and S 2 are
well isolated from each other, apart from a weak gravitational
interaction between the mechanical modes that, for the mo-
ment, we avoid specifying to remain as general as possible.
We remark that gravity must be the only interaction between
S 1 and S 2, meaning that, for example, any electromagnetic
interaction is well screened (see e.g. [36]).
We also take dissipation and thermal noise into account.
We assume that the optical modes and the mechanical modes
are characterized by damping rates κ and γ respectively and
that they are coupled to their respective noise operators, ain j
and bin j [37]. The noise operators are optical and mechanical
fields characterized by the following bosonic commutators:
[ain j(t), ainj(t′)†] = [bin j(t), bin j(t′)†] = δ(t −t′).
(2)
For the mechanical modes, we assume a thermal Markovian
environment with ⟨bin j⟩= 0 and correlation functions
⟨bin j(t)†bin j(t′)⟩= NTδ(t −t′), ⟨bin j(t)bin j(t′)⟩= 0,
(3)
where NT is the mean bosonic occupation number at temper-
ature T and mechanical frequency ωB, i.e., NT = [exp
 ℏωB
kBT

−
1]−1, with kB denoting the Boltzmann constant.
The optical noise operators ainj(t) admit a clear physical
interpretation since they correspond to the actual radiation
fields entering the optical cavities from their unique input-
output port. Such operators should be considered as weak
fields in addition to the strong classical laser pumps (implicit
in the mean-field linearization). We assume the second cav-
ity is not driven by any additional optical field beyond the
laser pump. This means ain2(t) represents vacuum noise with
⟨ain2(t)⟩= ⟨ain2(t)†ain2(t′)⟩= 0. On the contrary, for the first
optical cavity, we assume an arbitrary input probe field pre-
pared in a generic quantum state, with the only restriction of
being weaker than the classical pump. The motivation for as-
suming an arbitrary ain1(t) is that in this work we are interested
in the gravity-induced quantum channel from the optical input
of the first cavity to the optical output of the second cavity (see
Fig. 1). For the same reason, we apply the input-output theory
of a single-sided optical cavity [37], to obtain the output field
emerging from the second cavity:
aout2(t) = √κa2(t) −ain2(t).
(4)
Without gravity, S 1 and S 2 would be completely indepen-
dent and any signal encoded into ain1(t) would never be trans-
mitted to aout2(t). With gravity, S 1 and S 2 are coupled, and
part of the input signal may reach aout2(t). Thus gravity can
activate an effective transmission line from ain1(t) to aout2(t),
i.e., a quantum optical channel from S 1 to S 2 as shown in
Fig. 1.
We call this phenomenon gravitationally induced
transparency (GIT) because it is analogous to the electromag-
netic [38] and optomechanical [39] counterparts and because
transparency is only induced in a narrow frequency window
of the order of the mechanical effective linewidth (see Sup-
plemental Material S.I C).
Non-classicality criterion— The key point of this work is re-
lating the non-classicality of gravity to the non-classicality of
the gravitationally induced optical channel from a mode of the
input field ain1(t) to a mode of the output field aout2(t). Indeed,
since gravity is the only mediator between S 1 and S 2, the ex-
perimental observation of a non-classical channel between S 1
and S 2 would imply that gravity cannot be described as a clas-
sical process such as, for example, a classical feedback-like
mechanism “reading” the position of a particle and applying a
related force on another particle [7–11].
A proper theory of gravity in the quantum limit is still un-
known but, on the contrary, a quantum theory of channels be-
tween optical modes is scientifically mature and experimen-
tally accessible [13, 19].
In particular, given a channel Φ
