Critical Slowing Down in Bifurcating Stochastic Partial
Differential Equations with Red Noise
P. Bernuzzi1,†, C. Kuehn1,2, and A. Morr3,4
1Technical University of Munich, School of Computation Information and Technology, Department of Mathematics, Boltzmannstraße 3,
85748 Garching, Germany
2Technical University of Munich, Munich Data Science Institute, Walther-von-Dyck-Straße 10, 85748 Garching, Germany
3Technical University of Munich, School of Engineering and Design, Lise-Meitner Str. 9, 85521 Ottobrunn, Germany
4Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, Research Domain IV: Complexity Science, Telegrafenberg A 31, 14473 Potsdam, Germany
†Author to whom any correspondence should be addressed.
Email addresses: paolo.bernuzzi@ma.tum.de (P. Bernuzzi), ckuehn@ma.tum.de (C. Kuehn), andreas.morr@tum.de (A. Morr).
April 9, 2025
Abstract
The phenomenon of critical slowing down (CSD) has played a key role in the search for reliable precursors of
catastrophic regime shifts. This is caused by its presence in a generic class of bifurcating dynamical systems. Simple
time-series statistics such as variance or autocorrelation can be taken as proxies for the phenomenon, making their
increase a useful early warning signal (EWS) for catastrophic regime shifts. However, the modelling basis justifying the
use of these EWSs is usually a finite-dimensional stochastic ordinary differential equation, where a mathematical proof
for the aptness is possible. Only recently has the phenomenon of CSD been proven to exist in infinite-dimensional
stochastic partial differential equations (SPDEs), which are more appropriate to model real-world spatial systems. In
this context, we provide an essential extension of the results for SPDEs under a specific noise forcing, often referred to
as red noise. This type of time-correlated noise is omnipresent in many physical systems, such as climate and ecology.
We approach the question with a mathematical proof and a numerical analysis for the linearised problem. We find that
also under red noise forcing, the aptness of EWSs persists, supporting their employment in a wide range of applications.
However, we also find that false or muted warnings are possible if the noise correlations are non-stationary. We thereby
extend a previously known complication with respect to red noise and EWSs from finite-dimensional dynamics to the
more complex and realistic setting of SPDEs.
Keywords: SPDEs, Early-warning signs, Critical Slowing Down, Red noise, Bifurcations.
MSC codes: 60H15
Funding: This work was supported by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under Grant
Agreement 956170. This is ClimTip contribution #. The ClimTip project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon
Europe research and innovation programme under grant agreement No. 101137601. Views and opinions expressed are however
those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European Climate, Infrastructure,
and Environment Executive Agency (CINEA). Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for
them.
1
Introduction
Identifying and assessing high-impact events, such as climate tipping points or ecological catastrophes, has gained tremendous
importance recently [37, 2]. The non-linear, potentially abrupt response of complex systems to anthropogenic changes poses a
grave challenge for conventional modelling techniques [49]. This has motivated the use of conceptual models, wherein the complex,
high-dimensional dynamics are reduced to a few variables and their characterising feedback mechanisms. Often, a noise model is
added to replace some of the omitted complexity [40, 55]. In such conceptual models, the nature of abrupt regime shifts can be
formalized as dynamical bifurcations, that is, a vanishing of a previously stable equilibrium state [1, 12].
1
arXiv:2504.06198v1  [math.PR]  8 Apr 2025
