9
The terms given in Eqs. (33)-(36) pin the arguments of
the cosines to constant values in order to minimize the
total energy of the system. In the parameter regime we
are considering, all fields in the bulk and on the surfaces
of the sample are pinned in a pairwise fashion, such that
the bulk and surfaces are fully gapped.
However, two
chiral states eφ11Ny11¯1 and eφ¯1NzNy¯11¯1, propagating along
the x direction and localized at the hinges of the sam-
ple, do not appear in the sums and thus remain gapless.
Following Refs. [19, 20], one can show that these states
carry a fractional charge e/p.
Finally, the gapless states propagating along the y and
z direction can be found in a similar way as in the integer
case. Again, the path of the fractionally charged gapless
hinge states depends on the dimerization pattern and the
boundary termination of the sample.
V.
CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
We have constructed a model of a chiral 3D SOTI from
an array of weakly coupled nanowires. The specific choice
of helical magnetic fields and spatially modulated inter-
wire couplings allows the model to host (single or multi-
ple) integer or fractional gapless chiral hinge states, while
the bulk and surfaces remain fully gapped. The fractional
regime emerges in the presence of strong electron-electron
interactions, which have been effectively treated using a
bosonized language. In this regime, the hinge states carry
a fraction of the elementary electron charge e/p (with p
being an odd positive integer), and quasiparticle excita-
tions are predicted to obey nontrivial Abelian braiding
statistics [19, 20]. Furthermore, the path of the gapless
hinge states can be controlled by adjusting the interwire
coupling amplitudes and boundary terminations.
We have proposed two potential realizations of the
model: one of them is based on rotating magnetic fields,
and the other one on the interplay between SOI and uni-
form magnetic fields. In both cases, the total magneti-
zation is equal to zero, such that the SOTI phases con-
structed in this work effectively correspond to integer and
fractional QAH phases. Although our model is primar-
ily of theoretical interest and serves to expand the set of
analytically tractable toy models for strongly interacting
phases, some of its aspects can, in principle, be imple-
mented in experiments. In this context, recent progress
in realizing fractional QAH effect in layered systems [49–
53] looks promising.
Finally, we note that our 3D model of coupled wires
could potentially be modified to enter other second-order
QAH phases at filling factors l = q/p, where q and p
are positive integers. This modification would allow the
system to host not only Abelian but also non-Abelian
quasiparticle excitations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Swiss National Sci-
ence Foundation and NCCR SPIN (Grant No. 51NF40-
180604).
This project received funding from the Eu-
ropean Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
program (ERC Starting Grant, Grant Agreement No.
757725).
K. L. acknowledges support by the Labora-
tory for Physical Sciences through the Condensed Matter
Theory Center.
Appendix A: Hinge states in the model with SOI
In this Appendix, we show that the SOI-based model,
described in subsection II B of the main text, is equiva-
lent to the model based on helical magnetic fields and,
hence, can also host gapless chiral hinge states.
In
the model with SOI, the chemical potential is tuned to
µ(l) = Eso(l2 −1) and the Fermi momenta are given by
k(l)
F ± = kso(1 ± l). In the usual manner, we rewrite the
Hamiltonian in a basis of slowly varying right and left
movers inside each wire:
Ψnmτν(τ ¯ν) = eik(l)
F +xRnmτν(τ ¯ν) + eik(l)
F −xLnmτν(τ ¯ν), (A1)
Ψnmτν(τν) = e−ik(l)
F −xRnmτν(τν) + e−ik(l)
F +xLnmτν(τν).
(A2)
As a result, we find the Hamiltonian density
H0 + HSOI = −iv(l)
F
X
τ,ν,σ
(R†
nmτνσ∂xRnmτνσ
−L†
nmτνσ∂xLnmτνσ),
(A3)
where v(l)
F
= αl.
This expression coincides with the
Hamiltonian density H0 of the main model given by
Eq. (13). It is then straightforward to show that for l = 1,
the magnetic and tunneling terms written in the basis of
right and left movers are the same as those in Fig. 2 in
leading order of the perturbation theory. Hence, the al-
ternative model has a fully gapped bulk as well as fully
gapped xy and xz surfaces, but hosts two gapless hinge
states R1Ny11¯1 and LNzNy¯11¯1.
Similarly, it can easily be shown that the results
for the multi-state regime from subsection III B are
also valid for the SOI-based model.
However, in con-
trast to the cases of l = 1 and l = 1/p, the tunnel-
ing amplitudes in the z direction now depend on l as
t(l)
zν(x) = 2tzν[cos(2k(l)
F +x) + cos(2k(l)
F −x)] and ˜t(l)
zν(x) =
2˜tzν[cos(2k(l)
F +x) + cos(2k(l)
F −x)]. In this case, they cou-
ple both exterior modes with Fermi momenta ±k(l)
F + and
interior modes with ±k(l)
F −, but leave 2l gapless hinge
states.
