4
III.
METRIC REPRESENTATION OF THE
DENSITY MATRIX AND PATH INTEGRAL
We then reach to the following expression for the den-
sity matrix of spacetime
ˆρ ∝e−β ˆ
H,
(26)
where ˆH is the spacetime Hamiltonian.
In the non-
quantum high temperature regime we can let β →β/M
with M a large integer. Then we can use for the high tem-
perature density matrix the usual classical limit [2, 12–14]
ρ(gµν, g′
µν; τ) ∝exp

−τ
Z
Ω
 1
2κR + LF
 p
3g d3x

δ[gµν(x) −g′
µν(x)],
(27)
where gµν(x) is the spacetime metric tensor, x
≡
(ct, x) = (x0, x1, x2, x3) is an event in space(x)time(t),
τ = β/M is a small complex time step, R is the Ricci
scalar of the spacetime subregion, κ = 8πGc−4 is Ein-
stein’s gravitational constant (G is the gravitational con-
stant and c is the speed of light in vacuum), Ωis the vol-
ume of space of the subregion whose spacetime is curved
by the matter and electromagnetic ﬁelds due to the term
LF , and 3g is the determinant of the spatial block of the
metric tensor. In Eq. (27) the δ is a functional delta [15].
Using then Trotter formula [16] we reach to the path
integral expression described in Ref.
[2] for the ﬁnite
temperature case, where the metric tensor path wan-
ders in the spacetime subregion made of the complex
time interval [0, ¯hβ/c[ with periodic boundary condi-
tions and the spatial region Ω. The spatial region can
be compact in the absence of black holes or not if any
are present.
In any case it can either include its out-
ermost frontier or not but from a numerical point of
view it is convenient to use periodic boundary conditions
there in order to simulate a thermodynamic limit so that
only the frontiers around eventual black holes matter.
The metric tensor 10-dimensional space is an hypertorus
with gµν(ct + β(x), x) = gµν(ct, x) and gµν(ct, x + ξ) =
gµν(ct, x). In the classical regime, when β is small, and if
the periodicities along diﬀerent spatial dimensions are in-
commensurable, i.e. ξi/ξj for i ̸= j cannot be written as
rational numbers, then the Einstein ﬁeld equations will
let the metric tensor explore its phase space in a quasi-
periodic fashion, so that one can use either a “molecular-
” (or “hydro-”) dynamics numerical simulation strategy,
since the imaginary time averages equals the ensemble
averages thanks to ergodicity, or a Monte Carlo numer-
ical simulation strategy. In the quantum regime, when
β is big, it is necessary to use the Path Integral Monte
Carlo method described above.
The ﬁeld theory we are approaching with our path in-
tegral method where the main actor is the metric tensor
ﬁeld may be subject to triviality problems as the ones
that occur for example when treating the ϕr
n scalar eu-
clidean covariant relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory [5] for
r ≥2n/(n−2) where n is the number of spacetime dimen-
sions and r the integer positive power of the interaction
term g|ϕ(x)|r, g being the coupling constant. It could
be that as happen in that scalar case also for the tenso-
rial case studied here, aﬃne quantization plays a crucial
role. As already mentioned in footnote 2 aﬃne quanti-
zation is a necessary tool to treat a constrained theory
with mathematical rigor. Moreover it is diﬀerent from
the quantization proposed by Ashtekar [6] and as such it
is novel.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
We gave logical foundation to the statistical gravity
horizontal theory we recently proposed [2, 12]. Our weak-
ness in discussing Eq. (2) does not reﬂect a weakness in
the current knowledge and studies around that equation
but is just our lack of deep vertical awareness.
Our statistical theory of gravitation deﬁnes a temper-
ature of the metric tensor which measures the distances
between events in spacetime as the derivative of the en-
ergy of the metric respect to its entropy.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conﬂict of interest
The author has no conﬂicts to disclose.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are
available from the corresponding author upon reasonable
request.
[1] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Statistical Physics,
Course of Theoretical Physics,
Vol. 5 (Butterworth
Heinemann, 1951) translated from the Russian by J. B.
