Early Warning Signs for SPDEs with Red Noise
Using the effect of noise, there is a particular phenomenon to be observed before these bifurcations. This phenomenon is often
called critical slowing down (CSD) [32] since it describes the weakening response of the destabilizing system to noise disturbances.
CSD has been taken as the basis for many statistical early warning signals (EWSs) in time series data. An increase in variance
is often interpreted as an ongoing destabilization and an impending system collapse [11, 15]. However, the exact behaviour of the
system under noise close to the bifurcation depends on the type of noise [33, 44, 5]. One specific noise model, referred to as red
noise, can represent time correlation in the dynamics and is, therefore, suitable for a large range of applications [26, 51, 48]. In the
context of CSD, it can be shown that an increase in variance precedes a bifurcation, but only under the assumption of stationary
noise [44]. If the correlation time of the noise is itself subject to change, the EWS may be false or muted [18].
An additional challenge to the validity of EWSs is the simplicity of the employed low-dimensional conceptual model [4, 39]. In
particular, it is often impossible to rigorously derive a low-dimensional model from the real-world system, which will generally be a
spatial and infinite-dimensional dynamical system. A system of partial differential equations (PDEs) can more accurately describe
these dynamics [22]. However, even then, a stochastic noise term may be needed to replace fast time scale dynamics beyond the
model’s resolution[3, 47]. Such stochastic partial differential equations (SPDEs) have only recently been investigated in the context
of EWSs for bifurcations [9, 7, 6, 24, 34]. These works supply a mathematical basis for the use of EWSs in a considerably larger
range of dynamical systems. The investigated noise model is the canonical white noise model applied to the domain and boundary
dynamics, respectively.
In this work, we advance the previous findings on the applicability of variance and autocorrelation-based EWSs. As discussed,
this has already been achieved for low-dimensional models with red noise and for SPDEs with white noise. Here, we investigate
SPDEs under the influence of red noise. This step is essential in assuring the aptness of the CSD and EWS framework in real-world
systems. This is because real-world systems will generally be infinite-dimensional, and their chaotic, fast-time scale dynamics will
typically exhibit time correlation [26, 54, 50]. We investigate two types of red noise influences on PDEs that are losing stability.
These are (i) additive noise in the dynamical equations and (ii) linear boundary additive noise. We analytically examine linearised
SPDEs corresponding to non-linear bifurcating SPDEs [9, 6, 24]. The characteristics of such systems are relevant to real-world
systems because the noise is assumed to be small, and the dynamics evolve close to equilibrium, where linear first-order behaviour
dominates. In numerical experiments, we then confirm the predicted behaviour.
Our findings indicate that several SPDE components need to be considered to properly understand the occurring destabilisation.
The nature of the noise, i.e., the regions and the modes it affects, has complex implications for the solution. However, with respect
to CSD, these implications turn out to be negligible in a certain sense: a generic observable of the system will exhibit an increase
in variance before the bifurcation. At the same time, a generic observable of a system without a bifurcation but with increasing
noise correlation time will exhibit false EWSs. Such indications could be misinterpreted as an approaching bifurcation. When
considering the structure of the deterministic PDE, the spectrum of the linearised equation plays a two-fold role: it characterises
the linear stability of the studied equilibrium and small gaps between the eigenvalues delay EWSs as the critical transition is
approached. This effect is worse for the limit of a purely continuous spectrum, discussed further below. Conversely, the signals
can be highly affected by enhanced perturbations along specific modes generated by the interplay between additive noise on the
component itself and noise mediated by other generalized eigenfunctions in the same generalized eigenspace.
The paper is structured as follows. We introduce standard mathematical tools employed in the construction of the EWSs in Section
2. In Section 3, we prove fundamental statements about the limit behaviour of system variance in linear SPDEs losing stability
and driven by red noise. Such a stability loss is a generic feature of dynamical bifurcations in non-linear systems. Both the case of
stability loss under stationary noise conditions and under non-stationary noise conditions are investigated. We then confirm these
findings in numerical models of practical relevance in Section 4. Finally, we discuss the results in the context of ongoing research
on EWSs for bifurcations, such as climate tipping points.
2
Preliminaries
The following framework allows for the modelling of space-time dynamical systems under the influence of stochastic perturbations.
More concretely, we analyse the time evolution of a physical quantity u defined on a space domain under the influence of so-called
red noise. We set the space domain X1 ⊂RN and the Hilbert space H1 := L2(X1) of possible solutions u(·, t) ∈H1 for any t > 0.
We indicate the scalar product of this solution space as ⟨·, ·⟩. In contrast, we refer to the scalar product of any other Hilbert space
˜
H as ⟨·, ·⟩˜
H. The scalar product with respect to specific probing functions will play a central role in defining the concept of system
variance, a potential EWS of bifurcations. We focus on SPDEs on X1 with red noise or boundary red noise. As such, we define
the boundary X0 := ∂X1 of X1, and we label H0 := L2(X0). For κ > 0, σ > 0 and j ∈{0, 1}, we define the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
process ξj = ξj(x, t) that solves
dξj(x, t) = −κξj(x, t)dt + σQ
1
2
j dW j
t ,
(2.1)
for any x ∈Xj and t > 0. Such a process is often referred to in the literature as red noise [28, 29, 41, 38, 46]. This is because
its power spectral density is weighted most heavily in the low (red) frequencies. The constant κ > 0 controls the characteristic
correlation time 1/κ of the noise. The smaller κ, the longer it takes for correlations in the noise to decay. For j ∈{0, 1}, i.e.,
2
