cancel out in the νe/ντ ratio. This opens the door to lepton flavour universality studies with neutrino
interactions with unprecedented accuracy.
The collected datasets will enable a rich programme of neutrino physics measurements, providing
valuable SM tests as well as BSM searches, and serving as an essential benchmark for future neutrino
experiments.
Table 1 shows the expected neutrino yield in 15 years of operation, assuming a 3-tonne neutrino
detector. A key objective of SHiP is the first direct observation of tau anti-neutrinos, which have yet to
be directly detected experimentally. Until now, only nine tau neutrino candidate events were reported
by the DONUT experiment [18] without distinguishing between neutrinos and anti-neutrinos, and ten
muon-to-tau neutrino oscillations were observed by the Opera experiment [19]. The only leptonic decay
observed by OPERA shows negative charge as expected from a tau neutrino interaction.
By exploiting the high-intensity proton beam at the SPS and using a magnetised detector config-
uration, SHiP will measure both tau neutrino and anti-neutrino interactions with high statistics. This will
turn into the only precise study of tau-neutrino cross-sections, significantly improving our understanding
of neutrino-nucleon interactions in the 10 – 100 GeV energy range.
Beyond total cross-sections, SHiP will perform detailed studies of deep inelastic scattering (DIS)
structure functions, specifically measuring for the first time the F4 and F5 structure functions that are
unique to tau neutrino interactions [3]. These measurements are crucial for refining theoretical models of
neutrino-nucleus interactions, which play a fundamental role in current and future long-baseline neutrino
oscillation experiments.
Another essential contribution of SHiP to neutrino physics is the study of neutrino-induced charm
production [3, 17]. This process is particularly sensitive to the strange-quark content of nucleons and
provides an independent probe of the partonic structure of the nucleon. Precise measurements of charm
production in neutrino interactions will also allow a direct determination of the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-
Maskawa (CKM) matrix element |Vcd|. Currently, the uncertainty on |Vcd| is dominated by theoret-
ical uncertainties in charm production modeling. The high-statistics sample of neutrino-induced charm
events at SHiP will offer a novel approach to determine |Vcd| with improved precision, complementing
measurements from meson decays and lattice QCD calculations.
Finally, SHiP will also explore BSM physics closely related to neutrinos. Examples include an
excess of τ neutrinos, where hypothetical new physics mediators are efficiently produced in proton col-
lisions and then decay into ντ [20], and exotic neutrino up-scattering events, producing FIPs that either
decay after traveling a macroscopic distance or escape the detection [13].
CC DIS
Charm CC DIS
Nνe
2.0 × 106
1.2 × 105
Nνµ
5.8 × 106
2.8 × 105
Nντ
5.9 × 104
3.2 × 103
Nνe
4.0 × 105
2.1 × 104
Nνµ
1.3 × 106
5.0 × 104
Nντ
4.3 × 104
2.5 × 103
Table 1: Neutrino charged-current deep inelastic interactions (left) and those with a charmed hadron in the final
state (right), assuming a mass of 3 tonnes and 15 years of operation.
SHiP’s dedicated detector for neutrinos and scattering signatures will provide not only a
crucial test of the SM in the neutrino sector but also ensure that SHiP delivers impactful physics
results independently of potential discoveries in the hidden sector. The guaranteed nature of these
neutrino measurements strengthens SHiP’s role in the global neutrino-physics landscape.
5
