Main results
6
maximum in a bounded region and then take the limit as the size of the region tends to infinity in order
to obtain the “cluster process” which describes the shape of the field around a mesoscopic maximum.
In the continuum however, conditioning the origin to be a maximum even within a bounded region
becomes problematic, as such a conditioning is already degenerate.
To address this issue, we introduce a “softer” form of conditioning: we fix an arbitrary threshold
λ > 0 and, instead of conditioning on the origin being a mesoscopic maximum, we condition on
the value at the origin being at least as large as the nearest mesoscopic maximum minus λ. This
conditioning is non-degenerate within a bounded region as long as λ > 0. Theorem A proves that
we can then take the limit as the region size increases to infinity, thus yielding a limiting field eΥλ.
Finally, we show the existence of a unique random field Ψ on Rd which is 0 at the origin, takes only
negative values, is independent of the arbitrary threshold λ, and such that eΥλ can be expressed as a
randomly shifted version of Ψ (under a suitably tilted measure, see (2.10) for details). In this sense,
we can consider Ψ as the canonical field describing the shape of the field X from the perspective of a
mesoscopic maximum.
Acknowledgements. This work grew out of discussions between MH and Christophe Garban at the 2023
SwissMAP Workshop in Mathematical Physics. We are also grateful to Michael Aizenman and R´emi Rhodes for
interesting discussions on this topic. Both authors were supported by the Royal Society through MH’s Research
Professorship RP\R1\191065.
2
Main results
We now provide a description of our main results. First, in Section 2.1, we discuss the shape of a
⋆-scale invariant field around a mesoscopic maximum. Following that, in Section 2.2, we state the
result concerning the convergence of the supercritical GMC. In Section 2.3, we present the result
regarding the convergence of the measure-valued processes (µγ,t+s)s≥0 as t →∞.
2.1
Local structure of extremal points
We aim to investigate the local structure around points within the domain where the field attains
unusually large values, comparable to its maximum. The strong correlation with nearby points
suggests that each peak in the field comes with a cluster of high values. These clusters of high-value
points are generally well-separated from each other. By selecting one of these clusters and identifying
as reference point the maximum of the field inside the cluster, our goal is to describe the “shape” of
the field in the vicinity of this reference point.
Remark 2.1. We will see that the behaviour of Xb near a mesoscopic maximum is dominated by its
radial dependence. This in turn behaves like a Brownian motion, with time playing the role of the
logarithm of spatial distance. It is useful to keep this analogy in mind when parsing the results in this
section.
In order to make this heuristic precise, we need to introduce some notation.
Definition 2.2. For b ∈(0, ∞), we introduce the recentering constant mb by letting
mb
def=
√
2db −
3
2
√
2d
log b .
(2.1)
Furthermore, we define functions hb : Rd →R and ab : Rd →R by
hb(x)
def= 1
b
Z b
0
K(e−sx)ds ,
ab(x)
def=
Z b
0
(1 −K(e−sx))ds ,
(2.2)
with the definition of ab extended also to the case b = ∞.
