6
are degenerate when
G(Qt) = 0,
(22a)
V (Qc) = 0,
(22b)
i.e., at a position where the diabatic coupling is zero along
Qc and where the diabatic curves cross along Qt.
Depending
on
the
role
of
symmetry
in
solving
Eqs. (22a) and (22b), conical intersections are classified
into three categories38: symmetry-required, symmetry-
allowed, and same-symmetry conical intersections. The
first category pertains to molecules with a non-Abelian
point group, in situations where the electronic states
defining the intersection belong to a degenerate ir-
reducible representation.
In this case, both condi-
tions (22a) and (22b) can be determined from group the-
ory. For symmetry-allowed intersections, only (22b) can
be found using symmetry. Finally, for same-symmetry
intersections, both conditions are fulfilled accidentally39.
This explains why conical intersections between elec-
tronic states of the same symmetry have not been ex-
tensively studied, despite the development of algorithms
to find them40–43. In contrast, many diabatic models for
conical intersections between electronic states of different
symmetry can be found in the literature27,36,44.
Let us return to pyrazine to better understand how
point group theory can be used to locate a symmetry-
allowed conical intersection by solving Eq. (22b).
For
all types of intersection, a nuclear normal mode j can
couple two electronic states m and n at first order if the
relation45,46
Γm ⊗Γj ⊗Γn ⊃ΓTS,
(23)
is satisfied.
That is, if the direct product of the irre-
ducible representations Γm and Γn of the two electronic
states and of the irreducible representation Γj of the
nuclear normal mode contains the totally symmetric ir-
reducible representation ΓTS. In pyrazine, the only vi-
brational mode that can couple the electronic states S1
(B3u) and S2 (B2u) is the out-of-plane mode Q10a of B1g
symmetry36. In addition, we saw that the diabatic cou-
pling (3) between electronic states of different irreducible
representations is a linear (and not an affine) function of
the coupling mode. Consequently, the conical intersec-
tion must be contained in the Q10a = 0 hyperplane to
satisfy Eq. (22b). In contrast, the diabatic coupling be-
tween electronic states of the same symmetry evaluated
to first order in Qc is, in general, an affine function of the
coupling coordinate (i.e., contains not only a linear but
also a constant term), and the point at which the cou-
pling vanishes cannot be determined from group theory.
Most conical intersections studied in the literature in-
volve internal conversion between electronic states be-
longing to different irreducible representations, for which
the coupling vibrational mode cannot be totally symmet-
ric. This means that motion along this mode breaks the
molecular symmetry.
In Abelian point groups such as
Figure 3.
Contour plots of the adiabatic surfaces defining
conical intersections between electronic states of (a) different
and (b) same symmetry.
The cross marks the location of
the intersection, and the arrow shows the direction of the
force acting on a classical particle initialized at the Franck-
Condon point q0 in the excited state S2.
The last column
presents cuts of the conical intersections along the coupling
mode, highlighting their (a) peaked profile and (b) sloped
profile.
D2h, positive and negative displacements along a non-
totally symmetric mode result in the same configura-
tion47.
As a result, the potential energy curves along
the coupling mode Qc are symmetric with respect to the
Qc = 0 hyperplane, as seen for pyrazine in Fig. 2(c), and
the intra-state coupling coefficient κim in Eq. (4) of the
coupling mode must be zero. In contrast, the coupling
mode between electronic states of the same symmetry
must be totally symmetric, allowing the corresponding
coefficient κim to be nonzero.
D.
Internal conversion between electronic states of the
same symmetry
In Ref. 46, Neville et al. introduced two-dimensional
models to represent conical intersections between elec-
tronic states of both different and same symmetry. The
authors achieved this change of symmetry by varying the
coefficient κim of the coupling mode. Increasing this coef-
ficient tilts the angle nc of the conical intersection. Using
their parametrization, we took the models corresponding
to peaked (nc = 0◦) and sloped (nc = 10◦) conical inter-
sections. Although the diabatic potential is convenient
for propagation, interpreting the dynamics based on the
topology of the potential energy surfaces is not intuitive
in this representation. For this reason, Fig. 3 shows the
