16 
separate findings that the likelihood of smoking itself is associated with SDOH,58 and potentially 
combine that data with iHDIs from a collection of lung images acquired from known smokers. 
Third, for iHDIs to be used in HD research, additional extensive work would be needed to identify 
which medical imaging data source and radiomic features are most practical and useful as well as 
validate their association with differences in health outcomes. Collaboration among medical 
imaging scientists, radiologists, informaticians, biostatisticians, and HD researchers will be 
crucial. Additionally, it would be useful to present the iHDIs with measures of variance, such as 
95% confidence intervals, to enhance statistical analysis. However, at the time of manuscript 
publication, documentation for calculating the variance of the measures was not available for 
HD*Calc. Lastly, the data used in the study was drawn from one institution, and the SDOH 
demographic correlates are representative of only this area. Future studies will expand the use of 
iHDIs to multiple institutions and geographic locations. 
In summary, for the first time, the use of medical images as a data source for HD research, via 
high through-put data extraction and merging for a data input to HD indices, has been 
demonstrated.  
References 
1. National Institutes of Health National Cancer Institute Division of Cancer Control and 
Population Sciences. Health Drivers. Accessed February 28, 2025. 
https://cancercontrol.cancer.gov/hd 
2. Minority Health and Health Disparities Definitions. NIMHD. Accessed January 6, 2025. 
https://www.nimhd.nih.gov/resources/understanding-health-disparities/minority-health-and-
health-disparities-definitions.html 
3. Health disparities and health inequalities: applying All Our Health. GOV.UK. Accessed 
March 24, 2025. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/health-disparities-and-health-
inequalities-applying-all-our-health/health-disparities-and-health-inequalities-applying-all-
our-health 
