PHILOSOPHICAL TRANSACTIONS OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY A, VOLUME 383, ISSUE 2289, 2025, DOI:10.1098/RSTA.2024.0146
1
Rolling Horizon Coverage Control with
Collaborative Autonomous Agents
Savvas Papaioannou, Panayiotis Kolios, Theocharis Theocharides,
Christos G. Panayiotou and Marios M. Polycarpou
Abstract
This work proposes a coverage controller that enables an aerial team of distributed autonomous agents to collaboratively
generate non-myopic coverage plans over a rolling finite horizon, aiming to cover specific points on the surface area of a 3D
object of interest. The collaborative coverage problem, formulated, as a distributed model predictive control problem, optimizes
the agents’ motion and camera control inputs, while considering inter-agent constraints aiming at reducing work redundancy. The
proposed coverage controller integrates constraints based on light-path propagation techniques to predict the parts of the object’s
surface that are visible with regard to the agents’ future anticipated states. This work also demonstrates how complex, non-linear
visibility assessment constraints can be converted into logical expressions that are embedded as binary constraints into a mixed-
integer optimization framework. The proposed approach has been demonstrated through simulations and practical applications for
inspecting buildings with unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs).
Index Terms
Intelligent agents, UAVs, Planning, Coverage, Model Predictive Control
I. INTRODUCTION
The interest in swarm systems such as systems utilizing multiple autonomous unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) has
skyrocketed over the last few decades. Rapid advancements in robotics, automation and artificial intelligence coupled with the
decreasing costs of electronic components have fuelled a remarkable surge in interest towards the technologies and applications
of swarming systems. This work addresses the challenge of coverage planning and control using multiple collaborative intelligent
autonomous agents, specifically autonomous UAVs. Coverage planning [1] is crucial in several application domains including
search and rescue operations and critical infrastructure inspections. It is one of the essential functionalities that can notably
enhance the autonomy of existing swarming systems enabling them to execute fully automated missions in the aforementioned
scenarios. In coverage planning our objective is to design trajectories that allow a team of autonomous mobile agents to
comprehensively cover a designated area or points of interest. Concurrently we aim to optimize a specific mission goal such
as minimizing the mission’s duration and energy consumption of the agents.
This work introduces a coverage control framework that optimizes both the kinematic and camera control inputs of multiple
UAV agents simultaneously. This approach facilitates the creation of collaborative non-myopic coverage plans for 3D objects of
interest. Specifically, the contributions of this work are the following: a) We propose a coverage planning framework designed
to enable an aerial team of distributed agents to efficiently cover specific points on the surface area of an object of interest
in 3D. Specifically, we develop a collaborative model predictive coverage controller that orchestrates the agents guiding them
to optimally select their kinematic and camera control inputs. This process facilitates the generation of complementary non-
myopic coverage plans that optimize coverage; b) we demonstrate that these collaborative coverage plans can be generated by
incorporating light-path propagation constraints into the coverage controller. This integration aids in identifying parts of the scene
that will be visible from the agents’ projected future positions, a crucial aspect of developing effective non-myopic coverage
strategies; and finally c) we demonstrate how the proposed collaborative coverage controller can be realized using mixed-
integer programming techniques (MIP), by transforming complex, non-linear coverage constraints into logical expressions. We
showcase its performance through both qualitative and quantitative real-world and synthetic experiments.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section II reviews the relevant literature on coverage planning with single and
multiple agents. Section III formulates the problem addressed in this study. Section IV details the proposed approach followed
by an evaluation in Section V. Section VI discusses open problems and future directions in swarm systems and finally Section
VII concludes this work.
II. RELATED WORK
With consumer drones becoming widespread and affordable coverage planning research has focused recently towards UAV-
based applications. For instance, [2] uses a traveling-salesman approach for UAV-based coverage of 2D polygonal areas
The authors are with the KIOS Research and Innovation Centre of Excellence (KIOS CoE) and the Department of Electrical and Com-
puter Engineering, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, 1678, Cyprus. {papaioannou.savvas, pkolios, ttheocharides, christosp,
mpolycar}@ucy.ac.cy
arXiv:2504.05883v1  [cs.RO]  8 Apr 2025
