23
FIG. 16. (a) Remanence FMR sweep from negative to positive saturation. The x-axis represents the ‘preparation field’, which is applied before
returning to zero field to measure the remanent spectra. The data is then modeled into multiple macrospin states and their corresponding
magnetization sub-levels as detected by microwave spectroscopy. Adapted from Ref. [21]. (b) Representative FMR spectra at 11.5 GHz for
trilayer ASI arrays with varying Cu spacer thickness (tCu). Adapted from Ref. [235]. (c) Field dependence of the BLS spectra from thermally
excited SWs was measured at finite wave-vector k for both single-layer and multilayer ASI samples. Adapted from Ref. [200]. (d) SW
frequency versus wavevector ( f vs k) dispersion for a coupled ASI-film system with a 10 nm spacer. Black dots represent experimentally
measured data points, while the color shows the results of the corresponding micromagnetic simulations. The lowest lying mode shows some
appreciable dispersion. Adapted from Ref. [201]. (e) SW field dispersion for a 3D ASI system: Experimental data points are represented by
symbols, with the elastic peak fitted to a Gaussian function (inset). Adapted from Ref. [20]. Schematic illustration of the samples for (a), (b),
and (e) are shown the insets of the respective figures.
(Cu) in a NiFe/Cu/NiFe-based trilayer ASI device235. Another
2.5D system comprises of ASI coupled to an extended thin
film underlayer200. Figure 16(c) shows the field-dependent
BLS spectra of thermally excited spin waves measured at a
finite k = 4.1 rad/µm. The results reveal reconfigurable spin-
wave dispersions in a NiFe square ASI200. The corresponding
variation in the spin-wave dispersion is shown in Fig. 16(d),
revealing five distinct SW modes201. This work nicely illus-
trates how reconfigurability can be introduced by transition-
ing from a 2D ASI stack to a 2.5D ASI stack. Moving to a
fully 3D stack, the SW dispersion from thermal magnons in a
true 3D artificial spin ice system fabricated using two-photon
lithography and thermal evaporation is presented in Fig. 16(e).
The BLS spectra reveals two dominant, nearly monotonic
magnon modes which change with the external field20. The
simulated mode profiles show collective excitations through-
out the complex network, while also revealing spatial quan-
tization with varying mode quantization numbers. Detecting
spin waves in a real 3D system like a 3D ASI presents two
primary challenges69: First, the system’s 3D nature necessi-
tates integrating multiple levels along the vertical axis, com-
plicating the localized detection and excitation of magnons
using electrical techniques. Second, current probing methods
rely on either microwave techniques or magneto-optical tech-
niques such as Brillouin light scattering. Microwave-based
methods typically measure the collective dynamics of the en-
tire system, while magneto-optical techniques predominantly
probe the topmost layers of the magnetic material. As a re-
sult, accessing the dynamics within the bulk of the structure
remains experimentally challenging69.
While still in their infancy, these advancements highlight
the vast potential of moving beyond 2D ASI systems, em-
phasizing their utility in controlling magnetization dynam-
ics, engineering reconfigurable magnonic devices, and explor-
ing fundamental physics in new dimensions. Future research
will likely integrate geometry optimization, material engineer-
ing, and external tunability to unlock further applications in
magnonics, and neuromorphic computing, where ASI arrays
could mimic brain-like cognitive processes. We will explore
neuromorphic computing in ASI in greater detail in the next
section.
