Under consideration for publication in J. Fluid Mech.
1
Banner appropriate to article type will appear here in typeset article
Theoretical analysis for non-linear effects of
magnetic fields on unsteady boundary layer flows
Jing-Yu Fu1, Ming-Jiu Ni1 and Nian-Mei Zhang1†
1School of Engineering Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 101408, PR China
(Received xx; revised xx; accepted xx)
1
This study investigates unsteady boundary layer phenomena in electrically conducting fluids
subjected to static magnetic fields. Using a semi-explicit similarity transformation method,
the momentum equation associated with the Stokes stream function is solved. The nonlinear
closed analytical solutions for both stagnation flow and converging flow are derived. The
results demonstrate that the boundary layer structure incorporates shock and solitary wave-
like components, which are promoted by the Lorentz force. Under extreme magnetic fields,
the flow exhibits sine and cosine wave patterns, which are motivated by the strong Lorentz
force. An in-depth asymptotic analysis establishes the square root scaling laws that quantify
the growth of friction and flux with increasing magnetic field strength. The boundary layer
thickness scales inversely with the Hartmann number, a consequence of the dominant Lorentz
force, which differs from the conclusion for duct flow (Hunt 1965). These findings elucidate
the physical mechanisms governing the nonlinear coupling between magnetic fields and the
dynamics of the boundary layer.
Key words: Boundary Layers, Magnetohydrodynamics, Scaling Laws
1. Introduction
Boundary layer flow is a classical problem in fluid mechanics, introduced by Prandtl
(1904). Mathematically, its governing equation is the Navier-Stokes equation, which has
been approximated at high Reynolds numbers (Landau
1976). However, it has exact
solutions only under certain special assumptions (Wang 1991). For example, the simplest
assumption is a steady and zero pressure gradient (Blasius 1908). The study of the unsteady
boundary layer has broader physical and engineering significance. Most studies of the
unsteady boundary layer used numerical simulations and experimental measurements, with
few analytical solutions derived mathematically. The power series solution of unsteady
boundary layer flow in a given free stream velocity condition was obtained by Hassan
(1960). Similarity transformation is an efficient mathematical approach for finding solutions
to partial differential equations in fluid mechanics (Ungarish 2024). Sun (2024) proposed
a diffusion time scale similarity transformation method and derived analytical solutions for
two types of unsteady boundary layers.
† Email address for correspondence: nmzhang@ucas.ac.cn
Abstract must not spill onto p.2
arXiv:2504.06576v1  [physics.flu-dyn]  9 Apr 2025
