170
Conclusion and future prospects
N3LO matrix element calculations o compute consistent cross-sections and improve the estimate
of previous order theory uncertainties.
Finally, Chapter 5 describes the most recent extraction of helicity dependent PDFs at NNLO
accuracy. The study accounts for missing higher order uncertainties, and it shows an excellent
perturbative convergence of polarized PDFs.
The considered experimental data embrace
Deep Inelastic measurements as well as hadronic data of jet, dijet and Drell-Yan production,
which extend the kinematic coverage and are coherently fitted for the first time. We see that
NNLO corrections to polarized PDFs are small in almost all kinematic regions, with impact
of MHOUs also being limited. The more consistent treatment of the hadronic asymmetries,
however, provides better sensitivity in specific kinematic regions with respect to previous
determinations. This is visible principally for mid-x ranges in the gluon and valence-like PDFs.
On the other hand the enhanced fitting methodology suggests more conservative bounds in
the extrapolation regions, especially for flavor suppressed components. Our analysis further
suggests that the quarks carry only a fraction of the total proton spin (around 30%), consistent
with previous studies. Current sensitivity from the RHIC data however is not sufficient to
determine accurately the small-x gluon, leading to integrated gluon polarization compatible
with 0 and large uncertainties.
Future prospects
Scientific studies rely on the ability to compare models with data and describe new phenomena
in a quantitative way both at the level of predictions and uncertainties. While the former are
continuously improved by new ideas and methodological updates, the latter are more difficult
to validate and, the presence of different studies based on the same underlying rules, is essential
to confirm a scientific discovery and rule out possible incidental biases.
Throughout this thesis, to improve the determination of collinear PDF, we have applied a
consistent inclusion of higher order QCD corrections together with theoretical uncertainties in
different PDF fits and, studied their impact assuming a fixed fitting methodology. The ensuing
uncertainties are determined within the covariance matrix formalism combined with scale or
parameter varied predictions. The approach has the advantage to be valid for all the scattering
processes considered in a PDF fit and to decouple the estimate of theoretical errors from the
methodological and experimental ones. However, this procedure contains some arbitrariness,
which calls for benchmark studies against different approaches [371, 372, 303]. Although there
is not yet a consensus about the use of (PDF) theory errors, reaching an agreement is now
becoming a more stringent task for the high-energy physics community, especially in view of new
LHC analysis. In this respect, our new approximate N3LO PDFs could be helpful to validate the
goodness of different theoretical uncertainty methodologies, for e.g. by comparing N3LO-NNLO
cross-section shifts with lower order results supplemented with theory uncertainties [373].
Future updates on theoretical computations for PDF fits can include the complete removal of
