3
FIG. 2. A comparison between the dynamics of interdependent networks and of the correspondent demographic
process. Panel (a) shows the mean time to absorption TA (time until the cascading failure process ends, either in a collapse
of the network or in its survival) and Panel (b), the mean time to failure TF (time until the cascading process ends in a
failure, conditioned on failure). In both panels, markers present the outcome of an explicit interdependent networks dynamics,
whereas the dashed lines show the results of the corresponding demographic process. We used Erdös–Rényi networks with
average degree k = 5, and the results present an average over 104 different network realizations for each N. Note that the
larger the network, the better the fit to the simulations of demographic theory. For additional details and metrics regarding
the distribution of outcomes, see Appendix E. The basic scaling with N 1/3, implied in these graphs, is derived below following
Eq. (5).
dynamics depend on the strength of the initial attack,
that is, on the number of nodes that failed in the first
step, n0. Any such attack can end either when the GCC
in both networks still exists, in which case we say that
the attack has failed. The attack is considered successful
if it leads to a collapse.
In general, the analysis of such processes involves three
fundamental questions. First, what is the probability of
success, second, what is the average number of iterations
until success, assuming the attack ended successfully, and
third, what is the average number of iterations until the
attack is over, where in this third case we do not dis-
tinguish between successful and failed attacks. At the
critical point p = ˜p, all three of these quantities depend
on the size of the network N and on the strength of the
initial attack n0. As will be shown later, the dependence
on n0 enters through the variable n3
0/N.
Let’s start by comparing two types of numerical re-
sults: those obtained from a direct simulation of inter-
dependent networks, a complex simulation that requires
building a suitable network and tracking the size of the
mutual GCC at each step, versus the simple and fast
simulation of the corresponding demographic process.
For direct simulations, we prepared two interdependent
networks at their critical state. At the critical point, the
dynamics within each network is such that, on average,
each failing node triggers the detachment of one other
node from the GCC. Accordingly, we identified the corre-
sponding value of pc by analyzing a single network. Then
we duplicate it and connect the nodes of the two result-
ing networks via randomly chosen dependency links. See
Appendix B for further details.
Once we have a system at criticality, we can examine
the characteristics of the collapse process and compare it
with the results obtained for the demographic process as
described above.
Figure 2 demonstrates the power of our technique. For
the same n0, we examined the mean time until collapse
TF , and the mean time to absorption TA, and com-
pare the demographic process (where time is measured
in generations) with the collapse of the interdependent
networks (where time is measured in iterations).
The
qualitative and quantitative match is very good, which
demonstrates that the demographic model indeed reflects
the dynamics of the networks.
After establishing a quantitative correspondence be-
tween the two processes, we can apply well-known tech-
niques from the neutral theory [18, 22] to derive analyt-
ical solutions for interdependent networks problems. To
begin, let us consider Π(n0, N), the probability of col-
lapse given n0 and N. The analogous problem in neutral
dynamics is the probability of ultimate fixation.
Switching to continuous time, the Langevin equation
for a population under pure demographic stochasticity is
dn/dt = η(t)√n, where η(t) is a white noise process [23].
As explained, at criticality the cascading failure process
corresponds to the dynamics of a population for which
the growth rate is CM(t)/N, where M(t) is the accu-
mulated number of birth (failed nodes) until t and C
is a constant. Accordingly, the coupled Langevin equa-
tions characterizing the interdependent network process
are delineated as follows:
dn(t)
dt
= CM(t)
N
n + η(t)√n,
dM(t)
dt
= n.
(1)
As long as the process is neutral (i.e., when M/N is
small), a process that survived until t admits n(t) ∼t
