2
(i) Head is stationary
(ii) Head is accelerating
Semicircular
Canals (SCC)
Vestibular nerve
Cupula
Direction of rotation
Endolymph
Figure 1: Schematic of the vestibular system. (a) The inner ear and vestibular apparatus:
Three mutually orthogonal semicircular canals (SCCs), each containing a cupula, send
information to the nervous system about the rotational motion of the head. (b) Zoom in of
the obstruction within each SCC caused by the cupula. Information about the rotation of
each SCC is inferred from the deflection of its cupula — the inertia of the fluid that fills
the SCC (endolymph) causes the cupula to deform. (Cupula deformation is sensed via
innervated cilia that are embedded within the cupula.)
semicircular canals allows the detection of any three dimensional rotation of the head. A
schematic diagram of the vestibular system is provided in Figure 1.
The vestibular system can be affected by several pathologies that disrupt its normal
function. One of the most common disorders is benign paroxysmal positional vertigo
(BPPV), in which brief episodes of vertigo are triggered by specific head movements.
BPPV occurs when calcium carbonate crystals (otoconia) dislodge from the utricle and
move into the semicircular canals, causing abnormal stimulation of the vestibular nerve
(Hornibrook 2011). Another significant condition is vestibular neuritis, an inflammation
of the vestibular nerve, usually caused by viral infections, which leads to acute vertigo,
imbalance and nausea (Royal & Vargas 2014). Meniere’s disease also affects the vestibular
system, causing episodic vertigo due to abnormal fluid buildup in the inner ear, leading to
disturbances in balance (Harcourt et al. 2014). Early diagnosis and appropriate treatment of
these vestibular pathologies are essential to improving quality of life and preventing chronic
balance issues. Here, mathematical modelling has great potential in enabling for quantitative
predictions of balance response and in elucidating the sensitivity of the vestibular system to
material changes, for instance as may occur with ageing (Konrad et al. 1999).
A number of mathematical models exist for the vestibular dynamics, both numerical and
analytical. On the analytical side, previous models can be classified into two broad categories.
The first approach is that of Obrist and co-authors (Obrist 2008; Grieser et al. 2012; Vega
et al. 2008) in which the geometry is idealized to allow a solution to be found under arbitrary
forcing of the system, i.e. arbitrary rotational motion. The second approach is that of Rabbitt
& Damiano, who maintain a more realistic geometry but require strong assumptions on
the form of the forcing to make analytical progress. In particular, in their series of papers
(Rabbitt & Damiano 1992; Damiano & Rabbitt 1996; Damiano 1999), Rabbitt & Damiano
assume that the forcing is sinusoidal, as might be expected when moving the head up or
down (for instance when nodding). Fully numerical investigations of the vestibular system
also exist (Chung 2010; Goyens et al. 2019; Boselli et al. 2009, 2013) — these generally
implement a realistic channel geometry but do not model the cupular deformation as a
fluid-structure interaction. Instead, they incorporate the effect of cupular deformation via a
periodic boundary condition for the flow coupled to a time dependent pressure jump.
In this paper, we present both numerical simulations and an analytical approach for cupular
