F. Rigamonti et al.: The perturbed BLR of PG 1302-102
Fig. 1. Data considered in the analysis. In the panel, we show the flux normalized to a reference flux, F0, as a function of the rest-frame wavelength
of the spectrum of PG 1302-102 at the ESPRESSO native resolution.
3. Modeling of the spectrum
Here, we describe the specific steps needed to obtain an accu-
rate model of the spectrum of PG 1302-102. More precisely, in
§ 3.1, we present the scenario of a BLR orbiting in circular mo-
tion around a common center of mass of a putative SMBHB.
Such a model, in a simplified configuration, can be represented
by a Gaussian broad emission profile shifted in wavelength with
respect to the rest frame emission of its narrow line. In § 3.2, we
propose an alternative disk-like BRL model whose emissivity
distribution is distorted by the presence of an azimuthal pertur-
bation. In this scenario, the resulting emission features are not
necessarily Gaussian and can trace the presence of bulk motion,
possibly associated with the presence of a SMBHB, in the BLR.
3.1. Multi-Gaussian fit
In this section, we focus on the identification of substructures
and asymmetries in the BELs and NELs of the spectrum of
PG 1302-102, which may be an indication of the presence of
a SMBHB. More specifically, we aim at identifying in the emis-
sion lines one or multiple broad components shifted in wave-
length that could be associated with the orbital motion of a
SMBHB.
In Fig. 1, we show the spectrum considered for the analy-
sis. We selected the rest-frame spectral region from 4150Å to
5325Å; such choice balances the need to maximize the amount
of information extracted from the data with the computational
performance of the fit6. The selected region is large enough to
include the Hγ and Hβ BELs and the [OIII] forbidden NELs.
Increasing the region further would not have led to significant
changes in the extracted best-fit parameters, since it already
6 Due to the high spectral resolution of ESPRESSO data, we are al-
ready considering ≃138, 000 data points in the fit. Increasing this num-
ber further would mainly result in a worsening of computational per-
formance. We note that fitting the current data requires about 5 million
likelihood evaluations resulting in a total computational cost for a single
parameter estimation of about 40 hours.
includes the most prominent emission lines in the wavelength
range covered by ESPRESSO for this source.
The full spectrum is modeled as the superposition of differ-
ent components whose free parameters are constrained by fitting
the data with a nested sampling algorithm (Skilling 2004). This
approach was chosen since it allows us to measure the Bayesian
evidence (Z)7, which we use to compare different models and
assess the optimal number of components to be included in the
fit. More specifically, the search for the optimal model for the
spectrum of PG 1302-102 involved a step-by-step process where
models of increasing complexity were compared with each other.
This approach automatically prevents overfitting as the Bayesian
evidence, being an integral over the whole parameter space, is
penalized for models with a larger number of parameters. The
initial model consisted of a power-law continuum along with
broad and narrow Gaussian emission lines centered at the ex-
pected redshift of the source. From this baseline, we included ad-
ditional emission components and allowed the already included
BELs to be shifted in wavelength. At each stage, we checked that
any proposed modification was statistically justified by an in-
crease in the Bayesian evidence. The fiducial model (hereinafter
Model 1) was selected based on the highest Bayesian evidence.
Model 1 accounts for a smooth broken power law continuum
parameterized as:
F(λ) = Acont
 λ
λcont
!αcont 1 +
 λ
λcont
!βcont
γcont
,
(1)
where Acont is the normalization, λcont is the wavelength
break and, αcont is the slope at λ ≪λcont, while βcont and γcont
define the slope at λ ≫λcont and ensure a smooth transition
at λ ≃λcont. The modeling of all emission lines (i.e., Hγ, Hβ,
7 We stress that, comparing the Bayesian evidence of two models is
formally the best approach to model selection. Indeed, differently from
other indicators (i.e., χ2, BIC, AIC), the Bayesian evidence automat-
ically accounts for the dimensionality of the parameter space without
assuming any shape of the posterior distribution.
Article number, page 3 of 13
