with ρBCZ the density at the lower border of the convective envelope and DT and n are free
parameters.
Both parametrizations reproduce solar-age lithium depletion and maintain a helium value in the
convective envelope consistent with helioseismic determinations32. As discussed in Eggen-
berger et al.32, the overall trend is independent of the coefﬁcient’s form.
Internal gravity
waves79;80 have also been proposed for solar rotation proﬁle ﬂattening and lithium depletion.
In this scenario, lithium depletion occurs through shear layer oscillation, modeled as a diffusive
coefﬁcient in stellar evolutionary models79. The wide range of coefﬁcients studied in32 and39
likely captures this effect. However, models with effects of internal gravity waves, as per79
and81, would be interesting to investigate. In this study, Eq. 5 is used for Models 1 to 6, and
Eq. 7 for Model 8. Model 7 is a standard solar model without macroscopic chemical element
transport, and Model 9 has lower macroscopic mixing efﬁciency by about 30%, inﬂuencing the
light element depletion deﬁned by Eq. 5, reproducing solar lithium depletion within one sigma
using a lower Dh value.
The mixing of chemical elements in the overshooting region is assumed instantaneous and the
temperature gradient to be the adiabatic gradient. Thus αOv simply extends deep enough the
convective envelope so that the temperature gradient transition is placed at the position inferred
from helioseismology. This is achieved with an extended calibration procedure using 4 parame-
ters instead of the usual 3 used for standard solar models. These use two parameters describing
the initial chemical composition and one describing the efﬁciency of convection for standard
calibrations, aiming at reproducing the solar radius, luminosity and surface metallicity at the
current solar age. Here, we add an additional parameter for the efﬁciency of convection to
recover the base of the convective zone.
The reconstruction method uses an iterative correction of the Ledoux discriminant proﬁle de-
19
