ˆ∆
ω
ψ
ψ
=⇒
ω
φ
c
⊗
φ
ψ
ψ
=⇒
ω
φ
c
ψ
ψ
Figure 3: Schematic decomposition of the b∆-vertex coupled to an antighost source ω into
two normal three-point vertices φcc and φψψ. These form a reducible tree-level diagram
connected by an auxiliary scalar ﬁeld φ with unit propagator to reproduce the correct
Feynman rule of b∆.
calculation while allowing for suitable generalizations. Such a successful implementation
around a FeynArts-model ﬁle will be discussed here brieﬂy.
As a fermionic object with ghost number −1, the tree-level b∆-operator is very diﬀerent
from a typical Lagrangian term, yet is eﬀectively treated as such in the logic of FeynArts.
In the quantum action principle (cf. Eq. (3.4)) b∆is understood as a one-time insertion
into the action which can be deﬁned by introducing an additional external source which
couples to the operator and renders it a standard Lagrangian term,
b∆· Γφ1...φn = δΓφ1...φn
δω∆

ω∆=0
,
(3.20)
where ω∆denotes an auxiliary antighost.
Hence it would be suitable to realize the
breaking vertex as ω∆cψψ. Since however in FeynArts handling of such 4-fermion vertices
can be subtle, it is preferable to split them into two 3-point vertices by means of an
auxiliary scalar ﬁeld φ with unit propagator, as shown in Fig. 3. On the Lagrangian
level this can be schematically understood via eliminating an auxiliary scalar ﬁeld by its
equations of motion,
Lφ−aux = −φ2
2 + ω∆caφa + gT a
Rij
 
ψi
←
b/∂PRψj + ψi
→
b/∂PLψj
!
φa.
(3.21)
The Feynman rules of the 3-point vertex insertions ω∆cφ and ψψφ are adjusted in such
a way that the reducible tree-level diagram rightmost in Fig. 3 and formed from these
vertices reproduces the familiar Feynman rule of Eq. (2.16).
For multi-loop calculations of b∆-Green functions thus implemented there will be both
1PI reducible and irreducible diagrams, the former coming from diagrams where the
original ghost ca within b∆and thus the ghost of the left vertex in the middle of Fig. 3 is
external to the diagram. These include all diagrams of the Abelian model. The diagram
generation has to be furnished with additional selection rules such that only sensible
reducible diagrams are considered.
The external sources for BRST transformations are external ﬁelds with antighost
number and wrong statistics; hence their implementation in FeynArts employs similar
decompositions. At ﬁrst, the external sources are eﬀectively treated as composite ﬁelds
of conventional types available in FeynArts, e.g.
ρaµ −→ωa
ρAµ
Rjβ −→ωRχjβ.
(3.22)
13
