π+
π+
π+
π+
π Decay at Rest
π Decay at Rest &
μ Decay in Flight
π Decay at Rest &
μ Decay at Rest
π Decay in Flight &
μ Decay at Rest
69.3 MeV
0 - 53 MeV
0 - (>53) MeV
ATAR
1)
2)
3)
4)
Figure 4: Illustration of event types in the π →e and π →µ →e chains. The stars are indicative
of the energy deposited at the Bragg peak for pions (red) or muons (purple) that stop in the
segmented ATAR. The main channels of interest include 1) the π →e “signal channel” decay that
emits a monoenergetic 69.3 MeV positron; 2) the dominant π →µ decay, where the 4.1 MeV muon
travels up to 0.8 mm and also stops in the ATAR before emitting a positron. Events 3) and 4)
represent situations that can confuse the classification of events into categories 1) or 2). In 3) the
pion decays within the ATAR prior to stopping; the muon stop can then appear as a pion stop. In
4), the pion stops, and the decay muon (very rarely, but importantly) decays in the short time prior
to stopping. Because it is a decay in flight, the Lorentz boost can push the positron energy beyond
the 52.3 MeV endpoint. The ATAR is being designed to distinguish these event patterns.
can be constructed to isolate and measure all event types.
The calorimeter tail fraction for π →eν
events will be measured in situ by suppressing the
π →µ →e decays using information provided by the active target. π →µ →e events can be
identified and suppressed by the presence of the 4.1 MeV pulse from π →µν decay, use of a narrow
time window, π −µ particle identification, and tracking information to identify pion decay-in-flight
(πDIF), and muon decay-in-flight (µDIF) following pion decay-at-rest (πDAR). Simulations indicate
that µ−e backgrounds in the tail region can be suppressed to a level that will allow the uncertainty
in the tail fraction to contribute < 0.01% to the error in Re/µ.
The experiment will require a continuous wave pion beam that can be focused to a small spot size
and stopped within the ATAR dimensions. Ideal characteristics include a relatively low momentum
of 65 MeV /c (±2%) and a flux of 300 kHz. At this momentum, a separator is an effective method
to reduce background from beamline muons and positrons. We have already demonstrated that the
πE5 beam can provide the needed flux. Because of the high data rate, state-of-the-art triggering,
fast digitizing electronics, and high bandwidth data acquisition systems are required.
Requirements for measuring pion beta decay
In Phase II (III), pion beta decay π+ →π0e+ν will be measured by observing the characteristic
(nearly) back-to-back gammas from π0 decay normalized to π →eν
decay as in Refs.[22–26]. In
PIONEER we also expect to observe the low-energy positron absorbed in the ATAR in coincidence
with the gammas in the calorimeter. The Phase II (III) pion beta decay experiment will require
7 × 105 (7 × 106) events at an intrinsic branching ratio of 10−8. This will require running at a
significantly higher pion flux of ≥10 MHz. The beam momentum and emittance may be higher than
for the π →eν measurement to achieve the higher flux. The higher rate can be handled because of
5
