2
In this work, we aim to investigate the conditions
that govern stellar stability of HS derived from equa-
tions of state computed using a Maxwell prescription.
In this approach, we assume that the hadronic and
quark phases are in direct contact, with only one of the
two independent chemical potentials remaining contin-
uous throughout the phase transition. The details will
be provided in the following sections, but in summary,
we use the D3-D7 top-down holographic model [41,42]
for the quark phase, and a particular relativistic mean-
field (RMF) model [43–45] parameterization, namely
NL3* [46], for the hadronic sector.
The transition can be classified as slow or rapid
depending on the timescale of the conversion process
from hadronic to quark matter relative to the timescale
of perturbations caused by pressure fluctuations within
the star. If the transformation timescale is significantly
longer than that of the perturbations without mass
transfer, the transition is considered slow; if it takes
less time, it is deemed rapid [47, 48] and some mass
transfer can occur.
The analysis of stellar stability depends on fast or
slow transition being considered. In the first case, it is
used the Bardeen-Thorne-Meltzer (BTM) criterion [49],
where stability is assessed by examining the concavity
in the MR diagram. If the stellar mass increases as the
central mass density increases, the star is considered
stable. For slow transitions, the analysis is based on
radial oscillations [50–52], which is a dynamical method
also discussed in this work.
The D3-D7 holographic model was applied to the
study of HS assuming fast phase transitions [34,35,38].
The authors obtained non-standard HS configurations,
specifically the so-called second and third types, known
as HS2 and HS3, respectively. The HS2 stars consist of a
nuclear matter core surrounded by a crust of quark mat-
ter, also known as “cross stars” [53] and the HS3 stars
feature a three-layer structure, with a nuclear matter
core, a quark mantle and a nuclear crust [35]. Note that
these configurations do not present a stable quark mat-
ter core. On the other hand, in the present work we
show that it is possible to obtain a stable HS configura-
tion with a quark matter core if one assume slow phase
transitions, which impacts the stability analysis.
This work is organized as follows. In Section 2, the
D3-D7 holographic model that stands for the quark
phase is reviewed. Section 3 presents the relativistic
hadronic model that is used to build the HS crust. In
Section 4.1, the criterion for dynamic stability through
the analysis of radial oscillations is discussed. In Sec-
tion 4.2, the results obtained from the D3-D7/ NL3*
model are provided. We present the MR diagram con-
taining all stable segments and show that they fall within
the observational regions [54–57]. Additionally, we il-
lustrate the stiffness of the hybrid equation of state
through the gap in the sound speed squared at the
phase transition for the range of constituent quark mass
values studied. We also examine how the energy density
varies within the isobaric regime and present a specific
case of a pressure profile inside a 2.2 solar mass star,
which demonstrates a linear relationship at the phase
transition points. In Section 5, our conclusions are pre-
sented.
2 The D3-D7 holographic model
The D3-D7 holographic model will be employed to de-
scribe the core of HS, where only quarks are present.
This top-down approach is formulated by considering a
stack of D3-branes intersecting with a probe D7-branes,
which accounts for quark flavor. In the near-horizon
limit of D3-branes, one obtains the overall spacetime,
while the D7-brane, treated as a probe, captures the fla-
vor dynamics of the quarks. The 10-dimensional space-
time can be represented by the following table
t
x1
x2
x3
x4
x5
x6
x7
x8
x9
D3
•
•
•
•
-
-
-
-
-
-
D7
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
-
-
and the 10-dimensional metric has the form
ds2 = u2
L2 ηµν dxµdxν + L2
u2 (d¯ρ2 + ¯ρ2 dΩ2
3)
+ L2
u2 (dy2 + dz2) ,
(1)
where ηµν is the four-dimensional Minkowski metric, L
is the AdS radius and u is the holographic coordinate,
defined as u2 = ¯ρ2 + y2 + z2. The radial-spherical coor-
dinate ¯ρ and Ω3 belong to the D7 brane worldvolume,
given by x4, x5, x6 and x7. The coordinates t, x1, x2
and x3 represent Minkowski space and form the set of
dimensions shared by both D3 and D7-branes. Finally,
the coordinates x8 and x9, represented by y and z, cor-
respond to the outer space that is not accessed by any
brane.
The model operates in the ‘t Hooft limit, where the
D7-brane wraps around an AdS5 × S3 [42], a subspace
of the full AdS5 × S5 background. The low-energy dy-
namics are given by the Dirac-Born-Infeld (DBI) action
SD7 = −NfTD7
Z
d8ξ e−ϕ q
−det (gµν + 2πα′Fµν) ,
