Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Holographic hybrid stars with slow phase transitions
M. Aleixo a,1, C. H. Lenzi b,1, M. Dutra c,1, O. Louren¸co d,1, W. de Paula e,1
1 Departamento de F´ısica e Laborat´orio de Computa¸c˜ao Cient´ıfica Avan¸cada e Modelamento (Lab-CCAM), Instituto
Tecnol´ogico de Aeron´autica, DCTA, 12228-900, S˜ao Jos´e dos Campos, SP, Brazil
April 10, 2025
Abstract The D3-D7 holographic model is used to de-
scribe the core of the hybrid star, composed by quark
matter, while its crust is modeled from a hadronic rela-
tivistic mean field (RMF) model capable of reproducing
low-energy nuclear physics data as well as some astro-
physical observations. The D3-D7 brane configuration
and the RMF model lead to an equation of state that
is used to solve the Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff equa-
tions. For different model parameters, the mass-radius
diagram is presented. The conditions for the dynamic
stability of stellar configurations are discussed, consid-
ering the radial oscillation criterion for hybrid stars
with slow phase transitions. Strikingly, it is shown that
the models generate stable star configurations with a
core of quarks. We compare our results with NICER ob-
servational data for the pulsars PSR J0030+0451 and
PSR J0740+6620 and show that the compact stars gen-
erated from this method fall within the corresponding
observational regions.
1 Introduction
Neutron stars (NS) are formed as remnants of super-
novae depending on the mass of the progenitor star.
The interior of a NS is not completely understood but
it is expected that the pressure in its core can achieve
very high values [1]. Regarding its constitution, there
are models that consider the presence of hyperons or
K−condensate [2–4] and other predict that the pres-
sure becomes so high that cause the hadronic disso-
ae-mail: s.michaelaleixo@gmail.com
be-mail: chlenzi@ita.br
ce-mail: marianad@ita.br
de-mail: odilon.ita@gmail.com
ee-mail: wayne@ita.br
ciation into quarks [5–8]. If this occurs, the result is
a hybrid star (HS), typically composed of a crust of
hadronic matter and a core of deconfined quark matter.
There is also a more extreme hypothesis for compact
stars, suggesting that they could be entirely composed
of quark matter, the quark stars [9–14]. Indeed, since
the composite of the NS impacts observational proper-
ties, as the mass-radius (MR) relation, the NS physics
enables the study of dense matter under extreme condi-
tions. It is also worth to mention that the gravitational
waves [15,16] detection from a binary NS merger by the
LIGO-Virgo collaboration gives additional constraints
in the NS physics.
The underlying theory to understand the interior
of the NS is quantum chromodynamics (QCD). The
difficulty is that the perturbative methods do not ap-
ply to NS physics, so the challenge is to deal with the
QCD non-perturbative regime [17,18]. A promising ap-
proach is based on gauge/gravity duality, where, origi-
nally, the generating functional of the correlation func-
tions of N = 4 Super Yang-Mills (SYM) gauge theory is
mapped to partition functions of type IIB superstring
theory in AdS5× S5 space [19, 20]. The duality main
characteristic that makes it suitable for phenomenolog-
ical application is that strongly coupled gauge theory is
related to a weakly coupled classical gravity theory. In-
deed, within the holographic perspective, there are new
ways of describing linear confinement and spontaneous
chiral symmetry breaking [21–28].
Holographic models also offer possibilities for the
study of the QCD phase structure at finite tempera-
ture and density [29–33]. The application of holographic
models is based on obtaining the corresponding equa-
tion of state (EoS) [34–38] and solving the Tolman-
Oppenheimer-Volkoff equations (TOV) [39, 40], which
describe their hydrostatic equilibrium.
arXiv:2504.06952v1  [nucl-th]  9 Apr 2025
