 
model [6] based on a 1D-convolutional autoencoder 
architecture.  
Because X-class flares are known to have particularly 
significant impacts on the Earth, we tested our method 
on recent data from the X1.3 flare observed in active 
region (AR) 13663 in May 2024. Our analysis centered 
on reconstructing Stokes V profiles due to their high 
magnetic sensitivity 
for examining the spatial 
distributions of anomalous Stokes V spectra in 
correlation with magnetogram images. 
 
2. METHOD 
2.1. Autoencoder 
2.1.1. Model architecture 
In deep learning, deep autoencoders are a powerful 
model architecture designed for non-linear compression 
tasks. Their core principle involves compressing data by 
reconstructing the data through two main components: 
the encoder and the decoder. The encoder reduces the 
dimensionality of the input into a compact feature vector, 
while the decoder expands this feature vector back to its 
original dimensions.  
To 
facilitate 
dimensional 
reduction 
and 
reconstruction, both the encoder and decoder utilize 
various neural network layers, such as fully connected 
and convolutional layers. Our model uses 1D-
convolutional 
and 
deconvolutional 
layers, 
complemented by pooling and upsampling layers, to 
compress and reconstruct Stokes I and V spectra 
efficiently. The architecture of the autoencoder model is 
detailed in Figure 1. 
2.1.2. Autoencoder as an anomaly detector 
Due to their efficient compression capabilities, 
autoencoders are used as anomaly detectors by learning 
to reconstruct normal data and by identifying deviations 
in reconstruction for anomalous data. The model is 
initially trained on a normal dataset containing no 
anomalies, allowing it to learn the underlying patterns 
in the data. As a result, the autoencoder can reconstruct 
any new normal data with minimal reconstruction error. 
However, when the pre-trained model encounters 
anomalous data that it has not seen before, it struggles 
to achieve accurate reconstruction, leading to a 
substantially higher reconstruction error. By analyzing 
this error, we can distinguish anomalous data from 
normal data. In our study, we apply this principle using 
our compression model to detect unusual spectral 
profiles in solar spectral data prior to flare events and 
explore whether or not these spectra correlate with 
actual flare-triggering regions in the spatial domain. 
2.2. Dataset 
Hinode/SP provides spectro-polarimetric (SP) map 
data, capturing spatial images of Stokes I, Q, U, and V 
for Fe I line pair profiles. Each pixel in the SP map 
contains intensity values for I, Q, U, and V across 112 
wavelength points, specifically covering the line centers 
at 630.15 and 630.25 nm, as well as their continuums. 
This study focused on Stokes I and V profiles, 
representing the total intensity and the circular 
Figure 1. Autoencoder architecture for spectral 
compression. The blue, cyan, and green shades 
represent 
the 
encoder, 
bottleneck, 
and 
decoder 
components, respectively. The layer/data shapes are 
shown in parentheses following each layer name. 
