Attempts to account for this spectral intensity by fitting an additional, shifted normal
Auger-Meitner contribution arising from a small residual contribution from the first
Ar@C60 monolayer directly bonded to the Ag(111) substrate (see Section 6 below)
were not successful. Our motivation in attempting to introduce this contribution was
informed by our sample preparation strategy: depositing the argon endofullerene onto
a cold substrate significantly limits molecular mobility and it is very unlikely that
the film grows in a simple layer-by-layer mode. Indeed, the slow rate of decay of the
Ag 3d and Ag(111) valence band photoemission intensity as a function of deposition
time would point to significant islanding, with regions of the first chemisorbed mono-
layer remaining exposed up to high molecular coverages. (There is an appreciable
Ehrlich–Schwoebel barrier (∼120 meV) for C60 diffusion[11].)
However, a number of observations led us to discount the possibility of a residual con-
tribution to the multilayer/bulk spectra arising from the monolayer: (i) as discussed
in the main paper and Section 6 below, there is a significant, 1.25 eV, shift in the
kinetic energies of the normal Auger-Meitner peaks for the endofullerene monolayer
as compared to the bulk film. The normal Auger-Meitner intensity in the 29 – 30 eV
binding energy range is not in line with this shift; (ii) as discussed in the following
section, there is a very clear binding energy difference in the C 1s and Ar 2p core-level
emission for the monolayer vs the bulk film that would produce a strong shoulder in
the spectra should the monolayer make more than a negligible contribution. We did
not observe a shoulder of this type in the multilayer specta; and (iii) the monolayer
Auger-Meitner emission has a slightly higher on-resonance energy than that for the
bulk film (245.4 eV vs 245.3 eV), out of line with the behaviour of the spectral
intensity in the 29-30 eV binding energy (on resonance) range.
There is one final key point on the subject of fitting the decay spectra that we would
like to raise. Given the large number of constrained parameters, uncertainties that
are returned via the standard approach, i.e. diagonalisation of the covariance matrix
produced via the non-linear least squares fitting routine (which we implemented using
the Python LMFIT package), are often significantly underestimated (and, moreover,
assume normally distributed errors.) In order to provide a more robust estimate of the
uncertainties, we therefore allowed the parameters to vary by a small amount about
their constrained values and employed a Monte Carlo/bootstrapping approach to
explore the fitness landscape. For decay spectra close to resonance (i.e. those excited
with photon energies within ± 100 meV of the on-resonance value of 245.3 eV), we
estimate that the value of τD can be determined to an uncertainty of approximately
5%. Outside of this photon energy range, the signal-to-noise ratio is appreciably
larger and the estimated uncertainties consequently significantly larger (up to 10%).
Fig.S4 shows the variation in τD as a function of photon energy around the resonance
condition. There is a monotonic decrease in the delocalization time across the reso-
nance, which we have fitted with a simple linear dependence. The magnitude of the
uncertainties does not justify a more sophisticated/higher order fitting function.
5
