resources. Furthermore, note that the initial thermal state can be biased, e.g., by removing certain vibrational
energies/states which are known from independent arguments or simulations to lead to little or no products.
Electronic Motion
From known physical reasoning about energy scales for molecules and extended phases including metals,
semiconductors, and insulators, electrons can be considered to be approximately in their ground state for a
fixed equilibrium configuration of the ions (see App. B). That is, at the initial time the electronic excitations
for reactants and the catalyst are not thermally relevant. This is in line with most conventional quantum
chemistry approaches which, for the most part, focus on electronic ground states. We stress again that this
assumption is only made at the initial time - electronic excitations are included at all t > 0. Hence, we
initialize the electronic ground state in the equilibrium ionic positions for all chemical species.6
2.3
Chemical species identification
In order to define an end-to-end quantum algorithm, we need to decide what data of interest is to be extracted
from the coherently encoded output of the simulation. A common approach is that this is chosen to be one of
a handful of observables (most commonly, just energy) which are the same across a large swathe of use-cases.
Here, instead, we suggest to construct observables tailored to each specific instantiation of the problem at
hand.
In this spirit, we propose quantum chemical identification (QCI), a methodology for identifying a set
of chemical species in a wavefunction of a chemical dynamics simulation.
Examples of chemical species
can include free molecules, adsorbed surface species, free radicals, etc., depending on the chemical scenario
of interest.
The protocol consists of three steps.
First, fingerprint functions for each chemical species
are classically pre-computed. Second, the collection of fingerprint functions for a reaction are classically
compiled to form species counter functions. Third, the species counter functions are efficiently implemented
on a quantum computer using coherent arithmetic and logic. The output is chemical species counts entangled
to each ionic configuration in the wavefunction, which may be easily measured or further processed. Notably,
the proposed QCI protocol only utilizes ionic information to indicate and count chemical species. However,
it is most certainly a fruitful line of future work to consider species identification and extraction of other
observables based on joint electronic and ionic quantum information.
Classification
Consider chemical species (e.g. molecules or ions) X1, . . . , XM consisting of nX1, . . . nXM ions, respectively.
To each Xα we associate the configuration space of its constituent ions, R3nXα . We define an associated
configuration indicator function for Xα as,
IXα : R3nXα →{0, 1}
that takes configurational information and outputs a binary classification – whether the configuration rep-
resents molecule Xα or not.
This indicator is obtained using classical computational techniques. As a practical example, we could
compute
IXα(x) = Θ(∆>
Xα −EXα(x))Θ(EXα(x) −∆<
Xα)
(12)
where Θ is the Heaviside step function, EXα(x) is the energy of a configuration x ∈R3nXα and ∆<
Xα, ∆>
Xα
are suitably chosen energy thresholds such that energy values within the interval [∆<
Xα, ∆>
Xα] indicate the
presence of Xα. Appropriate classical computational techniques (e.g. DFT) may be used to compute the
configuration energy over a relevant subset of R3nXα . The lower threshold ∆<
Xα can, for example, be a local
minimum in the potential energy surface, while the upper bound ∆>
Xα can, for example, be the approximate
6We have implicitly assumed the electronic ground state of the chemical species is non-degenerate. As per Sec. 14.5.4 in [70],
the large majority of stable molecules have non-degenerate ground states. For exceptional cases with degeneracy, the user may
specify what appropriate state from the ground state manifold to prepare.
12
