Materials and methods
Parahydrogen handling
The ZULF setup is presented in a simplified scheme in Figure 1A. The pH2 gas-handling setup
was presented in detail in previous work of our group . (34,35). Controlled supply of enriched pH2
into the NMR tube containing the liquid sample was enabled by several pneumatic valves and a
back-pressure regulator from Swagelok. For all experiments, hydrogen gas was first passed over
a packed bed of an iron oxide catalyst, FeO(OH), at a temperature of 30 K to selectively convert
the commercially available di-hydrogen gas mixture into pH2 (approx. 97% enrichment).After
conversion, the gas in our piping system, i.e. mainly polyetheretherketone piping with good thermal
conductivity was used, warmed up (approx. 21°C at a pressure of 10 bar) before it is introduced
into the NMR tube. Two Teflon capillaries were inserted into the NMR tube, one leading to the
bottom and used for inflow of pH2 gas and the second capillary only at the top for the gas outlet. The
design of our NMR tubes is presented in the literature (34,36). Flow of hydrogen gas into the NMR
tube was controlled with a mass flow controller from Sierra Instruments (20 scc min−1). Quantum
oscillators were measured with continuous parahydrogen bubbling. Zero-field NMR spectra were
collected by pulsed bubbling of parahydrogen in short, controlled cycles, where each cycle involved
2.6 seconds of bubbling followed by a 0.5-second pause, repeated five times in total. The so-called
“ZF-ZF” (36) magnetic field sequences were adopted for collecting the conventional zero-field
NMR spectra. Pressure in the NMR tube was controlled using a back-pressure regulator that was
set to 6 bar. Control of all timings, pneumatic valves, and communication with hardware required
to set up ZULF detection were realized by TTL pulses in Python, where the signal processing and
feedback is also realized.
External feedback loop apparatus
The hardware components of the feedback loop system are described as follows. The signal produced
by the sample was measured using a commercially available optically pumped magnetometer (model
QuSpin Gen 2) with a sensitivity of around 15 fT/
√
Hz in a 3-100 Hz band. The analog output from
the OPM was digitized by a National Instruments (NI) analog input card (model NI 9239) at a
sampling rate of 2000 Hz. This digitized signal was transmitted to a PC via the NI Measurement
S2
