6
probability of dressed atom-pair eigenstates can be
calculated using second order perturbation theory with
singly-excited atom pairs as intermediate levels.
The
result of the calculation for the atom-pair considered in
Fig. 6 is shown in Fig. 7. The main feature of this plot
which is independent of the specific atom-pair geometry,
is the minimum total excitation probability occurring
at the D →F transition frequency (black curve). It is
the consequence of the reduction of the probability of
single-excitation (intermediate state) due to the avoided
crossing [Autler-Townes (AT) effect] resulting from
the interaction with the MW [22, 34].
The reduction
of the double Rydberg excitation probability of the
atom-pair (blue curve) is only partially compensated
by the increase in the probability of exciting atoms
in |D, F⟩or |F, D⟩states (red curve).
However, such
probability-increase extends over a broad frequency
range corresponding to the multiple avoided crossings in
Fig. 6.
The dependence on MW frequency of the double Ry-
dberg excitation probability of atom-pairs presented in
Fig. 7, although corresponding to a particular example,
is representative of the structure obtained for any pair ge-
ometry. In an ensemble of randomly distributed pairs as
encountered in the cold atom cloud, all pairs contribute
to the reduction of the total double excitation proba-
bility observed at the D →F transition frequency and
no significant increase of the total excitation probability
is obtained for any MW frequency.
We conclude that
the positive and negative variations of the IR absorption
with MW frequency observed in Figs. 2 and 5 cannot be
explained both as resulting only from variations of the
excitation probability.
However, since the IR absorption is proportional to
the ground state population, a reduction of the absorp-
tion can be explained by the depletion of the number
of atoms probed by the IR beam. Also, we notice that
the broad MW frequency range where the reduction of
the IR absorption occurs, roughly corresponds to the
frequency range where the probability excitation of atom
pairs in |D, F⟩or |F, D⟩states is increased (see the red
curve in Fig. 7). Atoms in such pair states are sensitive
to DDI and experience an inter-atomic force sufficiently
strong to expel the atoms from the observed volume in
a few tenths of microseconds (see Fig. 11 in Appendix).
To connect the calculated excitation probability and
the atomic depletion hypothesis with the observed spec-
tra we have developed a rate equation model correspond-
ing to the simplified level scheme presented in Fig. 8.
The model is concerned with atom-pairs with a fixed
inter-atomic distance R and polar angle θ. A simplified
notation is used to designate the pair dressed state. gg
refers to the pair ground-state (MW photon numbers
are implicit).
gr refers to pair states with only one
excited Rydberg atom. dd and df refer to doubly excited
Rydberg pairs.
dd includes all Rydberg states not
13
13.5
14
14.5
15
Microwave frequency (GHz)
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
Second order transition rates (Arb. units)
|D,D>
|D,F>(|F,D>)
Total
x 3
z
R
θ
FIG. 7.
Excitation probability for double Rydberg pair
excitation for the conditions mentioned in Fig.
6.
Black:
total probability. Blue: |D, D⟩states excitation probability.
Red: |D, F⟩or |F, D⟩excitation probability (multiplied by 3).
Inset: atom-pair geometry relative to the quantization axis z.
dd
df
gg
out
γ0n0
2γ+γ0
γ0
Λ1
2Γ
2Γ
η
gr
Γ
Λ2
Λ
2γ+γ0
γ+γ0
FIG. 8.
Simplified dressed atom-pair level scheme including
single a doubly excited states.
affected by the dipole - dipole repulsion [mainly |D, D⟩
states and some |F, D⟩(|D, F⟩) states for which the DDI
is not sufficiently large (see Eq. (A.13.a)]. df includes
all |F, D⟩(|D, F⟩) states for which the DDI is significant
(Eq. (A.13.b). All level degeneracies are ignored.
The model assumes that the ensemble of atom-pairs
is fed by atom-pairs in the gg state at a rate γ0n0. γ0 is
the intrinsic cold cloud loss-rate. In the absence of any
additional loss mechanism, the total atomic population
is n0. The decay to the ground state of a Rydberg atom
occurs at rate Γ [35, 36].
Based on the observations
presented in Fig.
4, we assume a loss-rate γ for all
Rydberg states (γ > γ0). In addition, to account for the
MW induced dipole - dipole atom removal we include
an escape rate η from level df out of the pairs ensemble.
The excitation rate from gg to gr is designated as Λ
while Λ1 and Λ2 correspond to the excitation rates from
gg to dd and df respectively.
The single-excitation rate Λ is calculated from transi-
tion amplitudes obtained using first order perturbation
theory while the double excitation rates Λ1 and Λ2
are calculated using second order perturbation theory.
The discrimination between Λ1 and Λ2 is based on the
dipole - dipole potential energy associated to the doubly
