dimensions, and aims to interpret the various types of string theories as diﬀerent
excitation states of these membranes. This promising approach is called “M-
theory.” The “M” in M-theory is said to stand for “Membrane” or “Mother” (as
in “Mother theory”).
The successful formulation of this M-theory was achieved by the BFSS
model.
“BFSS” is named after the initials of the four researchers, including
Banks, who developed the model [1] .
This M-theory was formulated using the so-called light cone gauge, breaking
the spacetime symmetry. However, if it were possible to formulate the theory
without breaking spacetime symmetry, it would provide a clearer understanding
of the structure of spacetime, which is desirable. This is referred to as a "Lorentz
covariant formulation of M-theory." Unfortunately, such a formulation has not
yet been achieved.
The BFSS model can be viewed as a matrix regularized theory of membranes
under the light cone gauge [2]. However, since taking the light cone gauge breaks
Lorentz covariance, obtaining a Lorentz covariant non-perturbative model has
remained a long-standing problem2.
It has been known that M2-branes can be rewritten using the Nambu bracket.
There has long been hope that a Lorentz covariant matrix model could be ob-
tained by "quantizing" (matrix regularizing) the Nambu bracket [5, 9]. How-
ever, it is also known that it is challenging to quantize the Nambu bracket while
preserving its inherent complete antisymmetry, the Leibniz rule, and the Fun-
damental Identity. This issue remains an unresolved problem to this day. As a
result, the path to constructing a matrix model through the quantization of the
Nambu bracket has remained closed3.
In this study, we avoid this problem by obtaining a matrix model through
2There have been previous discussions on Lorentz covariant matrix models [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8],
but the ﬁeld remains in an exploratory stage.
3For example, in 1973, Nambu initially proposed a ternary relation as a quantum Nambu
bracket, later known as the Heisenberg-Nambu bracket. However, he reported the breaking
of the Leibniz rule and also examined the non-associativity of the algebra in his paper [10]. It
was Takhtajan who pointed out that, in addition to complete antisymmetry and the Leibniz
rule, the Fundamental Identity is also required for the Nambu bracket [11]. They proposed
a Zariski quantization using Zariski algebras and suggested a quantum Nambu bracket that
satisﬁes these properties, but its physical meaning remains unclear [12].
Other approaches include studies using cubic matrices [9], analyses with the Hamilton-
Jacobi formalism [13], and investigations using path integrals [14]. Around 2008, the BLG
model was proposed, introducing a theory using Lie 3-algebras as the low-energy eﬀective the-
ory of M2-branes. Since its inﬁnite-dimensional representation becomes the Nambu bracket,
the relationship between M2-branes and the Nambu bracket attracted attention [15, 16].
However, the BLG model is a low-energy eﬀective theory for multiple M2-branes de-
rived from symmetry considerations, and its relationship with the matrix model as a non-
perturbative theory of M-theory remains unresolved. The BLG model is believed to describe
only two M2-branes due to arguments based on group structure. Subsequently, the ABJM
model proposed a description of N M2-branes as a Chern-Simons model with a bifundamen-
tal gauge group, but its connection with Lie 3-algebras and the Nambu bracket has become
somewhat distant [17].
More recently, an operator-based formulation of the Nambu bracket quantization within
classical mechanics was proposed, oﬀering a novel perspective on the canonical structure
underlying Nambu dynamics[18].
2
