T2 and d, we employ the SHG peak intensity ISHG [47]
ISHG = C3
λ2
FB
|χyyy|2I2
(5)
with the real-valued constant C3 = 2.267 × 10−15 V2 m2 W−1 (see details in the Supplemen-
tary Section 1). We then combine equations (3), (4) and (5), and fit the experimental SHG
intensity ISHG(λFB, I) measured for various λFB and I to determine the parameters d and
T2. We obtain fitting values for the dipole moment d = 3.2 ± 0.2 e˚A and the dephasing time
T2 = 24 ± 1 fs, which align well with previously reported experimental values [48, 49]. It
is important to note that the peak broadening observed in our experiments is affected by
both homogeneous and inhomogeneous broadening mechanisms. Homogeneous broadening
arises from processes such dephasing due to electron-electron and electron-phonon scatter-
ing, which are described by the dephasing time T2. Inhomogeneous broadening, on the other
hand, results from local potential variations due to strain or defects [50]. Our fitting does
not separate these different sources of broadening, and instead includes them all in an ef-
fective broadening value, ℏ/T2, which is larger than the broadening only due to dephasing.
As a result, the fitted value T2 = 24 ± 1 fs should be considered as lower limit for the actual
dephasing time.
In Fig. 4c we show the measured second-harmonic intensity for the highest (blue dots)
and lowest (red dots) evaluated FB intensities with respect to Edet (and λFB), where we
observe an increasing blueshift of the resonance depending on the FB intensity IFB. This
general trend is also nicely reproduced by the fitted analytical expression and the calcu-
lated shift ∆EOS/BS for Edet = 0 eV [9]. To further verify our analytical model and the
extracted fitting parameters, we compare the results with numerical simulations, which use
the same underlying Hamiltonian as the analytical model. In Fig. 4d we show the SH in-
tensity differences, comparing the SH values with and without the perturbation α from
equation 3, obtained from analytical calculations and numerical simulations at the largest
FB intensity IFB,max = 5 GW cm−2, where the two approaches show an excellent qualitative
agreement. We also extract from the numerical simulations another pair of values for the
dipole moment dsim = 4.9 e˚A and dephasing time T sim
2
= 25 fs (see Supplementary Section
3 for details). While for the latter, the results from analytics and numerical simulations
are in excellent agreement, the dipole element differs substantially. This discrepancy can
be attributed to two distinct differences of the two theoretical approaches. First, the nu-
11
