9 
 
Although the use of multiple energies and angles significantly reduces the ambiguity, we still estimate the range of 
thickness values that are reasonably compatible with the data to be about ±0.25 nm, which is, in the present case, 
significantly less than for TEM and XRR. 
4. Discussion 
The presented results highlight the high reliability of oxygen depth profiles obtained by XPS analysis using self-
consistent fitting of all emission peaks at multiple angles. They also emphasize the significant errors associated with 
the single-energy-model when analyzing samples with broad concentration gradients. Therefore, it is very important 
to be aware of the challenges involved in XPS data analysis. 
Peak fitting is subject to a variety of physical and empirical constraints, some of which are physically determined (like 
the intensity ratio of spin-orbit split doublets), sample- or device-dependent (like peak position or energy resolution), 
widely debated (basically every detail), or completely unknown (like every emission peak besides the most intense in 
the spectrum).[31][32] Achieving a consistent and physically meaningful fit is a demanding and iterative process that 
often does not lead to unambiguous and unique solutions, even when done by experts with the aid of published 
reference spectra. The use of all emission peaks instead of just one has three main advantages: 1. The reliability of 
peak fitting is significantly improved because all peak models within a spectrum must be self-consistent. 2. The need 
for self-consistency allows previously unexplored spectral regions (i.e. the entire spectrum with the exception of the 
main emission peak) to be elucidated with high confidence. 3. Depth profiling of chemical states is more reliable as it 
is based on two independent variables (𝐿 and 𝜃) instead of just one (𝜃).  
With regard to 1. and 2.: The increasing accessibility of XPS, as reflected by the rapid increase in the number of 
publications[1], has led to widespread misuse, incorrect data analysis, and insufficient data reporting, with about 40% 
of published peak fitting models containing major errors.[33][34][35][36] The widespread proliferation of flawed data and 
data analysis compromises the integrity of the scientific literature, misguiding researchers and perpetuating incorrect 
methodologies across studies.[37] These problems relate almost exclusively to the most dominant emission peak of a 
given element, because peaks with lower intensity are almost never considered. For those peaks, there are usually not 
even reference spectra available in data repositories such as xpsfitting.com, xpsoasis.org, xpsdatabase.net, or 
xpslibrary.com. Peak assignment based on binding energy values from commercial software or published literature is 
highly unreliable, because for decades demonstrably incorrect methods were used to reference the binding energy 
scale.[38] On the one hand, the lack of supporting scientific literature is a challenge for the multiple-energies approach. 
On the other hand, the interdependency of intensity ratios represents a significant opportunity as it facilitates the 
unambiguous identification and modeling of component peaks.  
The multiple-energies approach is in principle complementary to existing ARXPS depth profiling models as it just 
expands the amount of underlying information. The depth profile model presented here is conceptually related to the 
Multi-Layer-Method[14] that also parameterizes the depth profile of each species as a layer with defined stoichiometry. 
An essential difference is that, in this work, the interface between two layers is not assumed to be abrupt but gradual, 
described by a sigmoid function (like the complementary error function) with an additional parameter 𝑘. However, 
the model in its current form was only applicable to the specific case of SnTe/SnO, because the Sn2+/Sn0 ratio 
adequately describes the entire depth profile. Further research is required to extend the multiple-energies approach 
to multi-layer stacks of different materials. Apart from depth profiling, a better understanding of less pronounced 
emission peaks also allows more precise evaluation of composite materials in which the peaks of different elements 
may overlap.  
Assuming that the fundamental sequence of layers and their stoichiometry are known, which is often provided either 
by the production process or by other measurement methods, it is in principle possible to reconstruct the entire XPS 
spectrum. All emission peaks are intrinsically interdependent and the signal background is also contingent on the 
structure of the sample.[39] Models that incorporate this intrinsic interdependence represent a first step towards 
complete spectral deconvolution, which may ultimately facilitate complete knowledge of the surface chemistry. The 
