12
(a)
(b)
(III)
(II)
(I)
0
FIG. 4.
Excitation spectra of quantum-stabilized states.
(I) Spectrum of an unconfined droplet, taken from [76]:
(I.a) Bogoliubov excitation energies with three branches m = 0, 1, 2 (blue, red, green crosses). The lines show characteristic
energies: kinetic energy (dashed), dispersion relation (5) with LHY correction (dashed-dotted), Vdd (solid red). Examples of
(I.b) quasiparticle amplitudes and corresponding density fluctuations (I.c) (blue) compared to the ground state density (black)
for the lowest modes of the m = 0 branch. The positions z0,i are used to assign the momenta in (I.a). (II) Dispersion of a
D = 1 supersolid, taken from [95]: (II.a,a1) at as = ac, illustrating the Brillouin-zone mapping. (II.b1-c1) at lower as, showing
the evolution of the different branches. The upper subpanels (b-c) show the ground state structures. (III) Spectrum of the
D = 2 supersolids with illustrated crystal structures on the left, for (III.a) a triangular supersolid, taken from [115], (III.b) a
honeycomb supersolid, taken from [108]. The dispersion relation is illustrated by the dynamic structure factor (color map),
and the Bogoliubov excitation energies (white lines).
broken gauge symmetry. The supersolid excitation spec-
trum also presents gapped modes, a notable one being
the Higgs mode, associated with amplitude fluctuations
of the superfluid order parameter [119].
1.
Tube geometries
In tubular traps, D = 1 and the supersolids exhibit
two Goldstone modes [15, 93, 95, 116, 117, 120, 121]. In
an axially infinite geometry, each branch can be assigned
a character:
one branch corresponds to phase excita-
tions, i.e. excitations inducing density exchange between
crystal sites without motion of the sites themselves; the
other corresponds to crystal (also called density) exci-
tations, i.e. excitations inducing changes in the crystal
structure without altering the sites’ population.
Both
branches have a linear dispersion ϵ(q) ∼q→0 cνq where cν
is the speed of sound associated with the branch ν = 1, 2
(phase and crystal sounds, also called second and first
sounds). For dipolar gases, the phase branch has a lower
energy than the crystal branch and therefore a lower
sound speed. Furthermore, the crystal sound speed in-
creases with decreasing as while the phase sound speed
decreases, evidencing the reduction in superfluid fraction,
see also V B 3.
A regime of particular interest in tubular supersolids
is that of intermediate densities, where the superfluid-
supersolid transition is continuous, see IV C 1. We have
seen that the supersolid here connects to the softened
roton mode. This connection extends beyond the state
itself, and the full excitation spectrum of the supersolid
links to the rotonic spectrum of the unstable superfluid.
The mapping is done by folding the superfluid spectrum
onto an effective Brillouin zone defined by the periodic-
ity of the roton mode, i.e. with a width krot/2, see Fig. 4
(II.a) [95, 106]. Through this folding, the crystal exci-
tation branch connects to the gapless branch at k →0,
