4
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
⟨V ⟩[a.u.]
(a)
quantum
classical
Ehrenfest
TGED
TGWD
0
1
2
3
4
5
Time [a.u.]
0.90
0.95
1.00
P0(t)
(b)
Figure 1. (a) Time dependence of the expectation value ⟨V ⟩
of the potential energy and (b) electronic ground-state popu-
lation P0. The figure compares the results of exact quantum
dynamics, Ehrenfest dynamics, thawed Gaussian Ehrenfest
dynamics (TGED), thawed Gaussian wavepacket dynamics
(TGWD), and classical dynamics for a system of ten parallel
two-dimensional harmonic potentials with constant diabatic
couplings (see the main text for details).
a.u. Because the diabatic potential energy surfaces are
mutually parallel and because the diabatic couplings
are constant functions of the nuclear coordinates, the
electron-nuclear correlation vanishes, making this model
particularly suited for mean-field methods using a single
Hartree product to represent the molecular wavefunction.
Figure 1 shows the time evolution of the expectation
value of the potential energy and the time-dependent
population on the ground electronic surface when the ini-
tial state, initially centered at q0 = (−0.75, −0.75) with
no momentum, is propagated with exact quantum dy-
namics, TGED, Ehrenfest dynamics, TGWD, or classical
equations of motion. The perfect overlaps of the black
and red curves in panels (a) and (b) confirm that TGED
is exact in vertically displaced harmonic potentials with
constant diabatic couplings.
Surprisingly, Ehrenfest dynamics and classical dynam-
ics yield the same expectation value for the potential en-
ergy [Fig. 1(a)]. This equivalence can be understood from
the following observations: (i) Since the diabatic surfaces
are all parallel, with constant couplings between them,
the effective nuclear potential of Eq. (9) is also parallel
to the surface on which the classical particle evolves, re-
sulting in the equivalence of the expectation value of the
kinetic energies
⟨TEhr(t)⟩e = Tcl(t),
(17)
where ⟨⟩e denotes the integration over the electronic de-
grees of freedom.
(ii) Initially, the total energy is equal for classical and
Ehrenfest dynamics.
Additionally, both methods con-
serve the total energy ⟨H⟩= ⟨T⟩+ ⟨V ⟩, so we can write
Hcl(t) = Hcl(0) = ⟨HEhr(0)⟩e = ⟨HEhr(t)⟩e.
(18)
(iii) Combining the first two observations straightfor-
wardly leads to
⟨VEhr(t)⟩e = Vcl(t).
(19)
In other words, for Ehrenfest dynamics in this system,
the contributions to the potential energy from electronic
states inaccessible to the classical particle and the con-
tributions due to the diabatic couplings cancel out. The
same reasoning can be applied to compare the TGED
and the TGWD, both of which yield the exact expecta-
tion value of the potential energy [Fig. 1(a)]. Interest-
ingly, in the adiabatic representation, the exact TGED
corresponds to the simultaneous evolution of multiple nu-
clear wavepackets on several harmonic electronic surfaces
while maintaining constant populations, as the nonadia-
batic coupling is zero. This implies that the exact dynam-
ics can also be reproduced by running one appropriately
weighted TGWD trajectory per adiabatic state.
Of course, neither the TGWD nor classical dynamics
can describe transfer of electronic population, which thus
remains constant for both methods in panel (b). Despite
the absence of a nuclear wavefunction, Ehrenfest dynam-
ics yields the same population dynamics as the TGED
(which is exact). To understand this, we need to see how
the effective electronic matrix (15) of the TGED differs
from that of Ehrenfest dynamics.
In this system, the
second-order coefficients gijm in Eq. (4) do not depends
on m (i.e., are independent of the electronic degree of
freedom) and the diabatic couplings are constant [i.e.,
λimn = 0 in Eq. (3)]. Thus, the S × S × N × N second
derivative tensor V2 in Eq. (8) can be expressed as a ten-
sor product V2 = 1S ⊗V2, where V2 is the same N × N
Hessian of each diabatic surface. The effective electronic
matrix (15) reduces to
⟨Veff(q; ψ)⟩n = V0 + 1STr[V2 · Cov(q)]/2.
(20)
Consequently, the contribution from the finite width of
the Gaussian wavepacket only shifts the diagonal ele-
ments of the electronic matrix V0 by the same amount.
As a result, the electronic coefficients evaluated with
Ehrenfest dynamics or the TGED have different phases,
but the electronic populations are identical.
We can conclude that the TGED is expected to provide
accurate results when the electronic surfaces have similar
shapes and the diabatic couplings have only a weak de-
pendence on the nuclear coordinates. Ideally, these cou-
plings should be constant, which can be an appropriate
approximation in some cases35.
