 
6 
 
the seasonal to interannual scales, while the ACC-RC highly correlates with the “observation” (the correlations 
in ORAS5, CESM-CDA, and CM2-CDA by order are 0.65, 0.73, 0.79 in the interannual band and 0.82, 0.86, 
0.73 in the seasonal-to-interannual band), the NADW in all data-constrained products has however no 
significant correlation with the “observation” (Extend Data Fig.4b&5b). This suggests that while the CDA is 
able to coherently integrate data into coupled models and rebuild the 3-D geo-fluids, it is also constrained by 
the model’s deficiency. Because of absent mesoscales in the 100 km coarse resolution assimilation models 
used in this study, it’s very difficult for the CDA to retrieve high-frequency signals of NADW, for which 
mesoscale eddies play an important role [41]. 
We also find that while the GMOC’s decadal oscillations starting from the early 1980s has a significant 
fingerprint on the decadal modes of NADW, ACC-RC, and εm in both CDA estimates (Fig.2b‒d). In the 
seasonal to interannual scales, the GMOC significantly correlates with the corresponding ACC-RC mode 
(Extend Data Fig.4c&5c). At the interannual band, the correlations of GMOC with ACC-RC in ORAS5, 
CESM-CDA, and CM2-CDA are 0.61, 0.74, and 0.69, respectively, and at the seasonal-to-interannual band, 
the correlations are 0.33, 0.65, 0.37 respectively, whereas NADW and εm have no robust correlation with 
GMOC in these bands. This phenomenon could be attributed to the multiscale characteristics of ACC-RC as a 
strongly-coupled atmosphere-ocean component of the Earth system, whereas the seasonal to interannual scale 
NADW and εm modes strongly rely on oceanic mesoscale activities and associated air-sea interactions [42], 
which are unresolved in the models used in this study. 
To better understand the key processes that maintain GMOC, we perform a composite analysis of GMOC 
variability in terms of the NADW, ACC-RC, and εm (Fig.3 and Extend Data Fig.6). We first calculate the first 
principal component of GMOC stream functions over regions in the north of 30° N, between 30° S and 30° N, 
as well as in the south of 30° S (denoted as MOCn, MOCt and MOCs). We find that the MOCn, MOCt, and 
MOCs generally correlate with the NADW, εm and ACC-RC indices well (detailed analyses are provided in 
Text S3c). Variability of the GMOC is largely accounted for by the linear combination of ACC-RC, NADW, 
and εm in both free model simulations and data-constrained products, and such fit is better in free model 
simulations. The mean correlation between the original and synthesized GMOC indices is 0.69 for the two free 
model cases and 0.45 for the three data-constrained cases. This reflects how well models tend to express 
idealized relationships between variables, while data constraints inevitably introduce some imbalances as 
model misfits are corrected by data. However, the correlation in the two CDA estimates is much higher (0.55) 
than in the ORAS5 ocean reanalysis (0.31), suggesting that the approach of CDA data constraint may help 
