3
exceeds the Pan-STARRS resolution limit (∼1′′). The
catalog of all these pairs and their properties are com-
piled in Table 2.
Not all 2,497 systems in the initial pair sample are
double quasars. In fact, most of these cases are SDSS
quasars with non-AGN companions, such as foreground
stars (Shen et al. 2023a). To eliminate these contami-
nants, we first apply a Gaia proper motion cut to classify
the companion, which has been proven to be an effec-
tive method for distinguishing between quasars and fore-
ground stars in previous work (e.g., Lemon et al. 2019;
Shen et al. 2023a). Specifically, to account for measure-
ment uncertainties, we define the significance of proper
motion (PMSIG) following Lemon et al. (2019) as
PMSIG =
s
pmra
pmra error
2
+

pmdec
pmdec error
2
, (1)
where pmra and pmdec are the proper motion in right
ascension and declination direction, while pmra error
and pmdec error are the corresponding standard errors.
We classify the companion as a “starlike” companion if
its proper motion is detected by Gaia with > 3σ sig-
nificance; otherwise, it is classified as a “quasar-like”
companion. Specifically, some matched sources have no
reported proper motion measurements in the Gaia DR3
catalog. Such companions are also labeled as “quasar-
like” companions.
For convenience, we denote cases
where proper motion measurements are unavailable in
the Gaia DR3 catalog as PM = NA hereafter.
Based on this proper motion classification, the par-
ent Gaia-resolved pair sample includes 861 pairs with
quasar-like companions, and 1,636 pairs with starlike
companions. The classification results based on proper
motion or/and other criteria mentioned below are pre-
sented in Table 1.
Only ∼2% of Gaia singly matched SDSS quasars have
> 3σ proper motion detection, as shown in Figure 1.
We also crossmatched SDSS spectroscopically confirmed
stars with Gaia DR3, finding a very different proper mo-
tion distribution compared with that of singly matched
quasars. In detail, ∼90% of Gaia matched stars with no
magnitude cut have > 3σ proper motion detection. This
test indicates that our proper motion cut excludes only
a negligible fraction of bona fide double quasars. How-
ever, the number of starlike companions significantly ex-
ceeds that of quasar-like companions, and some stars,
especially faint stars, have unreliable Gaia proper mo-
tion measurements, and thus contaminate the double
quasar sample, which is further discussed in following
paragraphs and also in Sections 2.2 and 2.3.
Another complication is that faint and low-redshift
systems may be misclassified due to Gaia’s detection
limit and contamination from the extended host galaxy
emission. To balance sample size and purity, we limit
the redshift and magnitude of systems in the pair sam-
ple to ensure reliable identification of the double quasar
population.
We require each matched Gaia source to
have a magnitude cut of G < 20.5 and a redshift cut of
z > 0.5. These limits are more lenient than G < 20.25
and z > 1.5 adopted in Shen et al. (2023a), providing
a larger sample over a broader redshift range than our
earlier work.
The criterion G < 20.5 ensures a high completeness
in Gaia detection and astrometric (e.g., proper motion)
measurements. The fractions of quasars with reported
proper motion among all matched DR16 quasars in the
magnitude bins G < 20.25, 20.25 ≤G < 20.5, and
G ≥20.5 are 97%, 92%, and 41%, respectively.
For
the companions in the pair sample only, the proper mo-
tion completeness is approximately 100%, 99%, and 50%
for the same magnitude ranges. Panel (9) in Figure 2
presents an example of a faint companion with no re-
ported proper motion (i.e., PM = NA), appearing as
an extended source. Furthermore, we show the proper
motion distribution for matched quasars and stars with
G < 20.5 in Figure 1 and set PMSIG = 0 if no proper
motion measurement is reported. The distributions for
both matched SDSS quasars and stars with the mag-
nitude cut differs significantly from that without the
cut around PMSIG = 0, indicating higher completeness
at G < 20.5. Additionally, after applying the magni-
tude cut, about 97% of Gaia-matched SDSS stars have
PMSIG > 3, resulting in a purer sample for our proper-
motion-based double quasar classification.
The z > 0.5 redshift cut mitigates cases with se-
vere contamination from the host galaxy and foreground
stars.
Galaxies at lower redshifts will have relatively
more flux covered by the Gaia G band to complicate
astrometric measurements.
In Figure 3, the upper
panel shows that the fraction of singly-matched DR16Q
quasars with a 3σ proper motion detection increases
rapidly at z < 0.5, likely due to poor proper motion
measurements caused by host contamination. Further-
more, the lower panel shows that the fraction of matched
DR16Q quasars with astrometric excess noise (AEN)
greater than 5 mas also increases significantly at z < 0.5,
further suggesting compromised astrometric measure-
ments due to stronger host galaxy emission within the
Gaia bandpass at low redshift.
These two statistics
demonstrate the complexity of source detection and as-
trometric measurements at lower redshifts due to host
galaxy emission (e.g., Lemon et al. 2019; Hwang et al.
2020). Panel (7) in Figure 2 shows a low-redshift pair
example with an extended structure, which may im-
