complete convergence is achievable, using various NN interactions.
This
universal ensemble is used for extrapolating the NCSM results for heavier
p-shell nuclei. A benchmarking of ISU and TUDa methods for the ground
state energies and point-proton radii of Li isotopes [16] demonstrated the
consistency of the obtained results within the estimated uncertainties.
In this study, we continue the neural network extrapolation studies fol-
lowing the route suggested in the pioneering Ref. [11] with modiﬁcations
discussed below which we suggested in Refs. [17, 18]. We present the extrap-
olated results for the ground state energies of the 6He and 6Li nuclei and for
the lowest excited state energies of 6Li as well as for the rms point-proton rp,
point-neutron rn, and point-nucleon (matter) rm radii in these states, based
on NCSM calculations conducted in model spaces with Nmax ≤18 using the
realistic NN interaction Daejeon16 [19].
The manuscript is organized as follows.
A description of the method
employed is presented in Section 2. The results of extrapolations of the con-
sidered observables in 6He and 6Li are presented and discussed in Section 3.
Finally, a short summary and the conclusions are given in Section 4.
2. Method
The outline of our method is that we employ an ensemble of randomly ini-
tialized artiﬁcial neural networks to analyze results of the NCSM calculations
and predict observables at very large Nmax values where the convergence of
the NCSM calculations is supposed to be achieved. The ensemble approach
aims to improve the prediction accuracy and to assess its uncertainty.
As compared with the pioneering work [11], we proposed a diﬀerent neural
network topology and established strict criteria for selecting trained neural
networks [17, 18]. This eliminates the need to split the data into training and
testing sets, signiﬁcantly simplifying the training process [17]. Our modiﬁed
approach, combined with rigorous statistical analysis of predictions from the
selected networks, ensures statistical robustness and increases the reliability
of the extrapolated results.
The proposed extrapolation method was tested on a benchmark problem
of calculations of the deuteron ground state energy supported by the realistic
Nijmegen II NN potential [20]. This problem exhibits a slow convergence
with diﬀerent behaviors of the results obtained with odd and even values
of Nmax/2 thus posing additional challenges for extrapolation techniques,
and provides a unique opportunity to verify the correctness and eﬃcacy of
3
