2.2
Replacing the probabilistic Born rule by universe counts
Consider an experimental measurement with possible measurement outcomes labeled by b ∈
B, and Figure 1 illustrating the branching into distinct universes due to the measurement.
Denote by φb :=

ψb(τ1)
ψb(τ1)

the squared norm of each branch. The Born rule gives the
probability of observing measurement outcome b ∈B as follows:
P(observing outcome b) =
φb
P
a∈B φa
.
(3)
Note that we do not assume normalized state vectors in this paper, which explains the
denominator P
a∈B φa in the probability formula above — that term is equal to one for
normalized states.
Our claim is that the Born rule above is not required as a fundamental postulate of
quantum mechanics. Indeed, our framework eliminates the need to postulate or derive any
probability measure over experimental outcomes b ∈B.4
The Schr¨odinger equation and
decoherence fully determine how the universe branches into decoherent states b ∈B with
squared norms φb — this is the complete physical description of what happens in an experi-
ment. While the probabilistic interpretation in (3) may be convenient, it is not necessary for
explaining the observable implications of experiments.
While the Born rule provides important predictive power, as shown in our introductory
example (where y ∈[100, 300] was predicted with near certainty), we must provide an al-
ternative justiﬁcation for such predictions without invoking probabilities. To develop this
justiﬁcation, we examine how the multiverse continues to branch naturally after the initial
measurement.
To understand how branching continues naturally after the measurement, consider Fig-
ure 2. After the initial measurement creates states bi ∈B with squared norms φbi, each
branch continues to evolve and split naturally through environmental decoherence. By time
τ2, each state bi has branched into ni distinct states ai,1, . . . , ai,ni.
Our fundamental claim is that over macroscopic time scales, i.e. for τ2 −τ1 large, the
4We replace the probability measure with a count measure over possible future universes, which can be
interpreted probabilistically but doesn’t have to be.
9
