7
Deflection (Å)
Head-on particle reflection
Force (meV/Å)
Time (ps)
0.5
1.0
0
1
2
3
2.5
5.0
0
0
0
5
10
15
-175.25
0
0.1318
0
0.0823
0
-76.9
0
-7.61
0
0.008
0
a)
b)
c)
d)
h)
0.003
0
-3.15
0
g)
f)
e)
Full EOM
Time-local
Time-local, quasistatic
Time-local, quasistatic, homogeneous
FIG. 3. Validations of the time-local formalism. We numerically simulated a mobile particle launched towards a framework
mass, as shown in Fig. 2, with framework properties given in Sec. III. The mobile particle interacts only with its target mass
via U = U0e−|x|/λ/x with U0 = 14, 000 meV. Panels (a)–(d) show the deflection of the interacting mass, while (e)–(h) show the
force experienced by the mobile particle. The four columns correspond to different combinations of the potential width λ and
initial particle speed ˙R0. Each panel includes four curves corresponding to different levels of approximation. We calculated
“Full” results by solving the equations of motion, Eqs. (2) and (3), for the 50 × 50 × 50 framework and the mobile particle. We
calculated “Time-local” r by inserting the full-solution r, ˙r, R, and ˙R into the expression on the right-hand side of Eq. (25),
and calculated the force using “time-local” r and “full-solution” R. For the remaining two solutions, we also used Eq. (25),
but set ˙r or both r and ˙r on the right-hand side to zero, in quasistatic and homogeneous approximations, respectively. The
horizontal dashed lines in all the panels show the amplitude of the maximum displacement and force obtained from the “Full”
solutions.
for all the results.
While the deflection of the framework mass is a good
check for our solutions, the dynamics of the mobile parti-
cle are more governed by the force exerted by the frame-
work mass. Therefore, we plotted the force, −U ′(R −r),
in Fig. 3(e)–(h) calculated from the corresponding de-
flection in Fig. 3(a)–(d). We see that the difference in
the force between the full and time-local results is sub-
stantially smaller than the difference in the deflection. In
fact, for all but the most pathological case, the difference
is essentially negligible.
Although the calculated displacements of our full and
time-local solutions match well, the time-local equation
of motion Eq. (16) is not solvable on its own. First of
all, even in the single-framework case, Eq. (25), there
are two unknowns: r and ˙r. If we try to circumvent this
difficulty by solving for ˙r to obtain a differential equation
of the form ˙r = f(r), this produces a term r/U ′′(r −R)
which diverges when U ′′ goes to zero. In the more general
case of Eq. (16), it is impossible to solve for ∇rdU/dt
because the matrix KLKT is singular, so some further
simplification is necessary.
To proceed with our under-defined time-local problem,
we make use of the fact that the deflection of the frame-
work mass is rather small, so its velocity must also be
small:
˙r →0 on the right-hand side of Eq. (25). Us-
ing this quasistatic approximation, we calculated the de-
flection and force for the same parameters as the other
simulations, with the results shown as yellow curves in
Fig. 3. We see that this simplification leads to very mi-
nor changes in the deflection and even smaller ones in the
force. The main advantage of this simplification is that
it turns Eq. (25) and, by extension, Eq. (16) into truly
time-local transcendental equations for r. In the pres-
ence of thermal motion, this quasistatic approximation
amounts to substituting ˙r →˙rH.
Although the quasistatic approximation leads to an im-
portant simplification, solving the resulting transcenden-
tal equation can still be numerically costly. Therefore,
noticing that the magnitude of the deflection is smaller
than the potential width, we set r →0 on the right-
hand side of Eq. (25), which is equivalent to replacing
r →rH on the right-hand side of Eq. (16). The resulting
solutions with a homogeneous-motion approximation are
plotted in Fig. 3 as red curves. Comparing the various so-
lutions, we see that this dramatic simplification does not
introduce a significant difference to the force experienced
by the particle.
Based on the results presented in Fig. 3, we see
that the numerically tractable time-local, quasistatic,
homogeneous-motion approximation captures the motion
of the framework and the force it exerts on the mobile
