10
emerges from frustration between the in-plane confine-
ment and the random orientation of the stripes predicted
in infinite pancakes.
Finite systems with larger trap aspect ratios have also
been investigated, in particular in Ref. [112] published
before the quantum-stabilization discovery, and therefore
based on a different stabilization mechanism. Nonethe-
less, its infinite-system phase diagram closely resembles
Fig. 3(c). Fully trapped systems were here studied from
a local density approximation standpoint:
the gas is
treated as being locally uniformly trapped, but with a
chemical potential (or average density) that varies spa-
tially. This links the crystal structure at different trap
positions to different points in the infinite-system phase
diagram, changing from honeycomb to stripe to triangu-
lar when moving from the trap’s inner to outer regions.
In the smaller aspect ratio trap of Fig. 3(e), some crystal
structures may be interpreted using this analysis, e.g. the
square markers transition from uniform to honeycomb
from inner to outer regions.
Analogously, low-density
uniform halos have been predicted in the trap outer re-
gions around linear or triangular supersolids occurring at
the center of tube or pancake traps [14–17, 110].
E.
Effect of temperature
The phase diagrams of Fig. 3(b-e) are calculated in the
zero-temperature limit.
However, in experiments, the
temperature, T, is inherently finite and can be tuned.
This parameter is expected to influence the phase be-
havior in two main ways: it controls the emergence of
the quantum phases themselves; it introduces thermal
fluctuations, which add to but differ from the quantum
fluctuations, and thus modify the stabilized phase dia-
gram at low but finite T.
As reported in IV B, experiments have shown that the
gas can transition from a thermal state to a supersolid
by tuning T [16, 88, 92].
During this transition, two
symmetries are spontaneously broken: translational and
gauge, linked to solid and superfluid orders, respectively.
These two symmetries can be broken simultaneously or
successively when varying T. The nature, number, and
order of the thermally driven phase transitions are sub-
jects of active investigation.
In experiments involving
evaporative cooling in cigar-shaped traps, the gas has
been observed to first transition from a thermal state to
a normal solid state with local phase coherence, before
achieving global phase coherence and forming a super-
solid as T decreases [92]. This suggests that translational
symmetry can break at higher T than gauge symmetry.
However, since not only temperature but also total atom
number and trap geometry evolve during the evapora-
tive cooling process, the generality of these observations
may be limited. Experiments in cigar-shaped traps have
also indicated that density-modulated states are favored
over uniform ones as T increases at a fixed condensate
atom number, revealing influences of T on the phase di-
agram [92, 113]. So far, experimental studies on thermal
effects and transitions in pancake geometries have been
limited [88, 89].
Theoretically, the finite-T regime is not directly ac-
cessible in the extended MF theory of III C based on the
eGPE. However, it can be partly captured either by mak-
ing refinements to the eGPE [89, 113, 114] or by start-
ing from a different standpoint and using QMC treat-
ments, which are exact but computationally limited, see
IV C [102].
Refinements of the eGPE have followed different ap-
proaches: (i) A stochastic projected version of the eGPE
adds two terms set by empirical parameters to the stan-
dard eGPE: a dissipative term that models the cou-
pling of the classical field ψ to high-energy modes, and
a dynamical noise term that embodies thermal fluctua-
tions [89]. This approach enables simulations of the dy-
namics of ψ in the presence of a thermal bath. (ii) An
eGPE version including thermal fluctuation corrections
adds, alongside with µLHY from the standard eGPE, a
thermal chemical potential term, µth, to the right-hand
bracket of (3) [113, 114]. Akin to µLHY, µth accounts
for the energy shift of ψ induced by its interactions with
thermal excitations.
It is derived assuming local den-
sity approximation and a thermal population of the Bo-
goliubov excitation spectrum (5) of a uniform gas (see
III B 1).
Based on the stochastic projected eGPE (i), evapo-
rative cooling ramps in which both temperature T and
chemical potential µ0 vary have been simulated [89].
These simulations confirm the experimental observation
of a solid order appearing at higher T than superfluid
order, here in the case of pancake traps.
They also
show that supersolid states are stable against thermal
fluctuations.
Similar results have been obtained us-
ing QMC simulations, which further predict that the
underlying transitions follow the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-
Thouless (BKT) mechanism [102].
Based on the thermally extended eGPE (ii), phase di-
agrams including T as a control parameter have been
calculated [113]. These confirm the experimental obser-
vation that supersolid states are favored over uniform
states when T increases at a fixed condensate atom num-
ber (i.e.
R
d3r|ψ(r)|2) and density (i.e. |ψ(r)|2) in finite
and infinite geometries, respectively. This occurs as µth
also contributes in the dispersion relation (5) and makes
the roton soften at lower ϵdd as T increases. The ther-
mally extended eGPE (ii) does not directly account for
incoherent effects, making the thermal transition inacces-
sible via pure ground-state calculations in this formalism
(analogous to the supersolid-to-insulated-crystal transi-
tion in the T = 0 simulations, see IV A).
More generally, phase diagrams for varying conden-
sate density and interaction parameters at fixed T can
be calculated using the thermally extended eGPE (ii).
Ref. [114] examines a tubular geometry with transverse
dipole polarization, and showed that higher T shift the
critical ac to larger values for a fixed condensate den-
