10 
 
from in-situ SEM imaging, the crack lengths are estimated to be on the order between 1 to 10 µm 
for FAPbBr3, which is in good agreement with our experimental observation (~3 µm under 3E9 
e/µm3 @ 10 keV), as shown in Figure 1a. The crack lengths are estimated to be between 102 and 
103 µm for MAPbBr3, but the confinement of the e-beam scanning region restricts the further 
propagation of cracks for MAPbBr3 in Figure 1b. The disparities of crack lengths between 
FAPbBr3 and MAPbBr3 also explain the different crack patterns in two crystals. If the SEM 
magnification is sufficiently high, reducing the scanning region size to a scale smaller than the 
maximum crack length in FAPbBr3, the brick-layer pattern may also be displayed on the surface 
of the FAPbBr3 single crystal. 
 
The volatilization processes of FA+ and MA+ organic groups are different due to their size 
differences. There are two C-N bonds with different bond lengths in the FA+ cation, but only one 
C-N bond in the MA+ cation. Some selected atom distances of FA+ and MA+ in their unit cells are 
listed in Table S4 (Supplementary material). Because the FA+ cation size is bigger than the MA+ 
size, the volatilization of MA+ is more enhanced than that of FA+, leading to faster cracking and 
higher crack density. In addition, there is possible bond breaking for these organic groups, because 
the content of C and N elements does not decrease proportionally as indicated by the EDS results. 
In FAPbBr3, the weaker C-N bond in many FA⁺ cations may break first under beam radiations, 
followed by the breaking of another stronger C-N bond, then leading to structural instability and 
the simultaneous appearance of numerous short cracks on the surface. In contrast, for the MA⁺ 
cation, a crack initiates immediately after the only one C-N bond breaks, and this crack continues 
to grow longer, wider, and deeper in MAPbBr3. 
 
We can also explain the various trends observed in the e-beam and X-ray beam radiations by 
understanding the different processes of crack initiation and propagation. Because of the much 
longer and wider cracks, MAPbBr₃ obtains higher crack densities than FAPbBr₃ at the high e-beam 
energy of 15 keV. The crack density of FAPbBr₃ is more sensitive to the e-beam density, as it 
affects the number of cracks initiated on the crystal surface, whereas the crack density of MAPbBr₃ 
is more sensitive to the e-beam energy, as it determines the crack depth and width. Under X-ray 
beam, higher beam energy makes bond breaking easier and allows deeper penetration. In FAPbBr₃, 
the dominant factor is that higher energy causes faster volatilization, accelerating the rate of 
composition evolutions. In contrast, in MAPbBr₃, volatilization of organic components inside is 
more difficult with the deeper penetration, slowing the overall rate of composition changes. 
 
3.2.  Instability of OIHP single crystals under different radiation conditions 
Table 1 compares the instability of OIHP single crystals under both e-beam and X-ray beam 
radiations, incorporating some representative previous studies along with our work. By utilizing 
appropriate characterization methods under different beam conditions, the instability of OIHP 
