Figure 7: Dependence of convergence rate on network choices in Use Case 3 (FJ-MM vs comparison FJ)
of the susceptibility matrix Λ.
Moreover, their dependence on β is generally non-monotonic.
Since providing
an analytical description of these dependencies is nontrivial, we only demonstrate several numerical experiments.
In these experiments, we use one of the graps, described in Example 4, however, the diagonal entries of Λ are
now heterogeneous: nodes belonging to a randomly chosen subset ˆV are assigned λii = 0 (indicating complete
stubbornness), while the remaining agents are assigned λii = 1.
First, we focus on the dependence of the convergence rate on the network choice under the hypothesis of Use
Case 3 (i.e., ˜W = I). Our initial experiment demonstrates that when setting [β] = β0I in (6), the dependence of
the convergence rates on β0 differs substantially from the homogeneous λii case (Proposition 3). In particular, the
gap between the spectral radii of the FJ-MM and its comparison models is non-monotonic.
Example 5. We compare the convergence rates of the FJ-MM model and the comparison FJ model for different
network choices under the assumption that ˜W = I (Social Inertia). We adopt the same graphs as in Example 4.
The set of randomly chosen stubborn nodes has cardinality |ˆV| = 0.2|V|). It can be observed (Fig. 7) that the gap
between the spectral radii of the FJ-MM and the comparison FJ model is no longer a monotonic function of β0.
This outcome is expected since, when β0 = 1, both models lose asymptotic stability, yielding ρ( ¯Ad) = ρ( ¯A) = 1.
Unlike the situation in Example 4, the gap visibly depends on the network’s topology.
In the case of secondary neighbors (Use Case 1), the relationship between the spectral radii and β0 becomes
even more complex and substantially depends on Λ. Specifically, while the spectral radius of the comparison model
exhibits a pronounced minimum at some β0 = β∗∈(0, 1), the spectral radius of the FJ-MM model increases
monotonically to 1 as β0 →1. Furthermore, the gap between the two models widens as the number of stubborn
agents, |ˆV|, increases. This behavior is illustrated in our final example.
Example 6 (Influence of cardinality of ˆV). Consider a Watts-Strogatz graph randomly generated, with N = 200
nodes, degree equal to 0.6N and rewiring probability 0.7, under the assumption that ˜W = W 2 (Use Case 1). We
compare two cases: 15% of individuals are stubborn vs. 50% of stubborn agents and show the spectral radii of the
FJ-MM, the associated comparison model and the original FJ model with matrix W (corresponding to β0 = 0).
5
Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a generalization of the Friedkin–Johnsen (FJ) model, termed FJ-MM, which integrates
memory effects and higher-order (multi-hop) neighbor influences to account for both current and past opinions
across direct and secondary connections. Our analysis shows that while the convergence properties of the FJ-MM
model reduce to those of a comparison model–namely, the standard FJ model with a modified influence matrix–the
convergence rate is significantly affected by the incorporation of past opinions, as demonstrated by preliminary
eigenvalue analysis and numerical simulations on random graphs.
Also, our numerical experiments reveal that
memory and multi-hop influence reshape the opinion landscape by reducing polarization in the final opinion profile.
The findings presented in this paper suggest several promising directions for future research, particularly in
exploring both the steady-state and transient properties of the FJ-MM dynamics. It is well established that the FJ
