Properties and prevalence of false poor man’s Majoranas in
two- and three-site artificial Kitaev chains
Melina Luethi,1 Henry F. Legg,1, 2 Daniel Loss,1 and Jelena Klinovaja1
1Department of Physics, University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 82, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland
2SUPA, School of Physics and Astronomy, University of St Andrews,
North Haugh, St Andrews, KY16 9SS, United Kingdom
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
It was predicted that a minimal chain of two quantum dots (QDs) connected via a superconductor
can host perfectly localized zero-energy states, known as poor man’s Majoranas (PMMs).
It is
expected that these states are related to Majorana bound states (MBSs) in longer chains and that
the tunable nature of this setup makes it a promising platform to study MBSs. However, realistic
systems can only host highly, but not perfectly, localized near-zero-energy states, called imperfect
PMMs.
It has been shown that these imperfect PMMs can evolve into trivial states unrelated
to MBSs when the chain is extended.
Such states are called false PMMs, whereas PMMs that
evolve into MBSs in long chains are called true PMMs. Here, using a microscopic model of QD-
superconductor arrays, we consider properties of false PMMs and the circumstances under which
they appear. In two-site systems, we find that the origin of many false PMMs can be related to zero-
energy states occurring in the absence of superconductivity and we use this analytic understanding
to characterize the false PMMs that are typical for different regions of parameter space. In three-
site systems, we show that false PMMs can occur via the same mechanism as for two-site systems,
but we also find them in regions of parameter space where they are not predicted to exist, thus
hinting that the physics of false PMMs can be richer in longer chains. Finally, we demonstrate that
the PMMs most stable to perturbations in chemical potential and with the largest excitation gaps
appear in a region of parameter space that also has a large ratio of false to true PMMs.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Majorana bound states (MBSs) are quasiparticles that
emerge in topological superconductors [1]. It has been
proposed that they can store and manipulate quantum
information in a fault-tolerant way [2–4] due to their non-
Abelian exchange statistics [5].
The Kitaev chain [1]
is a spinless minimal model that hosts MBSs. It relies
on p-wave superconductivity, however there has not yet
been any strong evidence for intrinsic p-wave supercon-
ductivity and this has precluded a direct implementation.
Nanowires with strong spin-orbit interaction (SOI) prox-
imitized by a superconductor [6–13] are prominent exam-
ples of an effective implementation of the Kitaev chain.
However, despite great experimental effort, there has not
yet been a conclusive observation of MBSs in nanowires,
largely due to the fact that disorder can result in signals
that mimic MBSs [14–34].
To overcome the issue of disorder, implementing the
Kitaev chain as an array of quantum dots (QDs) has
been proposed [35–78], see Fig. 1. The QDs are separated
by superconducting sections that transmit elastic cotun-
neling (ECT) and crossed Andreev reflection (CAR) be-
tween pairs of QDs [79–85]. It has been predicted that,
by tuning the relative strengths of CAR and ECT, the
chain can be brought to a “sweet spot”, i.e., a point in
parameter space where a pair of states, with its partners
localized at opposite ends of the chain, do not overlap
and have the properties of Majorana bound states, even
in a minimal chain consisting only of two QDs [35, 36]. In
recent years, control over the strengths of ECT and CAR
has been demonstrated in multiple experiments [40, 86–
FIG. 1.
Sketch of a chain of QDs that can host PMMs.
The red (blue) QDs are normal (superconducting) QDs. The
normal QDs are characterized by a chemical potential µN,
Zeeman energy ∆Z, and Coulomb repulsion U. The super-
conducting QDs are characterized by a chemical potential µS
and a superconducting pairing ∆. The hopping between the
QDs is characterized by the amplitude t and the SOI angle
ΦSOI. The minimal chain consists of two normal QDs and
one superconducting QD. When going to longer chains, we
assume a uniform chain and that there is no superconducting
phase difference between the QDs.
91].
In minimal chains, due to the lack of topological
protection, the states appearing at these sweet spots have
been called “poor man’s Majoranas” (PMMs). However,
these sweet spots only exist in highly simplified models,
where it is commonly assumed that the QDs are fully
spin-polarized [35, 36] and/or there is a high degree of
independence between parameters [72]. In more realistic
models highly – but not perfectly – localized near-zero-
energy states exist [39, 72], which have been referred to
as “imperfect PMMs” [72]. It has been shown that when
the array of QDs is extended uniformly to the long chain
limit, imperfect PMMs can evolve either into true MBSs,
or into trivial states [73]. The former are called “true
PMMs”, whereas the latter “false PMMs” [73]. It is im-
portant to emphasize that the extension of the chain us-
ing uniform parameters is a theoretical tool and in re-
alistic experimental systems parameters will vary along
arXiv:2504.06732v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  9 Apr 2025
