2
the chain, which will further complicate whether a PMM
evolves into a topological state in the long chain limit.
While the existence of false PMMs was demonstrated
in Ref. [73], we study here the properties of false PMMs
and ascertain the regions of parameter space where they
occur.
To do this, we utilize a microscopic model for
the chain shown in Fig. 1. First, studying the system in
the absence of superconductivity and putting constraints
on the energy as well as the wave functions, we deter-
mine analytically where in parameter space false PMMs
appear in two-site chains. We find that there are two
defining characteristics of false PMMs in two-site chains:
1) Whether they appear at Zeeman energies smaller or
larger than the range of Zeeman energies within which
the uniform long chain hosts a topological phase and 2)
whether the false PMM is associated with a trivial zero-
energy crossing (ZEC) in the long chain limit. Through-
out, we compare our analytical results to numerical cal-
culations and find good agreement.
We also consider three-site chains, which have been
studied in recent experiments [51, 75], and show that
the same mechanism as in the two-site chains can cause
false PMMs in these systems.
We again compare our
analytical results to numerical calculations and find good
agreement. In addition, we also find false PMMs that
cannot be explained by the same mechanism as the two-
site system. This emphasizes that further mechanisms
for false PMMs can be present as the chain is extended.
Finally, we study the ratio of true to false PMMs as a
function of the threshold values that are required to de-
fine an imperfect PMM [72]. As would be expected, we
find that stricter threshold values result in fewer states
overall being classified as PMMs, but also that the ratio
of true to false PMMs increases as the threshold values
are made more restrictive.
Additionally, we find that
PMMs most stable to perturbations in chemical poten-
tial and with the largest excitation gaps occur at large
inter-QD hopping amplitudes. However, for these large
hopping amplitudes, the PMMs are not as well localized
and therefore threshold values cannot be too stringent
if these states should satisfy the PMM condition. As a
result, in this regime, the ratio of false PMMs is rather
high.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows.
In
Sec. II, we introduce the microscopic model of an artificial
Kitaev chain and the quantities required to characterize
imperfect PMMs. Next, in Sec. III, we study the proper-
ties of false PMMs in minimal and longer QD chains in
different regions of parameter space. In Sec. IV we ana-
lyze how the ratio of true and false PMMs in minimal QD
chains behaves as a function of the threshold values and
study the stability of the PMMs throughout parameter
space. We conclude in Sec. V. In Appendix A, we address
the finite Zeeman energy in the superconducting section.
The effect of finite on-site Coulomb repulsion is studied
in Appendix B. We compare analytically and numerically
calculated optimal chemical potentials in Appendix C.
II.
MODEL
To model an artificial Kitaev chain, we consider a
chain of alternating normal and superconducting QDs,
see Fig. 1, as was first introduced in Ref. 39. The normal
QDs have chemical potential µN, Zeeman energy ∆Z,
and on-site Coulomb repulsion U. The superconducting
QDs model Andreev bound states (ABSs) that effectively
transmit ECT and CAR between the normal QDs. The
superconducting QDs have a superconducting pairing po-
tential ∆and chemical potential µS. Both µN and µS
are measured with respect to the chemical potential of
the superconductor hosting the ABS. Due to screening
by the parent superconductor, we assume that the super-
conducting QDs have no Zeeman energy and no Coulomb
repulsion. It was shown in Ref. 39 that this assumption
is not necessary for PMMs and we comment on the effect
of finite Zeeman energy on the superconducting QDs in
Appendix A. We assume that all parameters are uniform
throughout the chain and that there is no superconduct-
ing phase difference between the superconducting QDs.
In the following, we will distinguish between a minimal
chain that consists of two normal (and one superconduct-
ing) QDs, chains that consist of three normal (and two
superconducting) QDs, and long chains that consist of
several tens to hundreds of QDs.
Let us now consider a chain with N normal QDs and
N −1 superconducting QDs. We label each QD with an
index j = 0, 1, . . . , 2N −2 and if j is even (odd), then
the corresponding QD is normal (superconducting). The
hopping between the QDs is determined by the hopping
amplitude t and the SOI angle ΦSOI. The chain is aligned
along the x axis and we apply a magnetic field parallel
to the z axis, leading to a Zeeman energy ∆Z. Thus, the
Hamiltonian of the system is written as
H =
2N−2
X
j=0
h X
σ=↑,↓
(µj + σ∆Z,j)njσ + Ujnj↑nj↓
+ ∆j(d†
j↑d†
j↓+ dj↓dj↑)
i
+ t
2N−3
X
j=0
X
σ,σ′=↑,↓
h
USOI
ΦSOI
2

σσ′ d†
j+1σdjσ′ + H.c.
i
, (1)
where njσ = d†
jσdjσ, d†
jσ (djσ) creates (annihilates) a
particle on QD j, the notation σ∆Z means +∆Z for σ =↑
and −∆Z for σ =↓, Uj is the on-site repulsion strength,
and
µj =
(
µN
if j even,
µS
if j odd,
(2a)
∆Z,j =
(
∆Z
if j even,
0
if j odd,
(2b)
Uj =
(
U
if j even,
0
if j odd,
(2c)
