Fermi surface as a quantum critical manifold: gaplessness, order
parameter, and scaling in d-dimensions
Gennady Y. Chitov
Bogoliubov Laboratory of Theoretical Physics,
Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, Dubna 141980, Russia
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
We study several models of d-dimensional fermions (d = 1, 2, 3) with an empha-
sis on the properties of their gapless (metallic) phase.
It occurs at T = 0 as a
continuous transition when zeros of the partition function reach the real range of
parameters. Those zeros define the (d −1)-manifold of quantum criticality (Fermi
surface). Its appearance or restructuring correspond to the Lifshitz transition. Such
(d −1)-membrane breaks the symmetry of the momentum space, leading to gapless
excitations, a hallmark of metallic phase. To probe quantitatively the gapless phase
we introduce the geometric order parameter as d-volume of the Fermi sea. From
analysis of the chain, ladder, and free fermions with different spectra, this proposal
is shown to be consistent with scaling near the Lifshitz points of other quantities:
correlation length, oscillation wavelength, susceptibilities, and entanglement.
All
the (hyper)scaling relations are satisfied. Two interacting cases of the Tomonaga-
Luttinger (d = 1) and the Fermi (d = 2, 3) liquids are analysed, yielding the same
universality classes as free fermions.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The initial motivation for this work was in the effort to better understand the physics of
the field-induced transition between the gapped and incommensurate (IC) gapless phases in
low-dimensional spin systems. Quantum critical properties of chains and ladders in magnetic
field have been actively studied over the years. (See, e.g., [1–12]). The key property is
the existence of quantized plateaux in the unique magnetization curve, corresponding to
the gapped incompressible phases, continuously connected by the curves of arbitrary real
magnetization. The latter correspond to the gapless incommensurate (IC) phase(s). The
necessary quantization condition for appearance of such plateaux in generic chains or ladders
was derived in [1]. We will call it the plateau theorem which states:
The magnetization plateau with rational (fractional) magnetization and a finite excitation
gap is only possible if condition
P(s −M) ∈Z
(1)
is satisfied. Here P, s, and M are periodicity, spin, and magnetization, respectively. Period-
icity P is defined as the number of spins in the unit cell in the ground state. This theorem is
a generalization of the Lieb-Schultz-Mattis (LSM) theorem [13] for the case of magnetic field.
The plateau theorem generalized for a quantum many-particle fermionic system defined on
a periodic lattice with an exactly conserved particle number, states that a finite excitation
gap is possible only if the particle number per unit cell of the ground state is an integer, i.e.,
at commensurate (rational) filling [14]. Since the spin-1
2 and spinless fermionic models can
be mapped onto each other by a judiciously chosen Jordan-Wigner transformation, one can
always make a correspondence between the results for spins or fermions.
We want to pay a special attention to the gapless IC (metallic) phase. At first sight,
no particular order parameter can be attributed to it, except of a standard notion of the
arXiv:2504.07014v1  [cond-mat.str-el]  9 Apr 2025
