5
desired canonical expectation values as a function of the
conjugate variable, i.e. the ring’s bending rigidity, κb.
We reconstructed W(nc) for space-filling ring melts on
a 5 × 5 × 4 cubic lattice for a total of 100 lattice sites;
see (b-h) panels in Fig. 2. To cover the entire admissi-
ble range 32 ≤nc ≤100, we used multiple intervalled
samplings with unit increment in ¯nc and m = 3 slack
variables, corresponding to intervals of widths 8. Con-
sidering the numerous intervals involved, we performed
the sampling with a parallel tempering scheme on a clas-
sical high-performance computing cluster, and reserved
the use of quantum optimization platforms to the more
manageable 3 × 3 × 2 system, which we discuss later.
The density of states obtained using m = 3 variables
is shown in Fig.1.
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
nc
10
22
10
19
10
16
10
13
10
10
10
7
10
4
10
1
W (nc)
FIG. 1. Density of states as a function of total curva-
ture for a ring melt filling a 5 × 5 × 4 lattice. The re-
construction was obtained using a sampling depth d ≈1, 000
for each of the 69 intervals of length 8 (m = 3) straddling
the entire range of curvature values, 32 ≤nc ≤100. The
data points represent the average density of states computed
from 4 reconstructions; error bars are smaller than the
symbol size, because the average error is around 5%.
W (nc) is peaked around nc = 78, which would be
the most probable value of nc for curvature-unrestricted
sampling. W decreases rapidly on both sides of the peak,
dropping by more than 9 and 22 orders of magnitude to
the right and left, respectively.
We note that if the same total number of states were
collected from a curvature-unrestricted QUBO sampling,
rather than from multiple overlapping intervals, then the
single resulting histogram would only cover the 60 ≤
nc ≤96 range. This limited coverage would preclude the
calculation of the entire W profile and, hence, of canon-
ical expectation values at arbitrary βκb.
B.
Canonical expectation values for varying
bending rigidity
The density of states W(nc) enables calculating the
expectation values of a generic observable, O, at fixed
inverse temperature, β, and bending rigidity, κb, via:
⟨O⟩βκb =
P
nc⟨O⟩ncW (nc) e−βκbnc
P
nc W (nc) e−βκbnc
,
(13)
where ⟨O⟩nc is the average of the observable of interest
computed at fixed nc. In the above expression, which
specializes eq. 12 to self-assembled ring melts, we have
set E = κbnc, thereby absorbing the curvature of π/2 at
each corner turn into the definition of κb.
Note that W is the same for any considered observ-
able and, therefore, needs to be reconstructed only once
by covering the admissible range of nc with overlapping
intervals. In addition, it is advantageous to compute the
constrained average, ⟨O⟩nc, using (uncorrelated) states
with the given nc from all intervals that include nc.
C.
Results: linking probability
We used the above scheme to profile the linking (con-
catenation) probability of canonically equilibrated melts
of rings as a function of the bending rigidity.
Concatenation constraints, also termed mechanical
bonds, are key structural motifs for supramolecular self-
assemblies, from self-limited synthetic catenanes [64,
76–78] to modular ones [65, 79–82], including three-
dimensional Olympic gels [83].
In recent years, various experimental advancements
[84, 85], especially in metal-ion templating techniques,
have finally made it possible not only to externally con-
trol the geometry and topology of mechanical bonding
but also to boost the yield of these topological constructs.
However, despite these breakthroughs, identifying the
conditions most conducive to inter-molecular linking re-
mains an open problem.
In this regard, the bending rigidity, κb is a natural pa-
rameter for the design of topologically-bonded materials.
However, studying the effect of κb on concatenation prob-
ability of long and densely packed rings is challenging for
real-space Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics because
the autocorrelation times increase rapidly with the rings’
rigidity. For instance, high effective bending rigidities,
e.g., due to electrostatic repulsions, can cause the dynam-
ical arrest in ring melts [86]; in addition, concatenation
constraints significantly slow down the system’s relax-
ation dynamics [87]. Consequently, profiling inter-chain
linking in canonical equilibrium has so far been feasible
only for a few distinct values of βκb and for discrete mod-
els amenable to special-purpose sampling methods [88].
Thus, how mutual entanglements in ring melts vary as
a function of βκb remains an unsolved problem for con-
ventional Monte Carlo methods. For the same reasons,
it is the natural avenue for applying the QUBO-based
sampling and the thermodynamic reweighting technique.
In fact, our recent study of ref. [33] has shown the po-
tential of using QUBO-based models to profile the en-
tanglement of ring melts. However, such considerations
