Figure 8: One-loop contributions (left) and two-loop contributions (right) of muonphilic
ALPs to (g −2)µ.
ALPs is not straightforward since the typical momentum transfer t from the target nucleus
to the ALP can be comparable to m2
ℓ, such that the full momentum dependence of the
lepton loop needs to be included for an accurate estimate.
To obtain a first estimate of the expected constraints, we implemented the constant
piece of the loop-induced photon coupling geff
aγγ = αCℓ/(πΛ) in the public code ALPIN-
IST [86], which allows for a reinterpretation of proton-beam dump data for ALPs with
different coupling structures. The resulting constraints are found to be weaker than the
ones from E137 and NA64. Given the results from ref. [87] for muonphilic scalars, we
anticipate the same conclusion to hold also for muonphilic ALPs, which can be produced
via Bremsstrahlung from secondary muons. Since a more accurate calculation is not ex-
pected to give significantly stronger bounds, we refrain from a detailed study and omit
these constraints from our analysis. For the same reason, we do not attempt to reinterpret
the recent search for ALPs coupled to photons at FASER [88].
4.7
Muon and Electron g −2
Electrophilic or muonphilic ALPs contribute to the anomalous magnetic moment of the
electron or the muon, aℓ≡(g −2)ℓ/2 with ℓ= e, µ, respectively. The main contributions
for the muonic case only are shown in figure 8.
At the one-loop level, there is no difference between derivative and pseudoscalar cou-
plings due to the direct coupling of the ALP to the external charged lepton lines. Con-
versely, the two-loop contribution, which features an effective ALP-photon coupling, dis-
tinguishes the two coupling types. The expression for the one-loop contribution is given in
ref. [5], while the expressions for the two-loop contributions can be found in refs. [21, 34]
and [89] for pseudoscalar and derivative couplings, respectively. Note that, in the latter
case, the result depends on the UV cutoff scale Λ, which we will set here to Λ ∼1 TeV.
The theoretical situation regarding the muon anomalous magnetic moment is currently
under scrutiny, see e.g. ref. [90] and references therein. Indeed, up to a few years ago, the
theoretical consensus was a value [91] that currently shows a negative 5.2σ discrepancy
with the current experimental world average [92], a discrepancy that would only be exac-
erbated by ALPs contributions. However, the latest lattice determinations of the so-called
leading order hadronic vacuum polarisation (LOHVP) contribution increase the theoreti-
cal prediction of aµ, effectively resulting in a compatibility at the 0.9σ level [93, 94]. Yet
– 23 –
