7
tems [20, 86].
Figure 8. (a) Schematic of the simulation setup, where parti-
cles are selectively activated within a circular region of radius
rbeam = 30σ at the center of the simulation box, simulat-
ing laser irradiation. (b), (c) Snapshots of the system under
Λ = 11 at times t = 2×106τp and 6.02×106τp, with particles
colored by their local non-affinity χi and defects (particles
with non-six neighbors) indicated. (d)(f) Time evolution of
the global non-affine deviation ∆X inside (blue) and outside
(orange) the active region. (g)(i) Evolution of defect fraction
inside (blue) and outside (orange) the active region. Param-
eter values are Λ = 9 (d,g), Λ = 10 (e,h), and Λ = 11 (f,i).
To study the above-mentioned effect near the solid-
hexatic transition, we examine a collection of selectively
activated particles coupled to a thermal heat bath with
˜Dt = 1, activated over a central circular region (Fig.8).
Three activity levels are considered: below (Λ = 9), at
(Λ = 10), and above (Λ = 11) the transition. The sys-
tem consists of N = 16384 particles, initially arranged
in a triangular lattice at density ρ = 1.1 within a rect-
angular simulation box of size 131.14σ × 113.57σ. Af-
ter sufficient equilibration, the central circular region of
radius rbeam = 30σ is selectively activated to mimic
laser irradiation (Fig.8(a)).
Particles are assigned ac-
tivity Λi(t) = σi(t)Λ, with σi = 1 inside the active zone
and σi = 0 outside. The value of σi(t) is updated at each
timestep based on particle positions.
A schematic of this setup is shown in Fig. 8(a), and
representative snapshots during evolution for Λ = 11 are
shown in Fig. 8(b), (c), where particles are colored by
their local non-affinity χi.
Pronounced softening and
defect formation are observed inside the active region,
while χi outside remains close to equilibrium. At early
times, defects remain confined within the active zone;
however, at later times, isolated defects begin to appear
in the passive region as a result of migration and de-
layed annihilation of defects originating from the active
area. To quantify global structural changes, we define
∆X = X(Λ) −X(0), the deviation of the global non-
affine parameter from its equilibrium value, as defined in
Sec. III B. The evolution of this quantity in the active
zone ∆X(in) and in the passive zone ∆X(out) is shown in
Fig. 8(d)–(f). Below the transition (Λ = 9), ∆X(in) fluc-
tuates around a non-zero mean with a larger amplitude
than in equilibrium, while ∆X(out) remains negligible.
At transition (Λ = 10), ∆X(in) diverges, while ∆X(out)
stays flat, indicating localized melting. Above transition
(Λ = 11), this divergence occurs earlier followed by an
increase in ∆X(out) as well, suggesting outward spread of
non-affineness. The defect fraction evolution in Fig. 8(g)-
(i) shows that for Λ = 9, defects form and annihilate
intermittently, while at and beyond the transition, de-
fect fraction increases significantly inside and, to a lesser
extent, outside the active region.
VI.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In summary, this paper explored spontaneous deforma-
tions in active solids, characterizing crystal deformations
through non-affine fluctuations and deriving a scaling law
in terms of activity Λ and density. Our scaling analy-
sis and numerical data collapse predict that non-affinity
scales as Λ2 with activity and (ρ −ρm)−1 with density.
At large Λ, the non-affine parameter diverges, signaling
defect proliferation and the activated melting to a hex-
atic phase with vanishing shear modulus and order. This
softening was further analyzed through topological de-
fect proliferation. At higher activity, the hexatic melts
to a fluid as captured by the change in structure factor
and hexatic order parameter. Using the properties found
from our studies, we finally proposed, locally tuned ac-
tivity as a means to control non-affinity and mechanical
properties. We numerically demonstrated the use of an
isotropic activity patch in the solid. Such a patch locally
softens the solid by increasing non-affinity, which reduces
the shear modulus. Activating the solid in an anisotropic
domain can modify elastic properties differently in each
direction. Our predictions can be directly tested in active
colloids. Additionally, locally controlling non-affinity via
activity is simpler to implement in Janus colloid experi-
ments than previous laser-controlled methods [39].
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The work began with a discussion between DC and SS,
followed by initial non-affinity scaling simulations carried
out by DD. PN set up and conducted all the final nu-
merical simulations. DC supervised the project, and all
authors contributed to writing the manuscript and dis-
cussed the results.
