EOS/BS
ℏ1
ℏ2
+K
−K
a
b
I0
Is
FIG. 1. Principle of ultrafast all-optical bandgap modulation and detection. a, Sketch
of resonant SHG in the ±K valleys of a TMD without considering the effect of all-optical bandgap
modulation by OS and BS shifts. Here, a linearly polarized pulse with photon energy ℏω1 (orange)
causes a second-harmonic signal (green) with photon energy ℏω2 = 2ℏω1 and intensity I0. b, By
including the intensity-dependent OS and BS shifts, the ±K valleys undergo a blueshift ∆EOS/BS,
reducing the efficiency of the SHG process, and decreasing the SH intensity to IS < I0.
limitations of perturbative NLO due to the dual role of light, which simultaneously induces
and probes the perturbation of the energy bands in a solid.
Furthermore, our findings
are comprehensively captured by a theoretical model based on the Semiconductor Bloch
Equations (SBEs) [21–24]. The obtained analytical [25] and numerical solutions enable us
to further retrieve from experiments the fundamental parameters of dephasing time and
transition dipole moment at optical resonances.
As a platform for our study, we use a monolayer sample from the family of transition metal
dichalcogenides (TMDs), which exhibit several unique features that make them interesting
for applications based on parametric nonlinear optics (NLO) [26]. These include a large
refractive index [27], strongly bound excitons that dominate their optical properties even at
room temperature [28], and a large nonlinear second order susceptibility coefficient combined
with the absence of phase matching constraints [29–32].
In parallel, TMDs provide an
excellent playground for all-optical bandgap modulation and valleytronics [8, 33–36]. Here,
we detect light-induced band structure modulation in a WSe2 monolayer based on parametric
SHG. By filtering out the competing signals from two-photon photoluminescence (TP-PL),
we isolate the second-harmonic (SH) response of the sample, and we measure an anomalous
SH intensity dependence that we can directly relate to the observation of an emerging
4
