9
i.e. have significant overlap between density peaks with
C < 1 so that global superfluidity is preserved.
Similar to the tube geometry, the first-order transitions
underlie bistability, with the ground state remaining as
a metastable state on the other side of the transition.
This holds for the uniform-to-modulated transition with
the uniform state being a metastable state down to the
roton instability like in IV C 1 (see red line Fig. 3(c)), but
also for the structural transitions between stripes and the
other crystal structures, where the different modulated
states remain metastable down to a point where one of
their sound modes becomes unstable [108], see also later
discussion in V B.
So far, experimental realizations of 2D-crystal su-
persolids have been made at relatively low densities
and trapping strength, and thereby limited to trian-
gular phases [88, 89], see Fig. 3(a2,a3).
These states
have been created by temperature instead of interaction
ramps, which avoids crossing discontinuous transitions,
and thereby minimizes excitations [89], see IV B.
3.
Effect of dipole tilt
The phase diagrams of Fig. 3(b,c) are shown for dipoles
oriented along a tightly confined direction. Tilting the
dipoles by an angle α with respect to this direction and
towards an unconfined direction provides an additional
tuning parameter, controllable in experiments by adjust-
ing the orientation of the applied bias field B using sev-
eral pairs of coils. In the extreme case of α = π/2, one
recovers the situation described at the beginning of IV A,
where phonon softening drives the MF instability and
the quantum-stabilized ground state is a single-droplet
state. Instead, for sufficiently small tilt angles, density-
modulated ground states occur, yet the phase diagram is
modified compared to Fig. 3(b,c).
In tube geometries, the crystal structures remain lin-
ear, but both the critical scattering length ac and the
crystal spacing increase with α.
For pancake geome-
tries, an example phase diagram with α = π/6 is shown
in Fig. 3(d) [90]. While this diagram features the same
phases and their same density ordering as the α = 0 di-
agram of Fig. 3(c), the stripe phase is favored at the ex-
pense of the triangular and honeycomb phases [14, 90].
The dipole tilt also influences the orientation of the
stripes. While for α = 0 this orientation is random, for
α > 0, the stripes orient themselves along the unconfined
direction in which the dipoles are tilted.
In addition to modifying the phases’ extents, the dipole
tilt further impacts the phase transitions and their na-
ture. In pancake geometries, it extends the density range
for which a direct transition between uniform and stripe
state exists, transforming the tricritical point of Fig. 3(c)
into a line in Fig. 3(d) (blue dotted line).
Along this
line, the uniform-to-modulated transition is predicted to
be continuous [90]. Similarly, the dipole tilt introduces
regimes where the structural transitions between stripe
and triangular or honeycomb phases become continuous
(red dotted lines in Fig. 3(d)). This configuration of ex-
perimental interest has so far only been explored in early
experiments [14] where supersolidity was not achieved,
see IV B.
D.
Theoretical predictions of modulated states in
trapped systems
Beyond the case of infinite geometries, the phase dia-
gram of dipolar gases in fully finite traps has attracted
considerable interest. Studies have explored various trap
geometries ranging from finite tubular [15–17, 107, 109]
to pancake-like [14, 87, 91, 110, 111] passing by fully
anisotropic ones [88]. This interest stems not just from
the experimental relevance of such configurations, but
also from the unique effects they induce, including be-
yond quantitative shifts, qualitative differences, and un-
precedented crystal structures in the system’s ground
state. The traps used in these theoretical works are typ-
ically harmonic, approximating the experimental config-
urations using Gaussian beam traps. Such traps are not
only finite but also inhomogeneous, resulting in a distinc-
tive interplay with the DDI.
In finite traps, the atom number N should be consid-
ered as a control parameter instead of the mean density
n.
Considering N introduces finite-size effects, which,
combined with the trap frequencies, limit the number of
crystal sites that the ground state hosts. For too small
N, the number of crystal sites is reduced to one, and un-
modulated ground states are found in trap configurations
for which larger N or infinite-system phase diagrams dis-
play density modulation, see e.g. [16, 71]. This was the
case in the early experiment of Ref. [11], see IV B.
Typical phase diagrams vary N and ϵdd for fixed trap
parameters. Fig. 3(e) shows an example for a pancake ge-
ometry with transverse polarization and moderate ratio
ω⊥/ω∥= 2 between axial and radial trap frequencies [91].
For this moderate aspect ratio, instead of a conventional
roton mode, an angular roton drives the MF instability,
see IV A [87]. Therefore this scenario notably deviates
from the considerations of IV C. Nonetheless, Fig. 3(e)
shows modulated states with familiar patterns – trian-
gular, stripe, honeycomb – appearing in same sequence
with increasing N as with increasing n in infinite sys-
tems (see Fig. 3(c)). This demonstrates the relevance of
infinite-system predictions for understanding finite sys-
tems, even with small aspect ratios.
Besides these familiar phases, Fig. 3(e) features modu-
lated states with novel structures – pumpkin or labyrinth
– illustrated in the subpanels.
The labyrinth phase is
particularly fascinating as the underlying crystal struc-
tures lack symmetries, and many configurations are al-
most degenerate. These characteristics being reminiscent
of glassy behaviors, this phase was dubbed superglass in
Ref. [91].
It occurs over a wide range of parameters,
partly or fully replacing the stripe phase, and potentially
