SciPost Physics
Submission
The details of the derivation of the heat flow power are presented in Appendix D. If the res-
onator were in the true thermal equilibrium with temperature Tr, the heat flow would vanish
in the case of equal temperatures Tr = Tp. Therefore, we can assign a quasitemperature Tr to
the resonator as the temperature of the probe which corresponds to the vanishing of the heat
flow, i.e. 〈W(Tr)〉= 0.
We present the plots of the steady-state quasitemperature and linewidth of the resonator
vs. the drive frequency and amplitude in Fig. 7. One can clearly observe both of these quan-
tities change sharply at the resonances which correspond to the Cooper pair breaking. The
frequencies of the resonances depend on the amplitude because of the ac-Stark shift of the res-
onator. The steady-state quasitemperature is determined by the dominant process of Cooper
pair breaking. The regions of the parameter space where the photon absorption from the res-
onator dominates correspond to cooling of the circuit. In the other regions, the Cooper pair
breaking with photon emission is stronger, and the resonator heats up.
Based on our results, we conclude that the driven Josephson junctions can serve as tunable
dissipative elements. Both the quasitemperature and the decay rate can be efficiently tuned
in a broad range, which makes this dissipation mechanism potentially interesting for such
practical applications as unconditional ground state preparation [43] or implementation of a
quantum heat engine [53]. However, this work serves merely as a proof of principle, and we
leave optimization of the drive parameters and analysis of the effects of non-vanishing Dynes
parameter and elevated electronic temperature for future studies.
5
Conclusions
We analyzed the effects of memory and dissipation in a strongly-driven Josephson junction on
the dynamics of the electromagnetic field in cQED systems within the quasiclassical approx-
imation. At low temperature, the mechanism responsible for both of these effects is photon-
assisted Cooper pair breaking. Despite the fact that breaking a Cooper pair in a Josephson
junction requires an energy much higher than the typical energies in cQED systems, multi-
photon processes enabled by the junction nonlinearity make experimental observation of the
dissipation and non-Markovian dynamics feasible. We illustrate this on a simple system of
a linear LC-circuit coupled to a strongly driven Josephson junction; our findings include the
emergence of a non-Lorentzian line shape in case of a resonance with one of the photon-
assisted Cooper pair breaking channels and the control of resonator quasitemperature and
decay rate by external drive.
Our theoretical approach, however, has certain limitations: we take into account the non-
linearity of the junction only with respect to the external classical drive and neglect the effect of
quantum fluctuations of the microwave field in the resonator. This makes our approach inap-
plicable to systems where either of these approximations is violated, e.g., qubits or Josephson
junctions coupled to high-impedance linear resonators [59]. Analysis of nonlinear quantum
non-Markovian dynamics of the system can be done using more advanced numerical meth-
ods, such as the hierarchical equation of motion [79–81] capable of accurate treatment of
highly structured and low-temperature environments. However, the presented quasiclassical
approach may still be helpful for qualitative analysis and estimates for a weakly nonlinear
system such as a transmon qubit.
14
