arXiv:2504.07068v1  [quant-ph]  9 Apr 2025
Quantum Reverse Shannon Theorem Revisited
Zahra Baghali Khanian1, 2, 3 and Debbie Leung3, 2
1Technical University of Munich, 85748 Garching, Germany
2Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics, Ontario, Canada, N2L 2Y5
3Institute for Quantum Computing, University of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, N2L 3G1
Reverse Shannon theorems concern the use of noiseless channels to simulate noisy ones. This is
dual to the usual noisy channel coding problem, where a noisy (classical or quantum) channel is
used to simulate a noiseless one. The Quantum Reverse Shannon Theorem is extensively studied by
Bennett and co-authors in [IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 2014]. They present two distinct theorems,
each tailored to classical and quantum channel simulations respectively, explaining the fact that
these theorems remain incomparable due to the fundamentally diﬀerent nature of correlations they
address. The authors leave as an open question the challenge of formulating a uniﬁed theorem that
could encompass the principles of both and unify them. We unify these two theorems into a single,
comprehensive theorem, extending it to the most general case by considering correlations with a
general mixed-state reference system. Furthermore, we unify feedback and non-feedback theorems
by simulating a general side information system at the encoder side.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The classical “reverse Shannon theorem” was established and proven in 2002 in [1] as a dual to Shannon’s capacity
theorem. This theorem states that for any channel N with capacity C, if the sender and receiver share an unlimited
supply of random bits, then an expected Cn + o(n) uses of a noiseless binary channel are suﬃcient to simulate n
uses of the channel N. The essence of this theorem is that, in the presence of shared randomness, the asymptotic
properties of a classical channel can be characterized by a single parameter: its capacity. A quantum generalization
of the reverse Shannon theorem is formulated and extensively studied in [2]. They consider shared entanglement
as the quantum counterpart of shared randomness and obtain the optimal quantum simulation rates under diﬀerent
structures and available resources: free entanglement, restricted entanglement, tensor power input states, arbitrary
input states, and feedback and non-feedback simulation models. (Additional study with diﬀerent techniques can be
found in [3].)
One of the questions that remained open in [2] is the diﬀerent treatment of the classical and quantum cases. In
this paper, we address this problem by considering tensor power mixed input states shared between the encoder and
a reference system. This not only uniﬁes the classical and quantum models but also extends them to the most general
quantum case. We also unify the coherent feedback and non-feedback models and extend it to the most general case
by preserving an arbitrary system at the encoder side. In the presence of free entanglement, we fully characterize the
optimal simulation rate in terms of a quantity that resembles the entanglement-assisted capacity [1]. Considering the
general mixed-state case comes with its own complications, as properties used in analyzing pure quantum states, such
as the monogamy of entanglement, are not applicable to mixed states. Without the assistance of entanglement, we
obtain converse and achievability bounds, which involve similar quantities but diﬀer in the limit taken for the error.
It is not obvious whether these bounds match in general, but we provide various examples for which the two bounds
are equal.
We introduce two functionals a(ρ, γ) and u(ρ, γ) of a quantum state ρ and an error γ. The ﬁrst functional has
properties such as sub-additivity and continuity, and it fully characterizes the assisted simulation rates. The second
functional is more complex, and it characterizes the simulation rate in the unassisted model.
Even for partially
classical input states, it can evaluate to the entanglement of puriﬁcation, which is not known to be additive. Hence,
