activation energy required to escape the local minimum. Note that the accuracy of the energy estimates must
only be sufficiently high to discriminate among a set of potential products. There is an inherent robustness in
the choice of accuracy since typically only after a significant distortion do we want to identify the collection
of atoms as a separate chemical species. Ultimately, the exact region of configuration space we identify as
the chemical species of interest depends to an extent on the chemistry we wish to capture, but we expect
some inherent stability under small changes of this definition.7
Compilation of counting logic
It is convenient to view IXα as acting on a subspace of the configuration space of all ions, and so given
x ∈R3ηion, we have that IXα acts on the appropriate nXα components of x. Then, for a given reaction or
other dynamical process being simulated, we specify a list of chemical species (X1, ..., XM) to identify, and
for x ∈R3ηion, compute a corresponding set of configuration indicators {IX1(x) = iX1, . . . , IXM (x) = iXM }.
The indicators are then mapped to molecular species counts using a compiler C to produce species counters,
CX1,...,XM : {0, 1}⊗M →NM,
(iX1, ..., iXM ) 7→(CX1(iX1, ..., iXM ), ..., CXM (iX1, ..., iXM ))
where CXα counts the number of chemical species Xα. The compiler processes the configuration indicators
to (1) ensure that there is no double-counting or overlapping of indicators, and (2) for the collection of atoms
in the simulation, check occurrence and count all (combinatorially many) possible ways a species Xα can
appear as a combination of the available atoms. As an example of the first property, suppose hypothetically
that we have prior knowledge that the CO configuration indicator does not sufficiently discern CO as an
isolated species and CO as a substructure within CO2. Then, positive indicators for both CO and CO2
sharing a common C atom do not indicate the presence of both species. There is a single CO2, but it triggers
both indicators. To avoid such double-counting, the compiler function performs additional logic to ensure
that CO is only flagged when it is not a derivative of CO2. The compiling logic is also pre-determined
classically given knowledge of the fidelity and interplay of indicators.8
Fingerprinting for an individual species
Direct coherent implementation of the classical indicators can be impractically expensive. For the energetic
classification we suggested, one would need to either directly load the indicator functions that partition the
ionic configuration space into the quantum computer, or run a quantum phase estimation, an expensive
subroutine introducing further large multiplicative costs.
All of these solutions have serious drawbacks.
Therefore, we must construct a more efficient strategy for chemical species identification. To this end, we
propose a classical pre-processing algorithm to identify discerning fingerprints of the chemical species, i.e.,
we develop an efficient substitute for IXα which, after compilation, we efficiently implement on a quantum
computer. Using machine-learning parlance, for each chemical species Xα, we identify a set of features,
FXα : R3nXα →RQXα
.
(13)
Here, FXα maps the 3nXα configurational coordinates of molecule Xα to a smaller QXα-dimensional feature
space. Features must be efficiently computable on a quantum computer, ideally only involving simple arith-
metic and a small number of free parameters to be loaded. Examples of features include functions of bond
distances, bond angles, or other chemically justified quantities. A feature indicator map
Ifeat
Xα : RQXα
→{0, 1}
(14)
is constructed such that ˜IXα = Ifeat
Xα ◦FXα closely approximates the indicator IXα. The feature indicator map
may be developed agnostically and scalably by using an appropriately-chosen machine-learning model (e.g.
7On an abstract note, the system only consists of interacting electrons and ions, and so what to identify as a molecule/chemical
species must, in part, by up to our interpretation of the collective/bound structures that appear in the wavefunction. Also note
that one may consider exchanging the above binary (“hard”) indicator for a non-binary (e.g. real number) “soft” indicator.
8One might fairly worry that checking combinatorially-many instances results in poor scaling for identification. However, for
a small handful of chemical species of interest, as we envision for any reasonably early to mid generation FTQC, the practical
costs of checking all instances (involving coherent arithmetic and additional simple logic) are negligible compared to that of
performing quantum time-evolution.
13
