High-order fluctuations of temperature in hot QCD matter
Jinhui Chen,1, 2, ∗Wei-jie Fu,3, † Shi Yin,4, ‡ and Chunjian Zhang1, 2, §
1Key Laboratory of Nuclear Physics and Ion-beam Application (MOE), and
Institute of Modern Physics, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, P.R. China
2Shanghai Research Center for Theoretical Nuclear Physics, NSFC and Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, P.R. China
3School of Physics, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, 116024, P.R. China
4Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, Justus-Liebig-Universit¨at Gießen, 35392 Gießen, Germany
We study the temperature fluctuations in hot quantum chromodynamics (QCD) matter. A new
thermodynamic state function is introduced to describe the mean transverse momentum fluctuations
of charged particles in heavy-ion collisions, enabling analytic expressions for the temperature fluc-
tuations of different orders. This formalism is applied to the QCD thermodynamics described by a
2+1 flavor low energy effective field theory within the functional renormalization group approach. It
is found that the temperature fluctuations are suppressed remarkably as the matter is evolved from
the phase of hadron resonance gas to the quark-gluon plasma phase with increasing temperature
or baryon chemical potential, which is attributed to the significant increase of the heat capacity
of matter.
Furthermore, the same mechanism leads to a negative skewness in the temperature
fluctuations.
Introduction.
Event-by-event (EbE) fluctuations in
charged particle momentum distributions serve as probes
of thermalization and the statistical nature of particle
production in relativistic heavy-ion collisions [1–4], where
an exotic state of matter, the quark-gluon plasma (QGP),
characterized with color deconfinement and chiral sym-
metry restoration was created [5–9]. The occurrence of a
phase transition from the QGP to a hadron resonance gas
(HRG) or the existence of a critical end point in the phase
diagram of strongly interacting matter [10–14] may po-
tentially be revealed by measurements of thermodynamic
fluctuations [15–17], such as the net-baryon or net-proton
number fluctuations [18–26] and the temperature fluctu-
ations [27].
In comparison to the net-baryon fluctuations, the tem-
perature fluctuation has attracted less attention, yet it
still provides an ideally powerful probe of QCD thermo-
dynamics and phase transitions as same as the fluctua-
tions of conserved charges. Recent advances in heavy-ion
collision experiments now enable the isolation of the ther-
mal fluctuations from confounding effects, such as the
initial state geometry fluctuations [28–32], flow contri-
butions, and other non-thermal sources, allowing tem-
perature fluctuations to be extracted from EbE mean
transverse momentum fluctuations of final-state charged
particles [27]. EbE mean transverse momentum fluctu-
ations have been extensively measured across collision
energies and systems in various heavy-ion facilities, of-
fering a new avenue to study the QCD phase diagram
[31, 33–38]. Progress in di-lepton observations also indi-
cates that measurements of vector-meson invariant mass
distributions by di-lepton decays can be used to deter-
mine the temperature of the thermal source at different
∗chenjinhui@fudan.edu.cn
† wjfu@dlut.edu.cn
‡ Shi.Yin@theo.physik.uni-giessen.de
§ chunjianzhang@fudan.edu.cn
stages of the system evolution [39–42].
Motivated by experimental advances, we develop a the-
oretical framework to systematically investigate temper-
ature fluctuations in hot QCD matter, that is general and
applicable to temperature fluctuations of arbitrary order.
As a specific application, this approach is applied to the
QCD thermodynamics described by a 2+1 flavor low en-
ergy effective field theory (LEFT) [43], where quantum
and thermal fluctuations are encoded self-consistently
through the functional renormalization group (fRG). The
fRG has proven to be a powerful nonperturbative theo-
retical method, and is well suited for the studies of prop-
erties of the hot QCD matter including the QCD phase
diagram, critical end point, and real-time dynamics, etc.,
see Refs. [12, 44–49].
We first introduce a new thermodynamic state func-
tion to characterize the thermodynamics related to the
mean transverse momentum fluctuations of charged par-
ticles, from which we derive analytic expressions for the
temperature fluctuations to arbitrary order. Numerical
results are obtained by applying this framework to a 2+1
flavor LEFT within the fRG approach.
Our approach
demonstrates that temperature fluctuations would be
suppressed remarkably as the matter evolved from HRG
to QGP with the increase in temperature or the baryon
chemical potential.
A new thermodynamic state function.
We begin with
a total derivative of the thermodynamic potential Ω
dΩ= −SdT −pdV −NBdµB ,
(1)
with the entropy S, temperature T, pressure p, volume
V , baryon number NB, and the baryon chemical poten-
tial µB. While we explicitly show µB as a representa-
tive of conserved charge, Eq. (1) is readily generalized to
include additional chemical potentials when other con-
served charges are presented. The thermodynamic po-
tential Ωis a state function of T, V and µB. By im-
plementing a Legendre transformation upon Ωw.r.t. the
conjugate pair S and T, we introduce a new state func-
arXiv:2504.06886v1  [hep-ph]  9 Apr 2025
