thiol-mediated polymerizations might both be amenable to ZnO polymerization. Based on the 
same mechanism, this chemistry can also be expanded to make acrylate homo-polymers. In this 
case, there is a potential mechanism in which thiyl radicals generated by E-field induced piezo-
chemistry can initiate the chain polymerization of methyl methacrylate monomers (Supplementary 
Fig. 11). However, low levels of polymerization was observed for disulfide-based monomers 
(Supplementary Fig. 12 and Fig. 13).We hypothesize that interactions with the ZnO surface may 
play an as yet fully understood role in this process which allows free thiols to be more reactive 
than disulfides31.  
Electrically controlled thiol-ene gelation  
Having demonstrated AC current induced thiol-ene step-growth polymerization, we further sought 
a method to modify material properties via polymer crosslinking to form a gel. As such, we tested 
if the polymerization could create a crosslinked network of TTT and EDT when applying an AC 
electric field (500 Hz, 8 Vrms, 3 h) (Supplementary Fig. 2 and 14). The formed viscoelastic gel 
sample displayed a storage modulus of 776 kPa at 1 Hz (Supplementary Fig. 15). Of note, when a 
DC voltage was applied, an anomalous porous gel structure appeared, which was not seen under 
AC voltage (Supplementary Fig. 16). It became clear from these initial experiments that regulating 
the electric field including parameters such as duration, strength, and frequency influenced the 
gelation process and, thus, the generation of thiyl radicals.  
First, to determine how the electric field strength would affect gel stiffness, we fixed the distance 
between the electrodes to 16 mm and changed the AC voltage from 4 to 16 Vrms (500 Hz, 250 to 
1000 V/m). Both the gelation onset time decreased and the storage modulus of the resulting gel 
increased monotonically from 346 to 776 kPa as the applied voltage increased (Fig. 2a and 2b).  
To quantitatively characterize the thiol-ene gelation, we considered how the crosslinking reaction 
might proceed via a radical-mediated process and share the similarity of radical generation of thiol-
ene linear polymerization between TEGDE and EDT. To evaluate the mechanism, we measured 
the monomer conversion during thiol-ene linear polymerization at the presence of MEHQ (0.30 
mM) while varying the applied voltage. As determined by 1H-NMR in Supplementary Table 4, a 
much higher level of conversion at 16 Vrms (77.9 %) was achieved than for the 4 Vrms (7.08 %), 
indicating that increasing the voltage generated more radicals in the same amount of time. Given 
the exothermic nature of the addition between thiols and terminal alkenes32,33, we further tracked 
the time-dependent temperature evolution of thiol-ene gelation at various applied voltage via a 
temperature sensor. The trend depicted in Supplementary Fig. 17 reveals that more heat was 
released with the increasing voltage, which suggested more additional reactions occurring as a 
result of the higher electric field34.We also evaluated the temperature change of thiol-ene 
crosslinking gelation with 0.60 and 1.20 mM MEHQ while applying the same voltage (16 Vrms, 
500 Hz). There is no peak of the temperature profile found in the sample with 1.20 mM MEHQ 
(Supplementary Fig. 17B) due to the effective quenching of thiyl radicals generated from electric 
field. In the other samples, we observed a peak in temperature followed by a plateau, which is 
indicative of an exothermic reaction. This experiment also confirms that the change in temperature 
is not due to resistive heating from the application of the electric field. A thermally driven process 
would result in a linear increase in temperature as the reaction progresses.  
