4
the quadratic fits.
This effect remains, albeit tamed,
for the complete FCC-ee dataset, with individual and
marginalised bounds differing by a factor of 2. We con-
clude that while di-Higgs production at the LHC essen-
tially corresponds to a direct measurement of κ3, at the
FCC-ee a global SMEFT interpretation is required to
achieve robust constraints on the Higgs self-coupling from
Zh production.
In the quadratic FCC-ee fit, Oφ is found to be pri-
marily correlated with Oφ□, with a correlation coeffi-
cient of 0.6, suggesting that a more precise determina-
tion of cφ□could significantly reduce the gap between
the marginalised and individual bounds.
We also find
that two-quark-two-lepton operators play an important
role in the determination of cφ, particularly before the
365 GeV run is included. In their absence, the 68% C.I.
on κ3 would already be reduced to about |δκ3| ≤0.20
even without the 365 GeV data, while with the full FCC
dataset we obtain |δκ3| ≤0.14.
The electroweak custodial model. Although many
BSM scenarios induce large deformations of κ3, it is chal-
lenging to obtain such effects without a comparable dis-
tortion in single-Higgs production [35, 45, 46]. One re-
markable model which bypasses this limitation is the cus-
todial symmetric Θ1 + Θ3 model, where one extends the
SM with scalar electroweak quadruplets Θ1 and Θ3, of
hypercharges 1/2 and 3/2 respectively, to form a cus-
todial bi-quadruplet [35]. The interactions between the
heavy scalars and the SM, besides the ones mandated by
gauge symmetry, are described by
LUV ⊃−λΘ φ∗φ∗(εφ) Θ1−λΘφ∗φ∗φ∗Θ3/
√
3+h.c. (3)
where φ is the Higgs boson and Θ1 and Θ3 share the same
mass, here assumed to be mUV = 4 TeV. Following tree-
level matching of Eq. (3) to the SMEFT at dimension-six,
only the Oφ operator is generated [35, 47]. Other opera-
tors are generated at one loop, with Oφ□and Otφ having
the largest matching coefficients among them. Including
only one of the quadruplets, e.g. Θ1, does not change
the situation at tree level, but leads to the custodially-
violating operator OφD being generated at one loop, with
important phenomenological consequences [35].
The 95% C.I. on the Higgs-quadruplet coupling |λΘ|
are reported in Fig. 4 for the same dataset combina-
tions as in Fig. 2, both for the custodially-symmetric and
custodially-violating variants, matched to the SMEFT to
either tree- or one-loop level. The tree-level matching re-
sults in both models showcase the (individual) sensitivity
to the Higgs self-coupling at future colliders, with a fac-
tor of 2 improvement going from the LHC Run 2 to the
HL-LHC and then a further 40% reduction at FCC-ee.
This pattern of improvement follows from the individual
bounds on cφ reported in Table II, and are consistent
with the result that for one-parameter fits no new con-
straints are provided by the √s = 365 GeV run.
0.1
0.5
1
5
10
50
100
FIG. 4: 95% C.I. bounds on |λΘ| for the custodial
quadruplets model, Eq. (3), and the non-custodial
model with only the Θ1 quadruplet, from a global
quadratic SMEFT analysis based on the same datasets
as Fig. 2 for both three-level and one-loop matching.
The one-loop matching affects both models differently.
In the non-custodial model, the bound tightens by an
order of magnitude due to the sensitivity to OφD, which
more than compensates the factor ∼0.1 between the
matching coefficients for cφD and cφ. One-loop matching
improves the sensitivity to the custodial model by around
10% and 25% at the HL-LHC and FCC-ee respectively.
The improvement is caused by the tight bounds on Oφ□,
despite being generated with a coefficient much smaller
than Oφ.
We note that this UV model correlates cφ
and cφ□along a direction in the (cφ, cφ□) plane poorly
constrained at the FCC-ee unless one includes NNLO
EW effects in EWPOs [48].
Summary and outlook. In this work we have revis-
ited the sensitivity to the Higgs self-coupling in the global
SMEFT analysis at the HL-LHC and the FCC-ee, in light
of the most updated ESPPU26 projections. Our main
findings are that the FCC-ee with √s ≤240 GeV cannot
improve significantly on the legacy HL-LHC constraints;
that the addition of the √s = 365 GeV run leads to a
reduction of the bounds on κ3 by a factor of 2; that in-
dividual and marginalized bounds are similar at the HL-
LHC but can differ by up to a factor of 3 at the FCC-ee;
and that quadratic EFT corrections are moderate but
not negligible. All in all, our analysis demonstrates that
the synergy of HL-LHC and FCC-ee data offers unique
potential to pin down the Higgs self-coupling with ∼15%
precision. These findings provide a timely input to the
ESPPU26 by sharpening the constraints on the Higgs tri-
linear coupling achievable at the HL-LHC and the FCC-
ee.
Our analysis could be extended by including higher or-
der corrections to the predictions for the EWPOs and to
the decays of the Higgs boson at the FCC-ee, as well as
by exploring the impact of alternative flavour assump-
