a pure emission along the ZZ direction can only be achieved by an excitation polarization
rotated by 45◦with respect to the AC/ZZ axes [29]. Subsequently, a polarization-resolved
measurement with an excitation along AC and with an analyzer along ZZ allows the complete
suppression of the SH signal. On the other hand, TP-PL is unpolarized at room temperature
[33], and it can thus be directly filtered and measured in the aforementioned configuration.
Thus, having characterized the crystal axes with the measurements in Fig. 2d, we ob-
tain the emission spectra for FB wavelengths ranging from 1.1 µm to 1.6 µm and for various
combinations of excitation and detection polarizations with respect to the AC and ZZ axis
(Fig. 3a). As expected, we observe distinct emission directions for the simultaneously oc-
curring NLO effects of SHG, THG, and TP-PL, according to the selection rules listed in
Fig. 3b. For SHG and THG, the polarization direction of the emitted signal can be di-
rectly inferred from the indices of the corresponding NLO susceptibility tensor element (see
equation (2) for SHG and e.g., Ref. [40] for THG). In contrast, incoherent TP-PL exhibits
unpolarized emission, with equal intensities along the AC and ZZ directions. To assess the
quality of the signal extinction and thus of our polarization-filtering capability, we compared
the emission line shape for an excitation wavelength of 1.5 µm, approximately corresponding
to the two-photon resonance of the A:1s exciton state. At these conditions, the SH signal is
strongly enhanced [16] as it overlaps with the TP-PL emission. In the AC-AC geometry, the
full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of the SH emission peak, centered at ∼750 nm, was
determined to be ∆λSHG = 7.6 nm. This value is consistent with the expected spectral line-
width reduction by a factor of 2
√
2 [33] relative to the FB pulse-bandwidth (∆λFB = 23 nm,
see Ref. [41]), confirming that SHG dominates the emitted signal. In contrast, the emission
spectrum observed in the AC-ZZ geometry closely resembled the PL spectrum (Fig. 2b),
indicating that the TP-PL signal dominates, while the SH signal is effectively suppressed
by the Glan-Thompson prism-polarizer in the experimental setup. Thus, by subtracting
the AC-ZZ signal (representing the TP-PL contribution) from the AC-AC signal, we could
properly filter the SH signal from the background TP-PL signal.
At this point, it is worth commenting on the observation of the TP-PL signal when the
photon energy of the FB is exactly half of the 1s exciton energy. Two-photon absorption
(TPA) on the 1s exciton state is, in principle, forbidden in the electric dipole approximation
[42], and thus our results should be explained either in the context of higher-order effects
(electric quadrupole or magnetic dipole [16]) or as the effect of 1s-2p exciton state mixing
7
