al.[45] for the lowest practically resolvable charge transfer time available via the core
hole clock method.) As such, we estimate that the upper limit of the electron delo-
calization time for the Ar@C60 monolayer is 0.08τCH, i.e. ∼500 attoseconds. (Given
the method of estimation, it is appropriate to quote only to 1 significant figure.)
This value is more than an order of magnitude smaller than for an argon atom
adsorbed directly on the Ag(111) surface[45] (where the equilibrium adsorption
height, namely 3.3 ˚A[53], is more than 2 ˚angstroms lower than that for argon in
Ar@C60). In other words, rather than acting to decouple the Ar 4s excitation from
the surrounding metallic environment (and thus impede the delocalisation rate),
we instead see the same effect, now accentuated, as for the bulk Ar@C60 film: the
fullerene cage provides a remarkably efficient conduit for electron transfer.
Ground state PAW-DFT calculations (Fig. 5(b)) predict substantial charge trans-
fer between the Ag(111) surface and the fullerene cage (∼0.56e, to be compared
with the 0.5e determined in a previous DFT study[54] and 0.75e estimated from
photoemission measurements[55]). However, the charge state of the encapsulated
argon remains essentially unaffected by chemisorption of the fullerene cage. (The SI
includes a discussion of the Ar 2p and C 1s photoemission spectra for the Ar@C60
monolayer, which are consistent with this interpretation.) It is clear, therefore, that
the very significant enhancement of electron delocalization rate for the endofullerene
monolayer again arises from excited state coupling of a diffuse Ar-fullerene hybrid
orbital with the Ag(111) electronic structure, rather than an adsorption-induced shift
in the position of the argon atom or its electronic structure. On this point, we note
that the calculations of Gauyacq and Borisov[38] can be used to determine the charge
delocalization time of an hypothetical “bare” argon atom adsorbed at the same
height of 5.5 ˚A as we measure for argon in Ar@C60 on Ag(111). This is ∼65 fs, at
least two orders of magnitude slower than the rate observed for the metal-adsorbed
Ar@C60 endofullerene. Moreover, SAMO-derived bands are robust against fullerene
adsorption on metals[23, 50] – indeed, SAMO states were first observed in a C60
monolayer on Cu(111)[23] – and so the absence of any spectator contribution to the
de-excitation spectra of the Ar@C60 monolayer is consistent with a coupling of an
Ar-SAMO hybrid orbital to the electronic “reservoir” of the Ag(111) substrate.
Conclusions.
The surprising result that emerges from our study is that encapsulating an inert atom
in a closed carbon cage yields a substantially enhanced level of electronic coupling to
the environment. We measure electron delocalization times that are at least an order
of magnitude faster for Ar@C60 than for a “bare” argon atom, despite the absence of
ground state mixing of the frontier orbitals of the fullerene with the encaged argon. Our
results are consistent with electron transport via diffuse hybrid Ar-fullerene orbitals,
in which the vast majority of the electron density is found outside the cage. This has
intriguing implications with regard to controlling the chemistry of endohedrally-caged
11
