6
Using a collection of R copies rather then a single TMSV
states means that the marginal photon number distribu-
tion will be a multi-thermal one with µ = µ0R mean
photons. In the limit of large R and small µ0 at fixed µ
the distribution will be Poissonian. We choose the quan-
tum transmitter in this regime as it gives an advantage in
a wider region of parameters in ranging [9]. The Chernoff
information of the quantum transmitter can be analyzed
numerically and we denote it as ξ(A)
T MSV .
In Fig.(2) we report a parametric plot of the pair
{ξ(E), ξ(A)}, often referred to as relevance-complexity in
the information bottleneck formalism.
The blue line
represents Alice’s Chernoff information with a quantum
probe as a parametric function of Eve’s Chernoff infor-
mation, that increases with the number of probe photons,
while the red one refers to a classical probe. The black
dotted line serves as a reference denoting the condition
ξ(E) = ξ(A), namely ∆ξ = 0. This line defines the two
regions ∆ξ > 0 and ∆ξ < 0. In the upper region ∆ξ > 0
the information recovered per mode by Alice is greater
than Eve’s and effective covert sensing is achievable, in
the lower region it is not. Similarly the regions bounded
by the blue and red lines define the physically achievable
sensing for the quantum and classical probe respectiv-
elly. The orange dashed line refers to the figure of merit
χ(A,∞)
coh
, characterizing the performance of a probe with
a large amount of photons per mode. In panel A we re-
port the situation of symmetric ideal collection efficiency,
ηA = ηE = 1. In the parameters configuration showed
the quantum probe has a wide region of achievable covert
sensing, the blue colored area. On the other hand, the
classical probe cannot achieve covert sensing at all, since
the red line lays below the black one and classical achiev-
able sensing lays fully in the region in which covertness
is not allowed. In this parameter configuration χ(A,∞)
coh
performs slightly better than the χ(A)
coh but it is still far
from meeting the covertness conditions.
To show classically achievable covertness, in panel B
we show the plot for asymmetric collection efficiency,
ηA = 1, ηE = 0.3.
In this case the black line lies be-
low the red one and the region in which covertness can
be achieved by the classical probe is highlighted in red.
The blue colored area in this case represents the region
in which covert sensing is achieved strictly by the quan-
tum probe. Note also how χ(A,∞)
coh
is in this case worse
than χ(A)
coh, so that the classical strategy is not improved
by collecting more signal photons per mode.
The same set of parameters chosen for Fig. (2.A-B)
are further used in Fig. (3.A). Here, we plot the differ-
ence ∆ξ for the quantum (blue lines) and classical (red
lines) probe as a function of the mean number of signal
photons per mode, µS. In the same regime of Fig. (2.A),
plotted in solid lines, ∆ξ is an always negative monotoni-
cally decreasing function for the classical probe, prevent-
ing covert sensing with classical resources. On the con-
trary, ∆ξ is not monotonic for the quantum case, with
effective covertness allowed up to a maximum number of
photons per mode.
The second parameters’ regime, the one considered in
Fig. (2.B), is plotted in dashed line in Fig.(3.A). In this
case, ∆ξ is strictly positive also for the classical probe
after a certain number of photons, but the quantum
probe performs the sensing at a vastly more effective rate.
These regimes are not qualitatively affected by the mag-
nitude of the background, as visible in Fig. (3.B), where
we show how the effect of increasing the number of mean
background photons µB is to slightly shift the region of
achievable covertness.
Finally we focus our attention to asymptotic (in the
number of modes/repetition, M ≫1) probabilities of er-
ror, either in ranging or detection, defined by the Cher-
noff information as perr ∼e−ξM/2. Fig. (4) gives a visual-
ization of the main result of our paper, the achievability
of quantum covert target detection and the significant
difference with its classical counterpart. Panel A shows
the result anticipated on covertness. As long as the con-
dition ξ(E) ≪1/M holds, covertness is ensured (in fig-
ure ξ(E) ≈10−8). So, if the difference ∆ξ is positive,
covert ranging can be performed to a certain degree of
accuracy. Moreover, at a fixed number of total photons,
a larger available band allows one to spread the energy
in more modes, reducing ξ(E), to leverage the different
rate of recovering and reduce Alice error to an arbitrarily
small degree, while still limiting Eve to a random guess.
Considering the target is faint (κ < 1/2), Eve can usu-
ally access more of the probing signal. Thus, in order to
meet the condition of effective covert sensing, ∆ξ > 0,
there must be some asymmetry in the sensing in favor of
Alice. Apart from the different task of ranging and detec-
tion, for the quantum probe this asymmetry is naturally
provided by the idler modes, accessible to Alice but not
Eve. In the classical case such asymmetry is dependent
on the parameters. As showed in the previous figures, ef-
fective covert sensing can be obtained if we assume that
Eve does not have access to all of the remaining signal,
i.e. lowering the collection efficiency ηE < 1. We present
this situation in panel B. The magnified insert shows the
better scaling of the classic ranging with respect to Eve’s
probability of detection. However the main figure shows
how this difference is negligible when compared to the
quantum probe, highlighting the great advantage offered
by the latter.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
We analyzed the problem of covert target sensing in
the optical domain by introducing a “bottleneck” on the
Chernoff information. This bottleneck is determined by
the requirement of hiding the probing party to an adver-
sary, while also extracting information about the target.
By operating in the asymptotic regime of many modes M
we imposed the latter requirement by limiting the adver-
sary Chernoff information. In the task of target ranging
we showed how effective covert sensing is possible, with
