To close the locality loophole (see Sec. 2.4.2), in Ref. [51] strict isolation of the quantum nodes
was applied together with other strategies.
This isolation was achieved by physically distancing the
trapped ion qubits from the optical fiber link after heralding entanglement, thereby reducing potential
coupling to the outside environment. Additionally, they employed techniques to scramble the qubit states
post-measurement, further minimizing any risk of information leakage, thus ensuring that the protocol’s
security remains intact against various adversarial attacks. Instead, in Ref. [53] spatial separation be-
tween the two parties was adopted and used independent random number generators (RNG) to close the
measurement-dependence loophole. This setup minimizes the risk of any local hidden variable theory
influencing the outcomes, reinforcing the validity of the loophole-free Bell test.
3.11. DI-QKD memory loopholes
We discussed the theoretical security proofs and the experiments on (fully)-DI-QKD. However, to
satisfy the definition of universal composable security the theory demands many different devices at each
run to close memory attack loophole, i.e. a leakage of information due to correlated subsequent outputs
[62, 206]. This is experimentally critical. Suppose that Alice and Bob have only one device each. Then
a memory attack is possible: the protocol is run on day i, generating Ki
A = Ki
B
, while informing Eve on day i = 1 of the hash functions used by Alice for postprocessing. Eve can
instruct the devices to proceed as follows.
On day 2, Eve modulates ρc
AB where c is a classical ancilla to carry new instructions to the device in
Alice’s lab as discussed in collective attacks in QT. These instructions tell the device the hash functions
used on day 1, allowing Eve to compute K1
A = K1
B. The classical ancillae also instruct the device to
bias the protocol for randomly selected inputs by producing specified bits from this secret key as outputs
for example by programming the device to announce one key bit of day 1 as an output of some specified
input. If any of these selected outputs are among those announced in the parameter estimation step, Eve
learns the corresponding bits of day 1’s secret key. But, Alice or Bob might abort the protocol any day,
thus, by waiting long enough, Eve can program them to communicate some or all information about their
day 1 key to obtain N secret bits from day 1 and then program it to abort on the day N + 2 since from
this day Alice and Bob do not have any secret key available. This type of attack is called an abort attack
and cannot be detected until it is too late. To defend against these attacks (i) all quantum data and
public communication come only from Alice, even if, Eve can still program Alice’s device to leak K1
A or
Ki
A, i = 1, 2, . . . via the abort attack; (ii) encrypt cQ with some initial preshared seed randomness, even
if fails if an abort attack involves communication with multiple users who may not be trustworthy; (iii)
additional independent measurement devices close memory attack loophole, but leave open the imposter
attack [62].
4. Mathematical techniques for advanced security proofs
In the previous section, we studied the secure protocol for generating a secret K and its associated security
proof as an independent module, analyzing lower bounds on Eve’s uncertainty or randomness for specific
attacks (individual, collective, and coherent) to establish security proofs. Here, we delve into advanced
techniques and mathematical methods for constructing such proofs in real-world settings.
4.1. Entropy accumulation theorem
Assuming the device operates under the iid assumption imposes unrealistic constraints, as it disregards
the possibility of classical or quantum internal memory and any time-dependent behavior. To ensure
security in the most general case, we must go beyond the iid assumption by considering a raw key, where
each segment is generated sequentially, with the outcome of round i depending on all previous rounds
j ∈[1, i −1]. This means the i-th round reflects not only its direct outcome but also the influence of all
prior events. The framework for this generalization is the Entropy Accumulation Theorem (EAT) [82].
Let us begin with some key definitions required for a formal description of EAT.
Definition 16 (Conditional smoothed min-entropy [84]). Given a density operator ρAB and ε ∈[0, 1],
the ε-smooth min-entropy of A conditioned on B is
Hε
min(A | B)ρAB = −log
inf
˜ρ∈Bε(ρAB)
inf
σB∈B(HB) ∥˜ρ
1
2
ABσ
−1
2
B
∥2
∞,
(106)
Bε(ρB) = {˜ρ|˜ρ ≻0, Tr˜ρ < 1,
q
1 −||√ρAB
p
˜ρ||2
1 ≤ε}.
(107)
39
