Entanglement and pair production in intense electromagnetic fields
S. Tang,1 B. M. Dillon,2 and B. King3
1College of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering,
Ocean University of China, Qingdao, Shandong, 266100, China
2ISRC, Ulster University, Derry, BT48 7JL, Northern Ireland
3Centre for Mathematical Sciences, University of Plymouth, Plymouth, PL4 8AA, United Kingdom∗
We investigate the spin correlations between electron-positron pairs created from a photon when
it scatters in a high-intensity laser pulse via the nonlinear Breit-Wheeler process. We find that the
spin states of the generated electron-positron pair can exhibit strong entanglement, with the degree
being sensitive to the photon energy, laser intensity, and the relative polarisation of the photon and
laser pulse. Photons with a high degree of polarisation can create strongly entangled pairs, and this
entanglement can be maintained in the high-intensity (non-perturbative) regime. We find that if
the photons are provided by a Compton source, strongly spin-entangled electron-positron pairs can
be generated with technology available today.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Entanglement is one of the most interesting phenom-
ena predicted by quantum physics, and central to quan-
tum information and quantum computing [1]. Many ex-
periments have measured violations of the Bell inequal-
ity [2], including the 1972 [3] and 1982 [4, 5] experiments
using entangled photons that received the 2022 Nobel
prize, and others since [5–10]. There has been significant
interest recently in studying entanglement in top-pairs
at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) [11–16], providing
insights into quantum effects at high-energies and poten-
tial probes of new physics [17]. ATLAS and CMS have
published observations of entanglement in the leptonic
final-states of t¯t production [18–20], but there are many
more systems where this effect can be measured [21–26]
(see [27, 28] for a review).
The high-intensity/strong-
field regime is yet another, less studied, scenario where
we can probe quantum entanglement.
The production of an electron-positron pair as a high-
energy photon collides with an intense laser pulse is often
referred to as nonlinear Breit-Wheeler (NBW) pair pro-
duction [29–33]. The process has been indirectly mea-
sured as a subprocess of nonlinear trident [34, 35] and
theoretically studied in various types of laser field [36–
50]. Direct measurement of NBW is an identified goal of
modern-day laser-particle experiments [51–54]. In such
experiments, the intensity parameter, ξ, quantifies the
effective coupling between the laser field and the pair.
When the intensity is low (ξ ≪1), the interaction is per-
turbative in ξ and well-approximated by including just
the channel involving the minimum number of interac-
tions with the laser background to reach the energy-
momentum threshold for pair-creation. Since the num-
ber of interactions is typically much larger than unity,
the perturbative limit is highly nonlinear in ξ. (At very
low values of ξ, pulse envelope effects can in principle
change this interpretation; these are interesting products
∗b.king@plymouth.ac.uk
of theory and we include them in our analysis but this
region is practically inaccessible to experiment.)
As the intensity is increased, so too is the contribution
of channels that involve more laser photons. Values of
ξ ∼O(1) can routinely be produced in the lab; at such
intensities all orders of interaction between the laser and
the pair must be included in calculation, which is some-
times referred to as non-perturbativity at small coupling.
The motivation for this paper is to investigate the ef-
fect that this non-perturbative interaction has on the de-
gree of entanglement in states generated in laser-particle
collisions.
The process of NBW pair creation is used
as a canonical example to study the concurrence of
the spin-polarisation in the generated electron-positron
pair.
Several works have investigated entanglement in
laser-particle interactions, most notably in the process
of Compton scattering [55–59]. Entanglement has been
less studied in pair-creation although it was investigated
in the Breit-Wheeler process in [60] for the case of col-
liding two finite wavepackets of photons with frequen-
cies exceeding mc2, i.e. the rest mass of an electron or
positron. In another more recent paper entanglement in
Breit-Wheeler production was studied as a component
of the trident process where the intermediate photon
is on-shell [61], with the main focus being on the gen-
eral kinematics of the final-state particles. The challenge
of measuring the polarisation of free-travelling electron-
positron pairs to determine their entanglement has been
studied recently in [62], where they propose using sec-
ondary scatterings to determine the polarisation of each
electron/positron for pairs with energies between 1 and
10 GeV.
Our work in this paper is the first study of entangle-
ment in strong electromagnetic backgrounds to NBW
pair creation in an intensity range spanning the per-
turbative ξ ≪1 to non-perturbative ξ ≫1, in an
energy range from the nonlinear η ≪1 to the linear
η > 2(1 + ξ2) (where η is the photon energy parame-
ter), considering a range of photon polarisations creat-
ing pairs in a circularly-polarised and linearly-polarised
background. We choose the concurrence observable to
measure the strength of entanglement, which we derive
arXiv:2504.06338v1  [hep-ph]  8 Apr 2025
