2
FIG. 1. Sketch of a nonlinear photonic lattice and basis of measurement in a given spatio-spectral mode associated to a given
waveguide and frequency band. Left: a pump mode (blue) is coupled to the center waveguide of the lattice producing SPDC
(red) that spreads accordingly to a coupling profile. Right: orthonormal homodyne measurement basis –frexels (rainbow)– for
a broad Gaussian-shaped local oscillator, and signal marginal of the joint spatio-spectral amplitude (JSSA) (equally for idler)
projected on the frexel basis (black). This example accounts for 9 × 16 = 144 spatio-spectral modes.
driven by the ability of propagating the interacting waves
with the same velocity or wave-vector phase-matching.
Birefringence is not always applicable, or not to the high-
est second-order tensor component. A possible solution
is the periodic modulation of the nonlinear coefficient to
quasiphase-match the propagation constants mismatch:
∆β(ωs, ωi) ≡β(ωh) −β(ωs) −β(ωi) −1/Λ = 0, with β
the propagation constant and Λ the poling period. For
instance in lithium niobate, where birefringence does not
give access to its highest second-order tensor component
d33, periodic poling enables access to it.
State-of-the-
art poled waveguides have demonstrated up to 8 dB of
squeezing [27]. Below, we consider that phase-matching
is just produced in the coupling region. The energy of
the signal modes propagating in each waveguide is ex-
changed between the coupled waveguides through evanes-
cent waves, whereas the interplay of the second harmonic
waves is negligible for the considered propagation lengths
due to their high confinement into the guiding region. We
set our calculation in the regime of pump undepletion.
The physical processes taking place in χ(2) waveguides
can be described by a dynamical operator
ˆ
M obtained
quantizing the flux of momentum of the electromagnetic
fields [28]. Particularly, we tackle the problem of broad-
band downconversion with an arbitrary pump, i.e. we as-
sume that the downconverted spectrum is much broader
than the pump bandwidth such that we can neglect the
dependence of χ(2) on the pump frequency ωh [29]. Thus,
the following Heisenberg equation is obtained for an ar-
ray of N evanescently coupled nonlinear waveguides with
an arbitrary pump waveform in the SPDC regime
d ˆAj(ωs, z)
dz
=
iCM[fj−1(ωs) ˆAj−1(ωs, z) + fj(ωs) ˆAj+1(ωs, z)]
+ ig
Z
αj(ωh) ei∆β(ωs,ωi)z ˆA†
j(ωi, z)dωi,
(1)
where
ˆA0 = 0 and
ˆAN+1 = 0, f0 = fN = 0 and
j = 1, . . . , N is the individual mode index corresponding
to each waveguide. z is the coordinate along the direc-
tion of propagation. ˆAj(ωs, z) ≡ˆAs
j and ˆAj(ωi, z) ≡ˆAi
j
are monochromatic slowly-varying amplitude annihila-
tion operators of signal and idler photons corresponding
to the jth waveguide –the individual mode basis– fulfill-
ing local commutation relations [ ˆAj(ω, z), ˆA†
j′(ω′, z)] =
δ(ω −ω′)δj,j′. We consider the nonlinear coupling con-
stant g –proportional to χ(2) and to the spatial overlap of
the signal and harmonic fields in each waveguide– equal
for all waveguides. g can be considered independent of
frequency as we take a downconverted spectrum consid-
erably broader than the pump bandwidth. We work at
the degeneracy point of the phase matching ωh = 2ωs
and consider a SPDC bandwidth ∆SPDC of tens of nm.
αj(ωh) ≡⟨α| ˆAj(ωh)|α⟩= √Ph ηj Ω(ωh = ωs + ωi) is
the complex amplitude of a strong coherent undepleted
pump field propagating in the jth waveguide, where Ph
is the total pump power in the array, ηj is the normal-
ized complex amplitude of pump power directed to each
waveguide j, and Ωis the normalized spectral pump com-
plex amplitude that feeds the production of a pair of
photons in frequencies ωs and ωi. The spatial and spec-
tral pump profiles can be tuned respectively by means of
a suitable set of pump phases and amplitudes at each
waveguide, and a pulse shaper.
Experimentally, dis-
tributable frequency modes –or frexels (see Fig.
1)–
are measured in bands of a given bandwidth by either
shaping a local oscillator (LO) or in a multipixel ho-
modyne detector [30–32]. These modes can be spatially
separated by means of a dispersive element such as a
grating or a prism and a microlens array, or fiber-based
wavelength-division multiplexing [33, 34].
The orthog-
onality of these modes is guaranteed as they do not
overlap.
We thus discretize the downconverted spec-
trum in L bands centered at frequencies ωl such that
each signal(idler) frexel mode is labelled with l(l′). The
frexel-mode operators ˆ
Al
j(z) are related to the monochro-
matic frequency-mode operators ˆAj(ω, z) simply by a
basis transformation between the discrete and the con-
tinuous basis ˆ
Al
j(z) =
R
dω ξl(ω) ˆAj(ω, z), fulfilling local
commutation relations [ ˆ
Al
j(z), ˆ
Al′†
j′ (z)] = δj,j′δl,l′, where
ξl(ω) corresponds to normalized frexel modes of width
∆F taken as real for simplicity. The extent and number
of frexel modes are experimental constraints: they result
