interacting with the initial i and ﬁnal state f, and are weighted by the Boltzmann distribution for
the free electrons. Only ∆n = 0 transitions are taken into account and the different contributions
are weighted by an inelastic Gaunt factor which depends on the ratio between the free-electron
thermal energy and the transition energy. Unlike125;126;127, we do not use hydrogenic expres-
sions, since the SCO-RCG code computes the radial integrals for each superconﬁguration. The
contribution of the elastic collisions to electron broadening is not included in SCO-RCG, as it
is usually much weaker than that of inelastic collisions131.
Ionic Stark effect
The treatment of the ionic Stark effect implemented in the ﬁrst version of SCO-RCG was pro-
posed by Rozsnyai131. The broadenings of the initial and ﬁnal states are assumed independent.
Speciﬁc ionic Stark model for Lyman (Ly) and Helium (He) lines
A more accurate modeling of the Stark effect is used for hydrogen- and helium-like ions132;133.
The line proﬁle then reads
φ(ν) ∝1
π
Z
Re
h
Tr{ ˆd. ˆX−1}
i
W(F)dF,
(18)
where ˆX = 2iπ (ν + ν1) −i ˆH(F)/ℏ−ˆΛc, ν1 is the frequency of the lower state and ˆH(F) =
ˆH0−ˆd.F is the Hamiltonian of the ion subject to an electric ﬁeld F, which follows the normalized
distribution W(F). The low-frequency microﬁeld distribution is parameterized by the electron-
ion screening constant and the ionic coupling parameter, based on simulations by Potekhin et
al.134. The analytical formulas, which accurately reproduce the calculated electric microﬁeld
probability distributions, are expected to be valid for both neutral and charged plasma point
particles with values of Γ ranging from 0 to 100, and for a wide range of effective electron
screening lengths.
ˆH0 represents the Hamiltonian without the electric ﬁeld, while ˆd and ˆΛc
denote the dipole and collision operators, respectively. The latter is derived from Griem et
al.135, assuming classical straight-path electron trajectories that do not induce transitions in the
43
