6
multiplexed in frequency results in a torus in a single
temporal mode [39].
Another option of practical interest is to use individual
modes in the spatial domain and squeezed supermodes
in the frequency domain with a flat spatial distribution
of the pump fields.
In this case there is a number of
independently squeezed spectral supermodes for each j
spatial mode [30]. For instance for both Gaussian phase-
matching and pump spectrum, the spectral supermodes
are close to Hermite-Gaussian modes [45].
This spec-
tral basis is accesible through suitable LO pulse shap-
ing in homodyne detection.
Notably, in this case the
independently-squeezed Hermite-Gauss spectral super-
modes are entangled due to spatial correlations. Thus, L
copies of a N-mode linear cluster state is generated, each
one with a different Hermite-Gaussian spectrum.
Finally, the frexel approach offers the possibility to eas-
ily add non-Gaussian features by subtracting photons in
specific spatio-spectral modes by means of a dispersive
element that isolates a spatio-spectral mode and a high-
transmission directional coupler or beam splitter, unlike
methods based on broadband modes that require a non-
linear interaction with a gate beam that selects the spec-
tral mode of subtraction [53]. The reason is that in this
case photon subtraction is carried out in a frexel that
is orthogonal to all other frexels, thus guaranteeing the
purity of the photon subtraction. The non-Gaussianity
then spreads over the cluster opening the possibility to
engineer multimode non-Gaussian states [54].
As a summary, we have analyzed the spatio-spectral
features of a χ(2) nonlinear photonic lattice, presented
the general solution of the system in the low gain regime,
and discussed the possibilities to generate large and dis-
tributable two-dimensional cluster states with a single
integrated source through suitable spatio-spectral pump
shaping.
Recent demonstrations of squeezing in single
nonlinear waveguides in spatial and spectral modes [14–
16, 27], and of second harmonic generation in arrays of
nonlinear waveguides and in slab waveguides with ar-
bitrarily reconfigurable two-dimensional distribution of
nonlinearity [55, 56], open the door to realizing fully in-
tegrated multimode spatio-spectral squeezing in optical
lattices, paving the way for scalable quantum photonic
technologies as quantum networks, distributed quantum
sensing and universal and fault-tolerant measurement-
based quantum computing.
This work was supported by MICINN through the Eu-
ropean Union NextGenerationEU recovery plan (PRTR-
C17.I1), the Galician Regional Government through
“Planes Complementarios de I+D+I con las Comu-
nidades Aut´onomas” in Quantum Communication, and
the Paris Ile-de-France region in the framework of DIM
SIRTEQ.
APPENDIX
We analyze below the approximation over which our
model works. For that, we describe the dependence of the
coupling with the wavelength following the model of [18],
but making explicit the dependence with the distance
between waveguides as in [55]. We write thus
C(λ, d) = C0
λ e−Γ0
n(λ)
λ
d,
(A.1)
where λ is the wavelength, n(λ) the refractive index in the
waveguides, d the distance between waveguides, and C0
and Γ0 are constants. This model is suited for distances
d larger than a minimal distance where next-to-nearest
neighbor effects are negligible. For instance, using the
data of [55] for a nonlinear directional coupler in LN, we
get C0 = 25.6 µm/mm and Γ0 = 0.19 for d ≥13 µm and
λ in µm.
In order to analyze the dependence of the coupling pro-
file with the wavelength we need firstly to define it. The
coupling profile is mapped to a set of distances between
waveguides –or distance profile. Experimentally, we de-
fine a set of distances that map the coupling at a given
wavelength λ0 using Equation (A.1). The largest cou-
pling of the profile CM will have associated the shortest
interdistance dm as
CM = C0
λ0
e−Γ0
n(λ0)
λ0
dm.
(A.2)
We calculate the coupling between waveguide j and j +
1 writing Equation (A.1) in terms of CM and the jth
interdistance dj
Cj(λ, dj) = CM
λ0
λ e−Γ0( n(λ)
λ
dj−n(λ0)
λ0
dm) ≡CMfj(λ).
(A.3)
This equation defines a coupling profile wavelength de-
pendent ⃗f(λ). The (normalized) coupling profile of de-
sign is however ⃗f D = ⃗f(λ0) with f D
j
∈[0, 1]. For ex-
ample, for a Glauber-Fock array the normalized coupling
profile is f D
j
=
p
j/(N −1) for j = 1, . . . , N −1. The
experimental set of distances corresponding to this cou-
pling profile is
dj = dm −
λ0
Γ0n(λ0) ln(f D
j ).
(A.4)
The coupling profile is distorted at wavelengths λ off
λ0 and given by
fj(λ) = λ0
λ e
λ0
λ
n(λ)
n(λ0) ln(f D
j )e−Γ0( n(λ)
λ
−n(λ0)
λ0
)dm.
The above equation shows that the profile distortion is
more evident as the distance to the design wavelength
|λ −λ0| increases and f D
j
decreases. For instance, for an
array in LN with d0=13 µm, Γ0 = 0.19, and coupling
profile elements at the design wavelength f D
j (1.55 µm) =
