oscillations or a some sort of nuclear paramagnetic phenomenon warrants additional investigations.
Apart from nitriles, heterocyclic molecules such as [15N]-pyridine (Fig. 3D), [15N2]-imidazole
(Fig. 3E), [15N3]-metronidazole (Fig. 3F), and 4-amino[15N]-pyridine (Fig. 3G) were explored.
These molecules were available in the lab and can be readily polarized with SABRE. While
conventional zero-field 𝐽-spectra of these molecules suffer from the severe spectral overlap and
broad linewidths, the quantum oscillators instead yield narrow, mHz-scale resonances that se-
lectively address individual transitions. The demonstrations of quantum oscillators operating on
[15N]-pyridine under a higher feedback gain (𝐺ext = −3000) is given in Fig. S6. In this strong feed-
back regime, oscillations corresponding to 𝐽-transitions at approximately 1 Hz, 4 Hz, and 10 Hz
become clearly observable. Furthermore, the dynamics of the 𝐽-transition at around 15 Hz under the
elevated feedback gain are presented, matching predictions from simplified numerical simulations
(Fig. S9). Likewise, the quantum oscillators emitting at ultralow frequencies (below 0.5 Hz) were
observed for [15N3]-metronidazole and 4-amino-[15N]-pyridine (see Fig. S7).
Finally, we demonstrate the 𝐽-oscillator using [1-13C]-pyruvate (Fig. 3H). Due to the poor
hyperpolarization at elevated temperature conditions (heat up by the OPM in our measurement
apparatus), together with the broad Hz-scale FWHM, the conventional zero-field NMR spectrum
of this molecule (blue trace) exhibited poor SNR (∼4). In order to achieve the quantum oscillator
for this molecule, an external feedback gain of 𝐺ext = 50,000 was applied. The resulting quantum
oscillator (orange trace) showed significantly improved SNR and a narrower linewidth. Notably, a
frequency shift of both peaks was detected, because the feedback loop coupled the two transitions
and “drew” the peaks toward each other (32).
These examples clearly demonstrate a powerful application of quantum oscillators for practical
zero-field 𝐽-spectroscopy. While the conventional zero-field 𝐽-spectra can be broad with poorly
discernible spectral features, the quantum oscillator approach provides spectra that are charac-
terized by a set of sharp, highly resolved resonance lines whose origin could be assigned by
carefully tuning and controlling feedback parameters. Consequently, this method opens avenues
toward analyzing complex mixtures containing structurally similar molecules whose resonance sig-
nals typically overlap substantially in conventional experiments. The quantum oscillator-enhanced
approach, offering ultra-narrow linewidths and exceptional spectral clarity, thus, enables effective
differentiation among species previously challenging to resolve.
8
