a 3–dimensional time–symmetric initial data that obeys the dominant energy condition.
In order to prove this, they use the inverse mean curvature flow (IMCF), a geometric
evolution equation where the velocity of a spacelike surface is inversely proportional to
its mean curvature [3]. An important ingredient in this derivation is the Hawking mass,
which is a quasilocal definition of mass for a 2–dimensional closed surface Σ [4]. Then
the inequality follows from the fact that this functional is monotonically increasing under
a generalized form of IMCF and approaches asymptotically to the Arnowitt-Deser-Misner
(ADM) mass. Shortly afterwards, Bray generalized the previous result for the multiple
black holes case using the so–called conformal flow [5]. This was later extended up to eight
dimensions in Ref.[6]. (See Ref. [7] for an interesting overview on the subject).
From a holographic standpoint, plenty of applications of energy functionals can be
found in the context of the anti-de Sitter (AdS) gravity/ Conformal Field Theory (CFT)
correspondence [8–10]. This duality between a supergravity theory in asymptotically anti-
de Sitter (AAdS) spacetimes and a CFT in one dimension lower becomes manifest by
the matching of the corresponding partition functions which establishes a map connecting
observables on the field theory side to dynamical degrees of freedom on gravity. As a con-
sequence, the holographic dictionary provides a geometrical interpretation of the different
field theoretic observables.
Surface functionals also appear in the computation of entanglement entropy (EE) of
a CFT. EE is a measure of the quantum correlation between two or more subsystems and
it is a key quantity to study phase transitions and critical phenomena [11, 12], character-
ization of topological phases of matter [13–15], quantum information [16, 17] and black
hole thermodynamics [18–20]. In Refs. [21, 22], Ryu and Takayanagi (RT) proposed that
the EE of a spatial region A is given by the area of a minimal codimension–2 surface Σ
embedded in the bulk and homologous to A, i.e.,
S(A) = A (Σ)
4GN
.
(1.1)
The RT conjecture was later proven by Lewkowycz and Maldacena (LM) in Ref. [23].
This was achieved by extending the replica trick to the gravity action, generalizing the
gravitational entropy to configurations with discrete symmetry. The discrete symmetry
induces identifications which give rise to a conical defect in the bulk manifold.
When
evaluating the gravity action in the resulting orbifold, one ends up with a codimension–2
functional which resides at the singularity.
In Einstein-AdS gravity, LM prescription identifies the conical contribution of the
corresponding action as the area of the surface Σ, i.e., the RT formula. However, as Σ is
anchored to the conformal boundary, its area inherits the infrared divergencies of the AdS
volume.
Therefore, a proper renormalization prescription for the area functional is an absolute
must. In Ref. [24], the authors, using standard holographic renormalization techniques,
determined a series of intrinsic counterterms for the area of Σ. An extension of this pro-
cedure can be found in Ref. [25]. An alternative description, based on the addition of
topological terms to the bulk action, was provided in Refs. [26, 27]. This proposal makes
– 2 –
