to the drier subsiding regions. The perturbations b′ & q′ show sharp changes in
gradient around the saturation point, zs (also shown in Figure 8). Note for this set of
parameter values, in the updraft regions, there is a small region where w′ < 0 close
to the surface, although the magnitude of w′ is small compared to max(w′) in the
column. Figure 9 shows that w′, b′ & q′ are all in phase, with the circulation from
the moister updraft regions to the drier subsiding regions associated with u′ being
π/(2kc) out of phase with w′ as expected.
Figure 10 shows the condensation term over one wavelength, produced by adding the
enlarged linear perturbation to the basic state. We take b = ¯b + b′, q = ¯q + q′ and
compute C = γ(q −qs)H(q −qs), where qs = eαb. Note that the fields of b and q look
relatively unaffected by the addition of the linear perturbation, however the linear
perturbation causes a significant change in the condensation term. The plots show
two pockets around the LCL, where the condensation has been enhanced (the most)
by the moistening effect of the linear perturbation in updraft regions. We can also
see that the LCL has been perturbed further downwards at x = 0 than upwards at
x = π/kc. The enhanced levels of condensation around the LCL show that the linear
perturbation causes the instability to stem from the LCL. The action can be clearly
seen seen by running super critical simulations from the basic state plus the linear
perturbation at a small amplitude (see supplementary material).
Figure 9.
The real parts of the buoyancy and specific humidity perturbation quantities at criticality. The
perturbation quantities are calculated using f′(x, z) = ˆf(z)eikcx, where ˆf(z) denotes the eigenvector of the
quantity f. The velocity is shown by the black arrows. The results are shown for the parameter values: RHsurf =
0.6, bsurf = 0.05 and r = 1 × 10−5 and Ra = Rac = 7.80 × 105.
The results in Figures 8, 9 & 10 indicate that the linear perturbation causes insta-
bility to occur in the updraft regions around the LCL, by consuming pCAPE in the
upper regions (z ≥zs), moistening the overall column and reducing the lower level
inhibition by reducing the CIN and the LFC, and increasing pCAPE in a small verti-
cal region between the LFC and the LCL. The moistening causes the largest increase
in the condensation term around the LCL of the environment, indicating that the
21
