 
3
2.0 METHODS 
 
To determine the effect of geotechnical measurements on erosion rate and crater 
formation from PSI events, regolith simulants were exposed to subsonic, non-reacting flows of 
compressed air in a small-scale, splitter plate setup, as shown in Figure 1. This setup features a 
24.8 cm x 19.7 cm x 19.1 cm aluminum regolith bin, with a clear acrylic splitter plate on one 
side for camera observations during PSI measurements. A 600-liter, high-pressure steel cylinder 
of compressed atmospheric air, with a maximum pressure of 19,305 kPa, provided 
uninterrupted flow through a 20,684 kPa, single-staged, pressure regulator when connected to 
the experimental setup. This compressed air regulator was then connected to an inline 
Measureman digital pressure gauge (with a reported accuracy of +/- 6.9 kPa) and purge valve, 
to a 500 cm flexible high-pressure hose (with an inner diameter of 2.5 cm), before passing 
through a Parker Skinner electronic solenoid valve (with an inner diameter of 0.32 cm), a Siargo 
inline mass flow gauge (with an inner diameter of 1.3 cm and reported accuracy of 0.2 slpm), 
and finally through a 200 cm-long, aluminum pipe (with an inner diameter of 1.0 cm). The pipe 
was used as the exhaust outlet, without a converging-diverging exit nozzle or device. The exit 
nozzle was fixed at a height of 5.0 cm above each regolith sample.  
 
 
Figure 1. Splitter plate experimental setup with regolith bin. 
Prior to measurements with regolith simulants, exhaust velocity profiles were directly 
measured using pitot-static devices as a function of exhaust height, and desired mass flow was 
accomplished by adjusting upstream chamber pressures. These velocity measurements were 
taken using a 10.0 cm pitot-static tube (with an inner diameter of 0.15 cm), connected to a 
XGMP3v3 pressure differential sensor and Arduino Uno to characterize the flow exiting the 
collimation pipe with a sample rate of 1,000 Hz. Velocity measurements were taken across 
multiple X-Y planes at various heights, as shown in Figure 2, using 3-dimensional manual 
translation stages to change pitot-static tube positions relative to the pipe exit in 0.1 cm 
increments.  
From these initial measurements, when conducting PSI experiments with regolith 
simulants, upstream chamber pressures were set between 275 – 551 kPa using the purge valve 
and inline digital pressure gauge. Before each PSI measurement, the ambient atmospheric 
