Scattering Protons
3
unphysical gluon polarizations. The first part takes the form
Lclassical = 1
4Ga
µνGµν
a +
X
q
¯ψq(i /D −mq)ψq ,
(1.2)
Ga
µν is the gluon field strength tensor Ga
µν = ∂µAa
ν −∂νAa
µ + gsfa
bcAb
µAc
ν, where the gluon field
vector Aa
ν is supplemented with the color index a. The constants gs and fa
bc are respectively
the QCD coupling and the QCD structure constants. As the underlying QCD symmetry group is
non-abelian, the gluon self interactions are present and, both triple and four gluon vertices are
present.
The second right-handed part of Eq. (1.2) set the propagation of the quark fields ψq and their
interaction with gluons through the covariant derivative D. Also, quarks carry a color index
which has been omitted here. The sum runs over the different flavor (up, down, strange, charm,
bottom and top) and m indicates their masses. In the rest of the work we assume u, d and s
to be massless, as we aim to describe only high energy scattering processes, while c, b, t will
be treated separately as their mass effect is not always negligible, and it often requires ad-hoc
prescriptions (see Section 1.4). The covariant derivative is given by Dµ = ∂µ + igstaAa, where
the matrices ta are the SU(3) symmetry generators. The entire Lagrangian is invariant under
SU(3) transformation which ensure color charge conservation. In particular, by setting the
number of colors NC = 3 we fix the normalization constant as
Tr

tatb
= TRδab,
TR = 1
2 ,
(1.3)
X
a
tata = N2
C −1
2NC
= CF ,
CF = 4
3 ,
(1.4)
Tr

T aT b
= Nδab = CAδab,
CA = 3 .
(1.5)
These factors appear during the computation of Feynman diagrams, as one needs to sum
over the possible color states. Higher order calculations generate sums on more complicated
topologies and other algebraic constants might be required. However, formally their value can
always be computed a priori from the properties of the SU(3) representations.
1.1.2. The strong coupling
In Eq. (1.2) we have introduced the strong coupling, which enters explicitly in the gluon
strength tensor definition and in the covariant derivative. The inclusion of one loop gluon
propagator corrections lead to integrals over the momentum flowing inside the loop, which
diverge as this quantity increases. This is the simplest example of well-known behavior which is
then reconciled with the physical states through a procedure called renormalization [32, 33].
In doing so, all the fields and the parameters (the coupling gs and quark masses) entering in
Eq. (1.1) are redefined in terms of bare quantities which are not physical and absorbs all the
infinite ultraviolet divergences, leaving the one-loop corrections to the physical parameter finite.
