3 
 
dipoles. So far only monolayer bismuth [26], few-layered 1T′ WTe2 [5, 27-30] , bilayer 
Td-MoTe2 [31] and graphene/hBN moiré heterostructures [32-36] exhibited signatures 
of sliding ferroelectricity when made into field-effect transistors, and that more recently, 
separate polar stacking orders in tetralayer graphene were electrically detected by 
Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) [37] after a few theoretical proposals [38-41].  
DW sliding at the vdW interface plays the pivotal role in studying and 
understanding 2D sliding ferroelectricity. Most of the DW sliding motion was imaged 
by the electromechanical detection by either piezoelectric force microscopy (PFM) or 
KPFM [6, 9, 13, 17, 42]. Scanning near-field optical microscopy (SNOM) has been 
recently utilized to indirectly probe the out-of-plane polarizations of twisted WSe2 and 
hBN moiré superlattices by placing a graphene sensor on top [23, 43]. The nanoscale 
spatial resolution and in-situ gate tunability make SNOM a new and discriminating 
technique to optically probe novel electric polarizations and switching dynamics [44].  
Herein we report the first optical imaging of spontaneous electric polarizations and 
switching in tetralayer graphene, a 2D metal composed entirely of carbon. By using 
gate-dependent SNOM, we directly visualize the spontaneous and contrasting out-of-
plane electric polarizations in two adjacent polar stacking orders ABAC and ABCB, 
which are the thinnest possible graphene polytypes. Our gate-dependent SNOM 
measurements reveal that a distinct optical response arises between two adjacent polar 
stackings with opposite out-of-plane electric polarizations and the optical contrast 
between two polar stackings systematically changes upon carrier doping. Particularly 
noteworthy is the observation of versatile DW sliding at distinct interfaces in gated 
tetralayer graphene, providing the first microscopic evidence of polarization switching 
via DW sliding in 2D metal. The spontaneous electric polarizations and DW sliding 
dynamics observed in SNOM are further consolidated by our combined Kelvin probe 
force microscopy (KPFM), Raman spectroscopy, and density functional theory (DFT) 
calculations. In addition, we also demonstrate a reversible polarization switching 
between two adjacent polar stacking orders in tetralayer graphene by mechanical 
manipulation of DWs.  
 
Results 
Polar stacking orders in tetralayer graphene 
Assuming an AB or BA stacking sequence between adjacent layers, there are four 
