3
-4
-2
0
2
4
Pair state detuning 
 (MHz)
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Rydberg excitation linewidth (MHz)
(c)
data
theory
-4
0
4
0
0.5
1
=2.3
-4
0
4
Rydberg drive detuning  (MHz)
=3.4
-4
0
4
=4.4
0
0.5
1
Normalized Rb Ion Counts
=0
=0.4
=0.7
=1.2
0
0.5
1
=-5.1
(b)
=-2.5
=-1.2
=-0.7
data
theory
Vdd
(a)
FIG. 3. Broadening of Rydberg excitation linewidth due to the Rydberg atom-molecule interactions. (a) Dressed state picture
of an interacting Rydberg Rb atom and KRb molecule system. The eigenstates |+⟩and |−⟩are linear combinations of the bare
states and are functions of the pair state detuning ∆and the interaction strength Vdd. δ represents the Rydberg drive detuning.
(b) The experimental (blue) and theoretically calculated Rydberg excitation spectra (orange) for all pair state detuning ∆in
units of MHz. The theoretical spectra are simulated using a Monte Carlo method based on a dipolar interaction model (SM
Section B). (c) The FWHM linewidth of the Rydberg excitation transition as a function of ∆. The error bars on the experimental
data and the bounds of the orange band represent the 1-σ confidence intervals. The experimental uncertainties account for
shot noise in the ion signal, while the theoretical uncertainties include both Monte Carlo sampling error and uncertainties in
the input parameters. The peak Rb and KRb densities are 4.29 ± 0.36 × 1011/cm3 and 1.59 ± 0.25 × 1010/cm3, respectively.
residual electric field in the system via Rydberg spec-
troscopy (see SM Section A), which we found to be 96.5
mV/cm.
A small bias voltage was applied across the
plate electrodes to cancel the residual field’s projection
along the normal axis of the plates, reducing the electric
field to a minimum of 38.6 mV/cm.
As shown in Fig. 2, we observed a narrow and promi-
nent KRb ion signal at E = 46 mV/cm. We identified
this peak, which is close to the calculated resonance based
on [36], to be the transition to the highest energy state
in the 99P3/2 manifold, as shown by the intersection be-
tween the red dashed line and the bottom black curve in
Fig. 2 inset. No additional resonances were detected at
higher electric fields, which is consistent with theoretical
predictions.
While ionization detection of N = 1 KRb molecules
provided a direct proof of the resonant energy transfer,
we further probed the underlying interspecies interaction
that manifested in the Rydberg excitation spectrum. In-
tuitively, near resonance (∆≲Vdd), the interaction Vdd
between a Rydberg atom and a molecule couples the
states {|98D, N = 0⟩, |99P, N = 1⟩}, forming two dressed
states |+⟩and |−⟩as illustrated in Fig. 3(a), both of
which can be connected by the Rydberg drive from the
ground state. This would lead to a double-peak excita-
tion spectrum, where Vdd set the spacing between the two
peaks. However, due to the random spatial distribution
of the atoms and molecules in the mixture, Vdd varies, re-
sulting in an inhomogeneous broadening of the Rydberg
excitation.
We measured the broadening of the excitation spec-
trum for each pair state detuning ∆, as shown in
Fig. 3(b). Each spectrum is fitted to a Lorentzian line-
shape as an approximation to extract a full-width-half-
max (FWHM) linewidth for comparison in Fig. 3(c).
When the Rydberg atom and KRb were on resonance,
the linewidth (3.5 MHz) was significantly broader than
the off-resonant case (1.5 MHz), where the off-resonant
linewidth was primarily limited by decoherence during
the Rydberg excitation.
To provide a theoretical model for our observed Ryd-
berg excitation spectra (see SM Section B), we treated
both the Rydberg atom and the molecule as point dipoles
that interact under an electric dipole-dipole Hamiltonian
HDD =
1
4πϵ0
da·dm−3(da·ˆr)(dm·ˆr)
r3
, where da, dm are the
dipole operators of the Rydberg atom and molecule re-
spectively, and ˆr is the spatial separation unit vector
between the species.
The distributions of separations
and relative orientations between Rydberg atoms and
surrounding KRb molecules are accounted for through
a Monte Carlo simulation. For each Rydberg atom, we
included the 10 nearest KRb molecules in the system
by considering the pairwise interaction between the Ry-
dberg atom and every molecule (see SM Section B for
details).
We found that including at least three near-
est KRb molecules is sufficient to reproduce nearly 90%
of the observed excitation linewidth, and incorporating
additional neighbors (which are farther away) leads to
a saturation of the simulated broadening, in good agree-
ment with experimental observations (see SM Section B).
Therefore, in additional to inhomogeneous broadening,
collective enhancement is included in the model to cap-
ture the entirety of the broadening in the observations.
The
simulated
Rydberg
spectra
are
overlaid
in
Fig. 3(b) for each ∆and agree well with the measure-
ments.
For a comparison of the excitation linewidths,
