8
trast, when multiple trajectories are used, the randomly
generated momentum vectors are generally not orthog-
onal to [Fad]12, enabling electronic transitions between
the adiabatic states.
After observing the failure of single-trajectory mean-
field methods to treat nonadiabatic dynamics between
electronic states of different symmetry, we assess here the
performance of Ehrenfest dynamics and the TGED in the
model represented in Fig. 3(b). This model describes a
conical intersection between electronic states of the same
symmetry, or more precisely, belonging to the same ir-
reducible representation of the molecule’s point group.
In this case, the gradient at the Franck-Condon point
has nonzero components along both nuclear coordinates.
As a result, the momentum vector acquires a nonzero
component along Qc, enabling population transfer even
when using single-trajectory mean-field methods. Figure
4 shows the nonadiabatic dynamics computed exactly,
with the TGED, and with Ehrenfest dynamics. The evo-
lution of the position expectation value is displayed and
color-coded to indicate the adiabatic population of the
upper surface. A first population transfer to the lower
surface occurs within the first 25 fs, as the nuclei pass
near the conical intersection.
The mean-field methods
are in good agreement with the exact result. However,
since the population transfer is not complete, a small
portion of the exact wavepacket remains on the excited-
state surface. Although this splitting of the electronic
wavepacket can be captured by both TGED and Ehren-
fest dynamics, neither mean-field method can describe
the subsequent splitting of the nuclear density due to the
evolution on two different surfaces. Nevertheless, the nu-
clear wavepacket propagated with TGED remains in a
qualitative agreement with the exact result up to 75 fs.
After this time, a second crossing of the conical inter-
section occurs causing repopulation of the S2 electronic
state.
Once again, the exact result reveals a splitting
that leads to a more intricate structure of the nuclear
wavepacket. Despite this complexity, the Gaussian of the
TGED method resembles the exact nuclear wavefunction
both in density and phase, which are absent in Ehrenfest
dynamics.
Finally, Fig. 5 provides a more detailed view of the
evolution of the electronic population of the S2 adiabatic
state.
First, we observe that Ehrenfest dynamics and
the TGED yield identical population dynamics, for the
same reason discussed in Sec. III A. Overall, the single-
trajectory mean-field methods agree well with the exact
result. Nevertheless, the population transfers at 10 and
80 fs are significantly more abrupt compared to the ex-
act reference. Another notable difference is the appear-
ance around 30 and 60 fs of rapid small-amplitude oscil-
lations of the population evaluated with the TGED and
Ehrenfest dynamics. This well-known effect is caused by
the overestimation of electronic coherence caused by the
mean-field approximation51,52. After the second cross-
ing of the conical intersection, the TGED and Ehrenfest
dynamics significantly diverge from the exact result.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Time [fs]
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
S2 adiabatic population
quantum
TGED
Ehrenfest
Figure 5.
Electronic population of the second excited adi-
abatic state S2, computed exactly and compared with the
thawed Gaussian Ehrenfest dynamics (TGED) and Ehrenfest
dynamics.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
The TGED improves on single-trajectory Ehrenfest
dynamics by describing the nuclear part with a Gaus-
sian wavepacket instead of a classical particle21. Conse-
quently, the total molecular wavefunction is fully defined,
and both nonadiabatic effects and nuclear quantum ef-
fects are taken into account, at least partially.
After demonstrating the exactness of the TGED in ver-
tically displaced harmonic potentials with constant dia-
batic couplings, we assessed the accuracy of the method
in systems modeling different types of conical intersec-
tions. We have shown that mean-field methods fail to
describe population dynamics in conical intersections be-
tween electronic states of different symmetry when the
molecular point group is Abelian. This behavior arises
from the requirement that the coupling mode must be
non-totally symmetric, which imposes that the energy
gradients along the coupling mode are zero at the Franck-
Condon point for all electronic surfaces.
In contrast,
when the electronic states have the same symmetry,
the coupling mode is totally symmetric, allowing for a
nonzero gradient of the potential energy. In this case, we
show that the molecular wavefunction propagated with
TGED can provide a qualitative picture of the exact dy-
namics over a duration that includes two crossings of the
conical intersection.
Conical intersections between electronic states belong-
ing to the same irreducible representation have received
limited attention because of the challenges in locating
them. Notably, this includes all intersections in molecules
without any particular symmetry. We propose using the
TGED to efficiently capture the initial nonadiabatic dy-
namics near such intersections. Additionally, the TGED
method can be applied in cases where single-trajectory
Ehrenfest dynamics is sufficient, with the potential for
increased accuracy by incorporating some nuclear quan-
tum effects.
