 
8 
information of each node; or in other words, the system is automatically divided into segments, and each 
node learns a representation that best summarizes the information of each segment for the downstream tasks.   
In our experience, for simplicity, the learning process is typically applied to systems with fixed 
sizes and timesteps. However, the design of the classifier model ensures its adaptability, allowing it to be 
trained and applied to systems of varying sizes (e.g., different numbers of water molecules) and different 
timesteps or even various time resolutions, accommodating data collected from diverse simulations.  
Interaction potential network: We directly employed NequIP architecture as the potential network. 
Unlike the classifier network, the graph representation in the potential network encodes only the relative 
displacements between CG beads in the edge features, while the node features represent the types of CG 
beads. In our specific case of a one-bead model for water molecules, all CG beads belong to the same type, 
resulting in a constant node feature in the first layer of the GNN. To prevent CG beads from coming 
excessively close to one another, a repulsive potential of the form (ğ‘Ÿ@ ğ‘Ÿ
â„ )<ğ‘†(ğ‘Ÿ)was incorporated into the 
network, ensuring physical plausibility and stability in the simulations. Here ğ‘Ÿ is the pairwise distance,  
ğ‘Ÿ@ = 2 â„«,  and ğ‘†(ğ‘Ÿ) is the cutoff function with the form33: 
 
ğ‘†(ğ‘Ÿ) =
â©
â¨
â§
1,                                                            ğ‘Ÿ< ğ‘ŸGB
        (ğ‘ŸH:2
<
âˆ’ğ‘Ÿ<)<(ğ‘ŸH:2
<
+ 2ğ‘Ÿ< âˆ’3ğ‘ŸGB
< )<
(ğ‘ŸH:2
<
âˆ’ğ‘ŸGB
< )A
,       ğ‘ŸGB < ğ‘Ÿ< ğ‘ŸH:2  
0,                                                                 ğ‘Ÿ> ğ‘ŸH:2 ,
 
 
 (7) 
 
where ğ‘ŸGB = 2.2 â„« and ğ‘ŸH:2 = 2.4 â„«. 
Training Details: 
Stabilizing the adversarial training. The training process for dynamic matching methods faces significant 
instabilities, primarily due to two factors. First, the adversarial training framework, while powerful, is 
inherently unstable because the generator and discriminator are optimized simultaneously with competing 
objectives. This often leads to oscillatory behavior or divergence in the optimization process. To mitigate 
this, we introduced a self-supervised discriminator 34 that leverages auxiliary tasks to provide more robust 
and stable gradient signals. In our case, given the embedded nodes, with a fraction of them being randomly 
masked, a predictive network is optimized to predict the two properties of the system: (1) The relative 
positions of CG beads to their neighbors (i.e., the edge feature) and (2) the position shifts the masked nodes. 
With this self-supervised task, the learned features are forced to contain both structure information and 
dynamic information. In other words, the network learns both the thermodynamic and dynamical principles 
of both systems, instead of focusing on a single aspect,  and uses that to determine whether the input 
trajectories are from the AA or CG simulations.  
Second, the dynamics of the model are highly sensitive to variations in the parameters ğœƒ, resulting 
in large gradients that destabilize training. To ameliorate the unstable gradient issue, we employed partial 
backpropagation,35, 36 a technique that prevents overly aggressive gradient updates by truncating 
backpropagation in a defined number of steps, thereby maintaining a more stable optimization process. 
Empirically, we observed that the gradients of potential parameters increased dramatically as the timestep 
increased, while the gradient of other parameters remained within a reasonable range. This aggressive 
update of the potential parameters often resulted in excessively large forces or unphysical interactions, 
