An alternative QFT formulation (e.g. with a pseudo-Hermitian Hamiltonian [99–101]) and/or a
modified Born rule [51, 102] may be needed, or it could simply be that cancellations eventually
occur and the physical observables are those associated with positive probabilities [103,54–56].
A striking feature of ghost propagators is that, even if they acquire a non-zero width at the
quantum level, the corresponding ghost particles cannot decay (or, at least, not in the standard
way). Indeed, it can be shown that the pair of complex conjugate poles does not lie in the second
Riemann sheet of the complex plane as for ordinary unstable particles, but appears in the first
sheet [104–106]. According to the operator formalism of QFT, this should imply that ghosts
remain part of the set of asymptotic states. In our opinion, acquiring a better understanding of
ghost resonances is crucial to learn more about quadratic gravity [106]. In particular, we have
recently pointed out that finite-time QFT may be needed to consistently define these objects and
capture their true physical features [106,107].
The presence of the spin-two ghost may induce the violation of some notion of causality in the
high-energy regime, i.e. at time scales of the order of or smaller than O(M2
p/m3
2) [104,60,64,67].
This means that the usual notion of causality may be an emergent phenomenon [108]. Further-
more, the correspondence principle may not hold in quadratic gravity and it may be necessary to
define the classical theory as a consistent limit of the corresponding quantum theory [61,96]. For
example, the ghost quantized as a fakeon does not appear as an on-shell state since it is projected
out of the physical Hilbert space by the new diagrammatics [109]. In this case, the action of
quadratic gravity (7) is an “interim” action, while the true classical action is non-local [61].
How the violation of causality manifests itself and the details of the classical limit may depend
on the type of quantization prescription. This also means that different quantization prescriptions
can lead to different physical implications.
Furthermore, the known quantizations of quadratic gravity are performed perturbatively, i.e.
the theory is formulated in the framework of perturbative QFT. It is not yet clear whether all
three quantizations mentioned above or only some of them can be derived from a non-perturbative
formulation of quadratic gravity. See [52] for some recent progress.
The exciting part of all this is that there is still more to learn about the conceptual aspects
and physical implications of QFT and gravity. Skeptics may be hesitant to implement alternative
quantizations for ghost fields and prefer to abandon quadratic gravity and with it strict renor-
malizability. However, it may not be surprising that a non-standard quantization is ultimately
necessary. We already know that the quantization rules for Dirac fields are different from those
for Klein-Gordon fields. It is true that in this particular example the different statistics also play
an important role, but our point is that it may indeed be that the type of quantization depends
on the number of derivatives [99]. Furthermore, and more importantly: in the next section we
will show that Nature continues to favor strict renormalizability as a paradigm for fundamental
physics, which should further motivate us to take quadratic gravity and ghosts more seriously.
12
