1
2
5
10
20
-1.0
0
1.0
1
2
5
10
20
1.0
3.0
5.0
Figure 4.
Left: The evolution of n (red), ξ (blue), η (green) for free theory (dashed) and interaction
theory (solid) with ϵ = 1 and xR = kτR = 1.
Right: n/n0 as a function of x = kτ with ϵ = 1, and
xR = 1, 0.5, 0.1 respectively.
Solid lines represent the Heisenberg equation, and dashed lines represent
perturbation theory results.
More precisely, ϵij can correspond to either a constant or a decaying adiabatic mode [40]. The
latter results in a constant shift for the conjugate momentum πij. Since the constant mode can be
eliminated by a large gauge transformation, free IR graviton modes are considered gauge-dependent.
As the secular term is due to the IR graviton modes, we need to understand if the effect is physical
or not in our setup.
In practice, a gradient term emerges in Eq. (6.1) for subhorizon modes, explicitly breaking the
large gauge symmetry. Primordial gravitons are quantum-mechanically generated during inflation.
At the time of their generation, they were within the horizon and the adiabatic vacuum is chosen
as a vacuum state in the remote past. After the horizon exit, the quantum state remains adiabatic,
which is regarded as a symmetry-broken phase. Thus, while the large gauge transformation is a
symmetry of the IR equation of motion, it is spontaneously broken by the quantum state.
In the present case, the stimulated emission is regarded as a tachyonic instability due to the
negative mass squared. In fact, one may consider an effective Hamiltonian
Heff = −1
5a4H2
Z
d3xhijhij,
(6.4)
which reproduces the Heisenberg equation we found in Sec. 3.5. From Eq. (6.4), one can read an
effective graviton mass due to the coupling to radiation2:
m2
eff = −2
5H2,
(6.5)
where H is the physical Hubble parameter. For massive gravitons, the symmetry breaking takes
place even for the IR equation of motion. Eq. (6.1) with this negative effective mass squared is
given by
h′′
ij + 2a′
a h′
ij −2
5
a′
a
2
hij = 0.
(6.6)
Note that the graviton can acquire an effective mass since general covariance is spontaneously
broken by the excited state. Equation (6.6) implies that the IR graviton modes no longer enjoy
2The same tachyonic mass has also been discussed in [28].
– 16 –
