1.3 No-scale models from higher dimensions
19
ters, sα ≪1, and continuously connect the full effective potential V1 of the
compactified theory with the effective potential V1,red of the reduced theory.
Moreover, the tree-level spectrum depends on a single modulus R. It is then
not surprising that V1 and V1,red have a very similar behaviour, and that in
the N = 8 case the disappointing result obtained for V1,red is now corrected
but qualitatively confirmed also for V1.
However, in the case of twisted tori with three or more extra dimensions,
already mentioned in section 1.3.1, the twist parameters are quantized and
the reduced theory can either be a mere consistent truncation or a genuine
effective theory [43, 44], depending on whether the compactification mani-
fold is homogeneous or not. In the first case, the three-dimensional manifold
is still a torus and supersymmetry appears to be broken in the reduced
truncated theory but remains unbroken in the full compactified theory. In
such a case, we expect V1 = 0, i.e. perturbative stability for the Minkowski
vacuum of the full higher-dimensional theory, which is indeed supersymmet-
ric, although V1,red could have a completely different qualitative behaviour.
Also in the second case, the tree-level field-dependent spectrum of the com-
pactified theory may have a non-trivial structure, with masses depending on
several moduli and V1 could exhibit significantly different qualitative features
from V1,red.
The simplest scenario we can consider is three extra dimensions, with the
internal manifold given by a twisted torus corresponding to the freely acting
orbifold T 3/Zk (k = 2, 3, 4, 6), where T 3 ∼T 2×S1 and a discrete translation
along the circle S1 is combined with a discrete rotation of T 2. In the N = 8
case, this can be studied both at the field theory [45] and at the string theory
[66] level, although in the string theory case one needs to take MC ≪MS
to avoid tachyonic winding states. Both descriptions, in the cases studied so
far, confirm the one-loop instability of the flat directions, with a negative
V1 scaling as an inverse power of the S1 radius R. The above studies can
be extended to supersymmetry-breaking compactifications on n-dimensional
(3 ≤n ≤7) freely acting orbifolds, for which a systematic classification is still
missing. All these flat compactifications of higher-dimensional supergravities
do not require D-branes and/or orientifolds to comply with known no-go
theorems for Minkowski vacua of higher dimensional theories [67, 68]: they
are therefore the obvious next step to explore, and probably the last one
where stringy effects can be consistently neglected.
