5
The surface impedance of the unit cell as a function of
the varactor’s capacitance is ﬁrst obtained, as described in
[22], [23]. The ﬁnite RIS of length Ltot is simulated, but with
the inclusion of only a single meta-wire (i.e., as if N = 1).
The meta-wire has the geometry of Fig. 2, and it is placed
at the center (y = 0) of the impedance layer. The varactor’s
capacitance is varied and the scattered electric ﬁeld from the
single-cell RIS upon an incident illumination is recorded at
a line segment of length 2λ that is located λ/2 above the
RIS. Similarly, the scattered ﬁeld from the homogenized RIS
model, that features a single impedance strip of varying surface
impedance Z = R + jX, is calculated at the same line
segment through the MoM approach. For each capacitance,
the impedance value Z with the closest matching in terms of
the scattered electric ﬁeld values is assigned as the surface
impedance. Compared to [22], [23], the impedance is varied
in a grid of real part and imaginary part values, allowing to
additionally characterize the losses. The resulting graph of
surface impedance as a function of capacitance is given in
Fig. 3(a). While the illumination (in this work, a normally-
incident Gaussian beam) and the observation points for the
scattered-ﬁeld comparison are selected arbitrarily, the ex-
tracted values would not differ signiﬁcantly for other choices.
A higher accuracy may be achievable by accounting for the
local ﬁeld on each cell [35]. However, the matching between
full-wave simulations and the homogenized-model predictions
is already satisfactory (as will become evident in Sec. IV), and
accounting for the local ﬁeld would have required a different
set of simulations for each cell and optimized solution.
Following a more typical approach, the unit cell is also
characterized in terms of a reﬂection coefﬁcient S11 under
periodic boundary conditions. The amplitude and phase of S11
are given in Fig. 3(b), allowing to establish a correspondence
between surface impedances and reﬂection coefﬁcients. While
the surface impedances are utilized in the optimization frame-
work, translating them to reﬂection coefﬁcients is beneﬁcial to
predict the reﬂected radiation pattern through a simple reﬂect-
array model and assess the beneﬁts of the adopted integral-
equation approach.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
The capabilities of the RIS for beamsteering and beam-
forming with high efﬁciency are examined in this section
through full-wave simulations. The assumed RIS has a length
of Ltot = 6.5λ ≈390mm in the center frequency of 5GHz.
There are a total of 30 meta-wires, each one with a surface
impendace Zn to be optimized. The meta-wires take the form
of the unit cell presented in Sec. III with their optimized
surface impedances implemented through the corresponding
capacitance values. Although the RIS is truncated to Lx = 4λ
(16 cells) along the x-axis, the full-wave simulations assume
an inﬁnite structure by simulating a single row of unit cells
and applying periodic boundary conditions along the x-axis.
Nevertheless, the width Lx = 4λ is sufﬁcient to maintain
high-accuracy of the radiation pattern in the yz-plane, as will
become evident from the measured results.
For the MoM solution, during each optimization iteration,
the induced currents are expanded to Ng = 600, Nw = 150
Fig. 3. (a) Extracted surface impedance Zw as a function of the varactor’s
capacitance at f = 5GHz. (b) Extracted reﬂection phase S11 under periodic
boundary conditions at f = 5GHz.
and Nv = 3000 basis functions expanding throughout the
ground plane, impedance wires and substrate, respectively.
Moreover, the imaginary parts of the surface impedance, that
constitute the optimization variables are constrained within the
range Xn ∈[−17.85, −12.05]Ωcorresponding to a capaci-
tance Cn ∈[0.2, 1]pF, or a bias voltage V ∈[0.5, 11.5]V. The
stricter range compared to the nominal range of the varactor’s
model was selected so that any fabrication issues (e.g., shift
in the substrate’s permittivity) will not affect the realizability
of the optimized surface impedance values.
A. Beamsteering simulation results
An incident plane wave at f = 5GHz is impinging on the
RIS from an angle of θin = −15◦. By optimizing the surface
impedances through the presented framework, we explore the
ability of the RIS to steer the beam with high directivity at the
angular range of ±60◦with a 15◦step. Although a 15◦step
was selected for the reﬂected angle for presentation purposes,
it is noted that beams with a maximum radiation towards any
angle within this range can be realized. The specular case
(reﬂection towards 15◦) is not optimized, as the response can
be directly obtained by uniformly loading the varactors at each
meta-wire with the minimum capacitance value Cn = 0.2pF.
To calculate the desired far-ﬁeld Eff
des(θ), an array of virtual
sources is assumed along the RIS aperture with currents given
as:
Ivs[n] = exp{−jkynsin(θout)},
(10)
