evaluate the MFPT at any rate r = r∗+ ∆r. To do so, we simply treat the coordinates Xj
i
of the trajectories with resetting as described above for unbiased trajectories and substitute
r = ∆r in Equation 7.
4
Applications of resetting in molecular simulations
4.1
Resetting as a standalone method
We established that standard resetting accelerates ﬁrst-passage processes for which the COV
of the FPT distribution is larger than unity. In which processes should we expect it to hap-
pen? To gain intuition, we next describe several systems where such broad FPT distributions
emerge, and resetting proved useful.
Resetting is particularly eﬃcient in ﬂat landscapes.53,77,78 We expect it to accelerate
processes where the free energy barriers are moderate and entropy plays a signiﬁcant role
in the dynamics.
Then, the system explores nonreactive regions of phase space for long
periods, resulting in trajectories with long FPTs. Occasionally resetting to a reactive region,
where rapid transition to product is possible, can reduce the MFPT. For example, consider
the modiﬁed Faradjian-Elber potential of Figure 2(a).14,39,41 It is a two-dimensional model,
consisting of two metastable states separated by an energy barrier of 12 kBT at x = 0 for
most y-coordinate values, where kB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature. It
has a narrow saddle only 3 kBT high at y = 0, near the minima of the basins. The basins are
very broad, such that a diﬀusing particle starting from one of the minima may spend much
time in nonreactive regions away from the saddle (|y| ≫0). The COV for transitions from
one minimum to the other basin is ∼1.23. Poisson resetting at the optimal resetting rate
gives a speedup of ∼15,39 which is deﬁned as the ratio of the MFPT without and with SR.
Often, barriers are much higher than kBT. In a classical two-state scenario with a high
barrier as in the Kramers’ problem,79 the FPT distribution is exponential: the COV is
exactly 1 and resetting cannot accelerate transitions. However, this simpliﬁed picture often
only holds at long timescales. When the initial state is composed of several sub-states, the
rate of transitions can vary before reaching local equilibrium within the initial state. This is
demonstrated in the three-state model of Figure 2(b).40,80 We initiate the particle in state
A and are interested in transitions over a ∼10 kBT barrier to the global minimum of state
B. The particle can also overcome a ∼6 kBT barrier to reach a nonreactive state I. The
system reaches thermal equilibrium between states A and I after ∼1.5 ns, after which the
FPT distribution decays exponentially, with a MFPT of ∼130 ns. But, before reaching
equilibrium, the rate of events is faster, and sharp resetting with a timer of 1.15 ns gives a
speedup close to 6 over simulations without resetting.40
We conclude that SR is eﬃcient as a standalone method when there are multiple metastable
states, or when the energy barriers are relatively low. Proteins are characterized by rugged
free energy surfaces that often ﬁt these criteria.81–83 As an example, Figure 2(c) presents
the free energy surface of a nine-residues alanine peptide in solution, along two CVs: the
end-to-end distance and the mean distance of three H-bonds-forming sites.84 Notice that the
scale of the color bar is diﬀerent from that in panels (a) and (b). We recognize 4 metastable
states, marked with white dashed lines. Representative conﬁgurations of the states are given
9
