10
Tan ET AL.
Lee et al. (2009) predict that the material will return on
a 10-second timescale. This seems to help explain the
10 s main emission of Type IL GRBs. However, the ex-
tended emission is also platform-like or hump-shaped
for this model, and the main emission and the extended
emission are produced by different processes in different
regions, which contradicts the requirements mentioned
earlier in Section 5.
In addition to invoking magnetar to explain the cen-
tral engine and extended emission, a BH as the central
engine has been established to depict the unified pic-
ture of merger type GRBs (Gottlieb et al. 2023). In this
model, the BH is produced by compact binary merg-
ers.
The main emission generated by the Blandford-
Znajek (BZ) mechanism and the magnetically arrested
disk (MAD) is introduced to explain the extended emis-
sion. The power of the jet during the main emission is
determined by the magnetic flux: the greater the mag-
netic flux, the higher the power. When the magnetic
flux accumulates to saturation, the accretion disk en-
ters the MAD phase, at which point the jet power is
determined by the accretion rate.
After entering the
MAD phase, the accretion rate decreases over time fol-
lowing a power-law with slope of -2. Consequently, the
time it takes for the accretion disk to enter the MAD
phase determines the duration of the main emission.
A larger accretion disk mass results in a later transi-
tion to MAD, leading to longer main emission durations.
This model seems to coherently unify long-duration and
short-duration merger bursts, and the power-law decay
with slope of -2 in the extended emission also matches
observational data. Moreover, both the main emission
and the extended emission are produced by the same
process, satisfying the requirements mentioned in Sec-
tion 5. Therefore, when discussing the central engine
of Type IL GRB, this kind of scenario should not be
excluded.
6. SUMMARY
Type IL GRB is an important subclass of GRBs. In
this work, we establish the criterion of searching for
Type IL GRBs. By searching in the Fermi GBM Burst
Catalog, we find five Type IL GRBs in the GRB samples
from the past decade (i.e., 2014 to 2024). We success-
fully verify through their energy spectrum and tempo-
ral properties that they belong to a distinct subclass of
Type I GRBs, clearly differentiating them from tradi-
tional “long” sGRBs. The compact binary merger origin
and long duration of the main burst make these GRBs
“special in special”.
In addition to the light curve patterns constrained by
the criterion, we find that distribution of the duration
of main emission in these 5 GRBs is relatively concen-
trated, and the energy ratio between extended emission
and main emission is almost constant (∼0.7, with small
scattering), such commonality may have strong implica-
tion on the mechanism of Type IL bursts. We also search
for thermal components in the precursors of these five
Type IL GRBs and discuss the progenitor model and
central engine model based on the long durations of the
main emission, as well as briefly discussing the extended
emission model. The existence of thermal component
in precursor, the slope evolution behavior of extended
emission, as well as the existence of weak periodic activ-
ity in the light curve, all indicate the diversity of Type
IL GRB.
Due to the lack of follow-up data of the X-ray range,
we are unable to place strong constraints on the ex-
tended emission of Type IL GRB. However, this is
precisely the significance of our work: to establish a
standardized criterion for rapid recognition of this kind
of distinctive GRB, thus guiding further low-latency
follow-up observations, accumulating detailed data, and
expanding our understanding of “special in special”
GRBs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (Grant No.
12494572,
12273042), the Strategic Priority Research Program
of
the
Chinese
Academy
of
Sciences
(Grant
No.
XDA30050000, XDB0550300) and the National Key
R&D Program of China (2021YFA0718500).
We ap-
preciate the public data and software of Fermi/GBM.
The GECAM (Huairou-1) mission is supported by the
Strategic Priority Research Program on Space Science
(Grant No. XDA15360000) of Chinese Academy of Sci-
ences.
