11
In our recent work [21], we showed that diffusion co-
efficients can deviate from Arrhenius scaling even in the
simplest case, where the electrolyte is composed of a sin-
gle atom. This deviation is also commonly observed ex-
perimentally, yet in Sec. VI, we found that the diffusion
coefficient follows an Arrhenius scaling with an activation
energy close to the statically-computed value.
In our simulations, the energy barrier was composed
primarily of the particle-framework interaction, while the
deformation energy played a much smaller role. Conse-
quently, for the particle to escape a local minimum, it was
sufficient that it have enough energy without relying on
a favorable framework configuration when it approached
the unit cell’s face. For a particle with Boltzmann energy
distribution, the probability that it has sufficient energy
Ea is approximately proportional to e−Ea/ℏΩT , giving the
Arrhenius form for the probability of the particle’s es-
cape.
However, if the relaxed configuration involves a
large lattice deformation, particle escape also requires a
favorable framework arrangement, leading to a deviation
from the Arrhenius form. The reason for this deviation
is the fact that the probability of a particle having suf-
ficient energy and the lattice assuming a configuration
that allows the particle to move between energy minima
is no longer Boltzmann distributed, as discussed in detail
in Ref. [21].
VIII.
SUMMARY
We have presented a scheme for computing the mo-
tion of mobile ions in solid electrolytes using a time-
local approximation.
By its construction, this formal-
ism is intermediate between fully-static NEB calculations
and time-approximation-free AIMD simulations. Our ap-
proach demonstrates the main features associated with
ionic transport: dissipation and diffusion. The simpli-
fied computation procedure makes it possible to perform
simulations on time and length scales more similar to
those anticipated in devices. In addition to providing a
time-local formulation, we also propose a computation-
ally tractable way to capture the short-time-nonlocal ef-
fects.
We envision several natural extensions to this work.
First, although we focused on a single mobile ion, it is
straightforward to extend our treatment to multiple cur-
rent carriers. We do not expect the formalism pertaining
to the response kernel to be significantly altered. Rather,
we would only need to include the interaction between
the mobile particles to prevent them from occupying the
same energy minimum. We suspect that simulating ionic
motion with multiple ions could reveal subtle correlation
effects, as well as a departure from the diffusive behavior,
leading to anomalous diffusion.
Next, in the limit of high carrier concentration, the in-
terstitial transport picture changes into a vacancy-carrier
current. We suspect modifying our formulation to de-
scribe vacancy (rather than particle) motion would not
introduce dramatic changes to the structure of the solu-
tions, since the timescale for the response kernel decay
should be similar.
Finally, machine learning (ML) techniques can play a
substantial role in the simulations. For the model system
considered here, we took a very simple interaction form
U. In reality, of course, the potential profile inside a unit
cell is very complex and computing it for an arbitrary
position of the interstitial atom is computationally costly.
Fortunately, ML has been successfully used to generate
potential profiles much faster than using the traditional
ab initio methods.
For this work, all computations were performed using
julia [29].
The plots were made with Makie.jl pack-
age [30] using the color scheme designed for colorblind
readers [31]. The scripts used for computing and plotting
can be found at https://github.com/rodin-physics/cubic-
lattice-loss-diffusion.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A. R. acknowledges the support by Yale-NUS Col-
lege (through Start-up Grant). B. A. O. acknowledges
support from the M. J. Murdock Charitable Trust, and
from the the National Science Foundation through Grant
No. PHY-2418777. A. U. was supported by the Min-
istry of Education, Singapore, under its funding for the
Research Centre of Excellence Institute for Functional
Intelligence Materials, National University of Singapore
(I-FIM, project No.
EDUNC-33-18-279-V12) and by
the National Research Foundation, Singapore under its
AI Singapore Programme (AISG Award No:
AISG3-
RP-2022-028).
A. M. was supported by the Ministry
of Education, Singapore, under its funding for the Re-
search Centre of Excellence Institute for Functional In-
telligence Materials, National University of Singapore (I-
FIM, project No. EDUNC-33-18-279-V12).
[1] G. D. Mahan and W. L. Roth, Superionic Conductors,
1st ed. (Plenum Press, 1976).
[2] H. Mehrer, Diffusion in Solids, 1st ed. (Springer, 2007).
[3] J. C. Bachman, S. Muy, A. Grimaud, H. H. Chang,
N. Pour, S. F. Lux, O. Paschos, F. Maglia, S. Lupart,
P. Lamp, L. Giordano, and Y. Shao-Horn, Inorganic
solid-state electrolytes for lithium batteries: Mechanisms
and properties governing ion conduction, Chemical Re-
views 116, 140 (2016).
[4] A. Manthiram, X. Yu, and S. Wang, Lithium battery
chemistries enabled by solid-state electrolytes, Nat. Rev.
Mats. 2, 1 (2017).
[5] T. Famprikis, P. Canepa, J. A. Dawson, M. S. Islam,
and C. Masquelier, Fundamentals of inorganic solid-
