Swinging small quantum systems out of available values of control parameters
3
any g. Already at this level it is interesting to ask the question if it is possible to engineer
time evolution of the intensity g(t) such that two different ground states, i.e., the initial
|ini⟩= |Ψ0(g1)⟩and the target |tar⟩= |Ψ0(g2)⟩state, are connected (as fast as possible)
by unitary finite-time evolution determined by H(g(t)).
Formally this question can be
formulated as an optimization problem for finding the intensity g(t) maximizing the final
fidelity
F(g(t), T) = |⟨tar|T exp
"
−i
¯h
Z T
0 H(g(t))dt
#
|ini⟩|2,
(3)
where T is the time-ordering operator and T is the total duration. In our work, to calculate
resulting fidelity for a given g(t), we perform the time evolution of the state of the system
by solving the Schr¨odinger equation written in the basis of Fock states using the MATLAB
function ode45 which is based on the Runge-Kutta method.
At this point, it is important to mention that physically this kind of optimization is not
sufficiently well-defined since it still does not take into account experimental limitations on
control intensity g(t). For example, although it is mathematically possible, in practice, it is
not feasible to change the intensity arbitrarily fast. Typically, its amplitude is also limited
to some well-defined, experimentally accessible range. Therefore, we should consider these
limitations when constructing the control protocol. In the following, we assume that the
intensity g(t) can be easily changed only in some range g ∈[gA, gB]. From the physical
engineering point of view, the most interesting cases are of course those in which target
interaction g2 is essentially outside the range [gA, gB], i.e., when the target state cannot
be attained with any adiabatic-like protocol. To check these scenarios we consider three
substantially different accessible ranges: (i) g2 > gB = −gA; (ii) gA = 0, gB < g2; (iii)
−g2 < gA, gB = 0. Additionally, to avoid nonphysical rapid changes of the control parameter,
we introduce an additional parameter M encoding the number of equally spaced time points
in period T at which the value of g(t) is optimized. Between these points, the value of g(t)
is interpolated smoothly via cubic splines (standard interp1 function in MATLAB).
After setting up the optimization function F and the control protocol g(t), we now
employ the optimal control theory to optimize the fidelity F, to estimate the quantum
speed limit TQSL, and to obtain the optimal control field g(t). We wish to determine the
temporal shape of g(t) for which the final fidelity F(g(t), T), for a chosen physical limitation
established by gA and gB, is saturated as close to 1 as possible. To achieve this goal, we
optimize g(t) to obtain the maximal possible fidelity F(g(t), T) for a given T. Given T,
we gradually increase M and repeat the optimization.
In general, the fidelity obtained
converges upon increasing M. In such a case, the optimization for the given value of T is
stopped. Then we increase T and do the optimization with this given T. We repeat this
procedure until fidelity is saturated above a given threshold. The choice of the threshold
value F depends on the quantum system to be optimized, as well as the precision wished
to obtain. As the precision increases, in general, the total duration also has to be increased.
The minimal duration obtained numerically is a good approximation of the quantum speed
limit TQSL. In our approach, we choose the Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno method as
the optimization algorithm [26]. This method can be understood as a quasi-Newton method
