of theory, within the Q-Chem 5.4 package[61], with the aid of the maximum overlap
method (MOM)[21, 22] (see following section) to maintain the core–hole during the
DFT calculation. The ground state structural and charge transfer calculations of Fig.
3 were carried out with the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) [62], under
periodic boundary conditions and within the plane-wave projector augmented-wave
(PAW) method [63]. The Ag(111)-(2
√
3 × 2
√
3)R30°-C60 structures were optimized
using the local spin density approximation (LSDA) with a force tolerance of 0.01
eV˚A−1 and an electronic convergence criterion of 10−6 eV. The energy cut-off was
set to 500 eV, and a Monkhorst-Pack k-point grid of 3 × 3 × 1 was used to sample
the Brillouin zone. Electronic charges associated with individual atoms, utilized in
the calculations of charge transfer, were derived using Bader analysis[64]. The atomic
visualisations were generated using the Open Visualisation Tool (OVITO)[65]. As
described in the S.I., a variety of other DFT methods and adsorption geometries were
employed to determine the Ar-Ag(111) separation but each provided poorer agreement
with the NIXSW measurements than the LSDA approach.
The maximum overlap method (MOM).
The MOM provides an efficient approach for calculating excited states by modifying
the orbital selection step in the SCF procedure and targeting solutions with non-
Aufbau occupations from a ground state reference set of molecular orbitals[21, 66].
By employing a simple orbital overlap-based criterion, the MOM prevents the varia-
tional collapse to the lowest energy solution. The MOM begins with an initial set of
molecular orbitals (MOs) generated from the ground-state configuration of the sys-
tem. Excitations are then introduced by modifying the occupation patterns, typically
replacing one or more occupied orbitals with virtual orbitals. At each SCF iteration,
the MOM algorithm applies an overlap metric to select the occupied orbitals that are
most similar to the target orbitals from the previous iteration, guiding the SCF solver
towards the intended excited state. In this work, we first calculated the electronic
structure of Ar@C60 at the PBE/6-31++G** level of theory to identify the relevant
Ar-based 2p and 4s molecular orbitals.We then constructed an initial guess for the
target excited state of this system by promoting an electron from one of the occupied
Ar-based 2p molecular orbitals to the unoccupied Ar-based 4s molecular orbital. Sub-
sequently, we used the MOM to relax the occupied molecular orbitals while staying
as close as possible to the initial pattern.
Supplementary information.
An extensive Supplementary Information file cover-
ing the following aspects of the work is available: circumventing beam damage; valence
band photoemission for bulk Ar@C60; comparison of Ar 2p core-level photoemis-
sion and Ar 2p →4s X-ray absorption spectra; fitting Auger-Meitner decay spectra;
comparison of photoemission lineshapes for bulk and monolayer Ar@C60 samples;
Doniach-Sunjic asymmetry; raw on-resonance decay spectra for multilayer and mono-
layer Ar@C60 coverage; population analysis: Ar and C contributions to the excited
state; orbital symmetry decomposition; comparison with time-dependent DFT; rela-
tivistic considerations; Z+1 approximation and ground state K@C60; and additional
DFT calculations for determination of the Ar-Ag(111) separation.
14
