effects of disadvantageous environments on individual behavior when facing social
dilemmas, we introduce the advantageous environment into the individual’s payoff.
Individuals are endorsed with a fitness function on which the adaptive control mech-
anism operates (See Fig. 1). The fitness function for the focal agent i is defined as:
Fi =





pi,
if pi ≥¯pi,
(1 −µ)pi + µ¯pi,
if pi < ¯pi.
(7)
If the player performs better than their social peers, their fitness comes exclusively
from their own contribution. Otherwise, the adaptive control mechanism operates.
Then, the parameter µ (0 ≤µ ≤1) represents the coupling of the individual to its
social neighborhood or environment. If µ →0, again fitness comes mainly from the
individual’s own performance, but as µ →1, the importance of the advantageous
environment to the player’s fitness increases. In the limit µ = 1, the player’s fitness
depends exclusively on their neighborhood performance (fitness obtained through ad-
vantageous environment).
4. Strategy-resource exchange and update. A neighboring player j of the focal player
i is randomly selected, and their fitness Fj is determined as given by the previous
equation. Player i then attempts to propagate its strategy to j at a rate given by the
modified Fermi function:
W(i→j) =
ri
1 + exp((Fj −Fi)/k),
(8)
where k = 0.1 represents the noise effect in the strategy update process, also referred
to as the selection strength [47]. The term ri denotes the resource quantity of player
i. Regarding resource evolution, each player initially possesses one unit of resources.
When player i successfully propagates its strategy to neighbor j, it gains a fraction ε of
j’s resources, while player j loses an equal amount. Following previous studies [48, 49],
we set ε = 10% in our simulations unless otherwise specified. In case of a successful
strategy and resource exchange, they are consequently updated for the involved agents
and the dynamics proceeds again to the first step in the list (Game stage).
All Monte Carlo simulation results presented in this study are based on networks of sizes
ranging from 200 × 200 to 600 × 600 players. The final proportion of cooperators is measured
8
