128
The Path to aN3LO Parton Distributions
On the other hand, when MHOUs are included, fit quality becomes independent of perturbative
order within uncertainties. (note that, with Ndat = 4462, σχ2 = √2ndat = 0.03). This suggests
that the MHOU covariance matrix estimated through scale variation is correctly reproducing the
observed shift between perturbative orders, i.e. the true MHOU. Note that if true this also means
that at aN3LO the missing N3LO corrections to hadronic processes are correctly accounted for by
the corresponding MHOU which is always included. Also, at aN3LO the fit quality is the same
within uncertainties irrespective of whether MHOUs are included or not. This strongly suggests
that inclusion of higher order terms in perturbative evolution and DIS coefficient function would
not lead to further improvements, i.e. that in this respect, with experimental uncertainties,
current methodology and current dataset the perturbative expansion has converged.
4.3.2. Parton distributions
We now examine the NNPDF4.0 aN3LO parton distributions. We compare the NLO, NNLO
and aN3LO NNPDF4.0 PDFs, obtained without and with inclusion of MHOUs, in Fig. 4.17
and in Fig. 4.18 respectively. Specifically, we show the up, antiup, down, antidown, strange,
antistrange, charm and gluon PDFs at Q = 100 GeV, normalized to the aN3LO result, as
a function of x in logarithmic and linear scale. Error bands correspond to one sigma PDF
uncertainties, which do (MHOU sets) or do not (no MHOU sets) include MHOUs on all theory
predictions used in the fit. The PDF sets, with and without MHOUs, are the same used to
compute the values of the χ2 in Table 4.3.
The excellent perturbative convergence seen in the fit quality is also manifest at the level of
PDFs. In particular, the NNLO PDFs are either very close to or indistinguishable from their
aN3LO counterparts. Inclusion of MHOUs further improves the consistency between NNLO and
aN3LO PDFs, which lie almost on top of each other. This means that the NNLO PDFs are made
more accurate by the inclusion of MHOUs, and that the aN3LO PDFs have converged, in the
sense discussed above. Exceptions to this stability are the charm and gluon PDFs, for which
aN3LO corrections have a sizable impact. In the case of charm, they lead to an enhancement of
the central value of about 4% for x ∼0.05; in the case of gluon, to a suppression of about 2−3%
for x ∼0.005. In both cases, inclusion of MHOUs leads to an increase in PDF uncertainties by
about 1 −2%. This makes the NNLO and aN3LO charm PDFs with MHOUs compatible within
uncertainties, and the NNLO and aN3LO gluon PDFs with MHOU almost compatible.
Fig. 4.19 presents a comparison similar to that of Figs. 4.17 and 4.18 for the gluon-gluon, gluon-
quark, quark-quark, and quark-antiquark parton luminosities. These are shown integrated in
rapidity as a function of the invariant mass of the final state mX for a center-of-mass energy
√s = 14 TeV. Their definition follows Eq. (1.106).
As already observed for PDFs, perturbative convergence is excellent, and improves upon
inclusion of MHOUs. The NNLO and aN3LO results are compatible within uncertainties for
the gluon-quark, quark-quark, and quark-antiquark luminosities. Some are seen for the gluon-
gluon luminosity, consistent with the differences seen in the gluon PDF. Specifically, the aN3LO
