we note that that quantum communication systems might also find use as dual-purpose devices. For
example, as large-scale quantum sensors capable of vibrational sensing [522], which could also motivate
investment, development and deployment.
Compatibility. For over thirty years, the data capacity of fiber-optical communications has increased by a
factor of ten every four years. The demand for increased capacity has not subsided, leading to even more
optical intensity within the fibers as channel density increases. QKD will most likely need to coexist with
classical data transmission in the same telecommunications network infrastructure. Moreover, to avoid
loss of capacity, a QKD channel should not occupy much more bandwidth than a classical one. This
is a considerable challenge, since noise from Raman scattering of light from the classical data channel,
in which photons in the optical fiber are scattered inelastically, can contaminate a quantum signal. We
note that Raman noise is not such an issue for CV-QKD, since the local oscillator used in homodyne
detection acts as a mode filter, thus eliminating a large part of the Raman background [523, 524]. Several
methods have been proposed to mitigate this problem for DV-QKD. One method to minimize Raman
noise, demonstrated as early as 1997 [525], is to employ a quantum signal with shorter wavelength,
such as the telecommunications O-band (∼1260 −1360nm), with the classical channels in the C-band
(∼1530 −1565nm) or L-band (∼1565 −1625nm).
In this way, the Raman noise is less prevalent.
This approach has allowed QKD with keyrates of 4.5 kbps and 5.1 kbps for O-band quantum signals co-
propagating and counter-propagating with 3.6 Tbps C-band classical (∼21 dBm), over a 66km commercial
backbone network [526]. An MDI-QKD session was realized in a deployed link of about 25km, resulting
in a positive key rate with up to about 45dB of link loss, when the quantum signal (@1310nm) was
multiplexed with classical telecommunications signals at 10 Gb/s (@ 1550 nm) and 10Mb/s (∼1510
nm) [425]. Recently, a quantum link sending one O-band photon of an entangled pair through 47km of
fiber with 18dBm of classical signal (C-band) was demonstrated [527], also showing improved performance
for wavelengths less than 1300nm. A similar setup was recently used for quantum teleportation coexistent
with classical communications [528]. Despite the difficulties due to Raman noise, wavelength-division
multiplexing (WDM) has been used to implement QKD in C-band channels coexisting with 100Gb/s
the encrypted classical channel (C-band) in a metrolpolitan network [513]. A possible way to minimize
Raman noise is to use hollow-core fiber, which also reduces noise arising from nonlinear effects. Noise
reduction of roughly 35dBm compared to standard SMF28 fiber has been observed in QKD trials [529].
Another route for coexistence of classical and quantum signals is space division multiplexing (SDM),
where multiple spatial modes are used as communication channels. SDM, involving new types of optical
fiber, is currently seen as a necessary step to solve the current capacity crunch in optical fiber com-
munications [530]. Multi-core optical fibers contain several single-mode cores within the same cladding
material, and can be used to transmit independent classical and quantum signals [531–533]. Other types
of specialty fibers, such as few-mode fibers and ring-core fibers, can support multiple transverse modes,
which can each function as an independent channel. Propagation of quantum and classical signals in
these fibers is currently being investigated for future communications infrastructure [534, 108].
Concerning DI-QKD specifically, Raman noise presents a considerable obstacle for deployment in
commercial fibers along with classical data channels.
Quantum process tomography of the effect of
Raman noise on DV QKD protocols has shown that it can be accurately described by a depolarizing
channel for both co-propagating and counter-propagating signals [535], where the degree of depolarization
is a function of fiber link length. Since depolarization reduces and can destroy entanglement, it is most
likely that DI-QKD will require a dedicated standard fiber, or one of the more advanced noise-reduction
solutions involving specialty fiber mentioned above. The second observation that is typically made about
the compatibility concerns integration and interoperability with existing cybersecurity hardware and
protocols. In this regard, QKD has already been integrated with various cybersecurity protocols, including
IPSec, TLS, Kerberos, AES, etc, as briefly discussed above. We will further discuss interoperability in
the next section.
6.4.1. Standardization and Interoperability
In addition to the scientific and technical challenges of realizing QKD in real-world conditions, there is
also a need for coordinated effort towards standardization and interoperability to enable the integration
of QKD into practical security services [536]. As QKD is an evolving technology, there are additional
challenges ranging from immediate concerns, such as ensuring the security and interoperability of trusted
relay-based QKD networks to medium- and long-term considerations like the large-scale integration of
quantum and classical telecommunications networks, expanding the applications of QKD, and scaling up
the network using quantum repeaters. Moreover, the global deployment of QKD may employ multiple
types of links (fiber, free space) depending on the type of network and application [537].
78
