XXX:4
Israel et al.
Fig. 1. Large-scale synthetic electric grid models: (left) 500-Bus (footprint of South Carolina); (center) 2,000-
Bus (footprint of Texas); (right) 10,000-Bus (footprint of Western U.S.)
• the 2,000-bus case on the footprint of Texas: This case has 2,000 buses, 544 generators, 1,356
loads, and 2,345 transmission lines. It has a total of 1,250 substations. For this case, the
assumption made in this paper is that it has 20 utilities and 1 balancing authority.
• the 10,000-bus case on the footprint of the Western United States: This case has 10,000 buses,
2,485 generators, 4,899 loads, and 9,726 transmission lines. It has a total of 4,762 substations.
For this case, the assumption made in this paper is that it has 80 utilities and 20 balancing
authorities.
2.2
Cyber-Physical Models and Test Cases
Cyber-physical models not only aid in assessing system performance but also help evaluate the
impact of cyber threats on power system operations and the implementation of appropriate security
measures. Understanding network topologies and their implications for cyber-physical systems is
essential to ensuring the integrity and functionality of electrical power grids. As a result, various
cyber-physical models for power grid networks have been developed for research.
One common approach is to model the communication network using the electric grid test case
as a reference, resulting in similar topologies for both networks. This method was demonstrated in
[27], where a communication model was developed based on the IEEE 118-bus synthetic grid. In
that study, the communication network was represented as a graph, with substations as nodes and
communication lines as links, to analyze the impact of latency on Phasor Measurement Unit (PMU)
messages.
The study compared a centralized topology, where substations connect directly to a control center,
with a decentralized topology that includes an intermediate communication hub. The findings
indicated that the decentralized topology resulted in lower delays. The algorithm proposed in this
paper also generates both centralized and decentralized communication network topologies but
follows a different approach for connecting the hubs compared to [27].
A large-scale cyber-physical model for a power system is presented in [19]. That study models
the power grids of multiple European countries using a decentralized network topology, where
substation routers connect to intermediate communication hubs, which in turn link to a utility
control center. The model also incorporates network redundancy and identifies the most critical
