an extended (condensed phase or large cluster) system, requires a far too large number of degrees of freedom
(DoF) to brute-force simulate all of the electrons and ions, and a correspondingly large basis size per particle
to maintain fine resolution of the highly energetic core electrons. In particular, the extended system poses
the largest difficulty in a dynamical situation since a finite size approximation to a fully extended system,
even with periodic boundary conditions, needs to be large enough to model realistic physics, i.e. there must
be sufficient DoF to act as both a surface of a bulk material and a thermal bath for the catalytic reaction. A
full dynamical simulation of such a large number of degrees of freedom is prohibitively expensive even with
state-of-the-art current quantum Hamiltonian simulation techniques.
As a simple yet effective way of eliminating chemically less relevant electronic degrees of freedom, partic-
ularly those of the subsurface layers of the catalyst, is to employ pseudopotentials. Pseudopotential methods
are a mainstay in conventional quantum chemistry calculations [57, 58, 59]. The main idea is to replace
core electron degrees of freedom by an effective modification of the electron-ion interaction - the so-called
pseudopotential term. The number of removed electronic DoF is a partially tunable knob interpolating be-
tween an all-electron simulation, and one where all but the outermost valence electrons have been replaced
by an effective potential. For quantum algorithms, employing pseudopotentials reduces the complexity in
two ways: first, by reducing the number of electrons in the system; and secondly by reducing the number of
plane-waves needed for convergence since core electrons tend to have highly oscillatory wavefunctions that
are no longer required to be captured. A possible complication is whether we can efficiently implement the
new electron-interaction term on a quantum computer. The answer is affirmative, and Sec. 5 is devoted to
that analysis.
Pseudopotentials have been extensively used in classical algorithms for static electronic structure calcula-
tions, and most recently they have also been employed in quantum algorithms for the same problem [63, 29].
Here we extend the idea by generalizing pseudopotentials to quantum dynamical evolution, for which the
notion of a simple one-body potential is no longer applicable. We define a new object - a pseudoion - as
a point-like dynamical object constructed from combining chemically-inactive core electrons and a nucleus.
Specifically, for each atom I, we treat ηcore,I core electrons together with the positively charged nucleus (of
atomic number ZI) as a single ion with positive charge
ZPI
I
= ZI −ηcore,I.
(2)
In total, we have ηval = ηel−ηcore valence electrons, where ηcore = Pηion
I=1 ηcore,I. Note that here valence refers
to the residual electronic degrees of freedom, which is a parameter rather than a chemically defined property.
Hence, for each atom, electrons are divided into two sets - valence and core electrons. This modifies the
Hamiltonian into the following form,
HPI = −1
2
ηval
X
i=1
∇2
i −
ηion
X
I=1
1
2MI
∇2
I + 1
2
ηval
X
i̸=j
1
|ri −rj|
|
{z
}
same as Eq. (1), but only valence electrons
+1
2
ηion
X
I̸=J
ZPI
I ZPI
J
|RI −RJ|
|
{z
}
V PI
ion
+ V PI
el−ion,
(3)
where V PI
el−ion is a modified interaction term between the electrons and the newly-defined pseudoions, which,
as we shall see shortly, is constructed from a pseudopotential.
There are different classes of pseudopotentials, obtained by the procedures described in Refs. [58, 64, 65,
66, 60]. We follow the same kind of norm-conserving pseudopotentials recently introduced into quantum
algorithms [63, 29], specifically the HGH pseudopotentials [66, 60]. However, as stated earlier, we consider
the problem of simulating dynamics instead. To this end, crucially, we do not make the ubiquitous Born-
Oppenheimer approximation and consider both the electrons and pseudoions as dynamical and interacting
objects. Accordingly, we promote the pseudopotentials to operators on the full Hilbert space of electrons
and pseudoions as follows,
V PI
el−ion :=
ηion
X
I=1
Z
RI
V I
PP(RI) ⊗|R⟩⟨R|I
(4)
where V I
PP(RI) is the pseudopotential, i.e. the sum of potential energy terms imposed on electrons by the
ion labeled by I at position RI. For simplicity, we take the HGH form from Ref. [60], which expands the
8
