NOTES ON COLOR REDUCTIONS AND γ TRACES
OLIVER SCHNETZ
Abstract. We present efficient algorithms to calculate the color factors for the SU(N) gauge group
and to evaluate γ traces.
The aim of these notes is to give a self-contained, proved account of the
basic results with particular emphasis on color reductions. We fine tune existing algorithms to make
calculations at high loop orders possible.
1. Introduction
Yang-Mills quantum field theories (QFTs) feature combinatorial factors in the Feynman integrals which
come from the SU(N) color gauge group. The calculation of these color factors is explained in [3].
In QFTs with fermions, a first step in the calculation of a Feynman integral often is the evaluation of
the traces over the γ matrices which originate from fermion edges and from vertices. The evaluation of
these γ traces is explained in any textbook on QFT, see e.g. [5].
Today, one typically calculates to loop orders ≤5, where any implementation of these reductions is
sufficient, see e.g. [6, 4]. With the method of graphical functions [7, 2, 8, 9, 1] it may become possible to
tackle higher loop orders in certain setups. At loop orders ≥6 it becomes increasingly desirable to fine
tune the algorithms for color and γ reductions.
In these notes, we collect identities that are necessary to perform the reductions to high loop orders.
We include the proofs of all relevant results. Particular emphasis is on color reductions, where the proof
of the essential identity (Proposition 3) is not included in [3]. We also prove some additional results
about color reductions.
The suggested algorithms are implemented in the Maple package HyperlogProcedures. Typical color
reductions are more or less instant at relevant loop orders. The reduction of γ traces is slightly more
time-consuming, mostly because it can produce lengthy results at high loop orders. For example, using
HyperlogProcedures on a single core of an office PC, the average time for a γ reduction of a Feynman
graph that contributes to the photon propagator is approximately 2 minutes at six loops and 30 minutes
at seven loops.
Acknowlegements
The author is supported by the DFG-grant SCHN 1240/3-1. He thanks Sven-Olaf Moch for discussions
and encouragement. The author also thanks Simon Theil for generating the figures in this work.
2. Color reduction
2.1. The color graph. We follow the algorithm presented in [3], which is particularly simple in the case
of the group SU(N). The complex Lie-algebra of SU(N) is sl(N), the Lie-algebra of traceless matrices.
For any representation of sl(N), the commutator of the basis T i = (T i)ab is1
(1)
[T i, T j] = fijkT k =
N 2−1
X
k=1
fijkT k,
where we sum over repeated indices (Einstein’s sum convention). The structure constants fijk = (fi)kj
define an adjoint representation of sl(N).
By definition, the trace of T i vanishes,
(2)
T i
aa ≡
N
X
a=1
T i
aa = 0.
1In [3] fijk = iCijk. We do not see the necessity to pass to complex numbers. Euclidean QED and Yang-Mills theory
can be formulated in a real setup.
1
arXiv:2504.05853v1  [hep-ph]  8 Apr 2025
