14
through the search of zeros of the model’s partition function. For the fermions with different
spectra considered, a phase transition can occur only at T = 0. At the critical point zeros
of the partition function are in the range of real values k ∈Rd in the momentum space at
finite volume V . The manifold of those zeros at T = 0 defines the (d −1)-dimensional FS.
It defines the surface of quantum criticality, and its appearance or restructuring constitutes
a quantum (Lifshitz) phase transition. Appearance of such a membrane in the momentum
space [30] breaks its initial symmetry, and as a consequence gapless excitations around the
FS appear as well, which is a hallmark of metallic phase.
As an exactly solvable simplified version of the dimerized spin-1
2 Heisenberg ladder in
transverse magnetic field, we studied the spinless fermions on a two-leg ladder. This tight-
binding one-dimensional model has the ground state properties consistent with the general
plateau theorem and, an addition, it undergoes a gapless-to-gapless Lifshitz transition within
the IC (metallic) phase. Analysis of the Lee-Yang zeros in this 1d model is conveniently
done when the wavenumbers from the BZ are mapped onto a unit circle in the complex
plane. From that analysis we get the information about gapped and gapless phases, by
tracing positions of zeros with respect to the unit circle. In particular, the number of the
Fermi points and its doubling at the Lifshitz transitions is read off from the number of
the roots sitting on the unit circle. The analytical expressions for the Lee-Yang zeros yield
directly various thermodynamic parameters (e.g., characteristic lengths, particle density,
susceptibilities).
The result derived for the ladder (cf. Eq. (A28) in the Appendix, reproduced below for
convenience)
¯n = 1 −1
4π(arg z+ −arg z−) ,
relating the average occupation number to the Lee-Yang zeros z± is suggestive: it implies
that for a gapless (metallic) phase we can do a little better than just count the number
of the Fermi points (Lee-Yang zeros) on the different sides of the Lifshitz transition, but
rather introduce a continuous (order) parameter which quantifies this phase in terms of the
“depth” of its Fermi sea. Following this logic, the order parameter P for the gapless metallic
phase relating it to the d-volume of the Fermi sea in the momentum space is introduced.
To cross-check consistency of this proposal we analysed the free d-dimensional fermions
for d = 1, 2, 3 with the Dirac and non-relativistic spectra. We demonstrate that for all
models considered, the properties of P are consistent with the scaling of other physical
parameters, like correlation length, the IC (Friedel) oscillation wavelength, compressibility,
and the entanglement. Taking the global entanglement (or entanglement entropy) S as a
zero-temperature counterpart of the thermodynamic entropy, we introduced the entangle-
ment capacity which has the critical properties of the specific heat with the critical index α.
It is shown that the value of α obtained from our scaling analysis agrees with the available
results for entanglement. Also, all the scaling and hyperscaling relations for critical indices,
known from the theory of quantum phase transitions, are shown to be satisfied. The Lifshitz
transition related the appearance or restructuring of the FS is found to be of the third kind
in three and two spatial dimensions, and it is of the second kind with divergent susceptibil-
ities in one dimension. The scaling indices and the third order of transition we found for
d = 3 agree with the original result due to Lifshitz [18], reported for a generic spectrum
(i.e., for a generic FS).
The address the important role of interactions, two paradigmatic examples of interacting
gapless fermionic systems (Tomonaga-Luttinger and Fermi liquids) are analyzed. Using the
Luttinger theorem along with other known results obtained by the methods of quantum field
theory, RG, bosonization, it is shown that the stable Landau Fermi liquid belongs to the
same universality class (defined by the critical indices) as the free Fermi gas in d = 2, 3. In
