12
FIG. 6. Schematic of an atomic force microscope (AFM). An AFM
creates images by moving a cantilever with a sharp tip across a sam-
ple’s surface. As the tip makes contact with the surface, it bends the
cantilever, altering the amount of laser light reflected detected by a
photodiode. To maintain a consistent signal, the cantilever’s height
is adjusted, causing the measured cantilever height to follow the sur-
face topology.
urable magnonics in ASI.
VI.
EXPERIMENTAL METHODS AND KEY FINDINGS IN
2D ASI
In this section, we provide a broad overview of stan-
dard experimental methods to probe both the ASI microstate
(Sec. VI A) and the resulting dynamics (Sec. VI B). We will
also review key experimental findings focusing on 2D sys-
tems.
A.
Static Magnetic Characterization
1.
Scanning Probe Characterization
Several methods have been developed for imaging magnetic
structures with varying sensitivities on different lateral length
scales. These methods are broadly categorized into beam- and
scanning probe-based techniques. Among the scanning probe-
based techniques, magnetic force microscopy (MFM) is par-
ticularly notable for its extensive use in locally characteriz-
ing magnetic nanostructures and imaging the magnetic field
distribution at the surface of magnetic materials130–133. This
technique is based on atomic force microscopy (Fig. 6) and
relies on probing the long-range magnetostatic force between
the magnetic sample and a magnetically coated tip, which is
positioned at a constant height above the sample surface. The
MFM procedure involves two main steps as shown in Fig. 7.
First, the surface topography is obtained using the standard
atomic force microscopy (AFM) in tapping mode, which ex-
ploits van der Waals interactions between the tip and the sam-
ple (Fig. 7 - left). The schematic in Fig. 6 shows the basic prin-
ciple of atomic force microscopy. A cantilever with a sharp
tip approaches the surface of the sample which is placed on a
x −y piezo stage. A laser beam is focused on the back side
of the cantilever and reflected onto a position sensitive pho-
todetector. As the AFM tip scans over the sample having with
FIG. 7. Schematic of the standard two-pass MFM mode: In the first
pass (left), the topography of the sample is detected by tapping mode
atomic force microscopy in which the amplitude of the cantilever’s
oscillation is controlled in feedback loop that varies the tip-sample
distance. In the second pass (right), the cantilever is lifted away from
the sample surface (lift height) in order to map the long range interac-
tions, and the phase change of the oscillating cantilever is measured
at a constant tip-sample separation.
height variations, the deflection of the cantilever changes and,
hence, the position of the laser spot on the photodetector will
also move. A controlled feedback loop ensures a constant tip-
sample interaction during the scanning to obtain high resolu-
tion images. In the next step, a second scan is performed with
the tip lifted away from the sample, such that van der Waals
interactions are negligible, and the tip experiences only long-
range magnetic and electrostatic interactions (Fig. 7 - right).
During this scan, the initial topography profile is repeated at a
constant probe–sample separation to obtain the phase change
of the oscillating cantilever. One of the key advantages of
MFM is its high spatial resolution (down to ∼10 nm)134, sen-
sitivity (∼10 pN)135, and its ability to operate at different
temperatures and magnetic fields for studying magnetization
processes136.
As described earlier, the long-range interactions (i.e., force
gradients) are measured in MFM between the magnetic tip
and the magnetic sample. These interactions are recorded in
the second pass by measuring the shift in frequency (∆ω), am-
plitude (∆A) or phase (∆α) with respect to the initial parame-
ters (ω0 , A0 and α0, respectively) of the oscillating cantilever.
However, ∆α is the most commonly used representation of
the magnetic contrast in the second pass of MFM.
When there are no interactions between the tip and the sam-
ple, the oscillating probe can be modeled as a point-mass
spring. In this case, its behavior can be defined by a classic
non-linear, second-order differential equation based on New-
ton’s second law of motion137. The resonant frequency of the
cantilever is given by
ω0 =
r
k
m,
(14)
where k is the spring constant and m is the effective mass.
When the cantilever is excited sinusoidally at a frequency ω,
the tip oscillates sinusoidally with a corresponding amplitude
A and exhibits a phase shift α with respect to the drive signal
applied to the piezoelectric actuator. The equation of motion
describing the output from the cantilever sensor is given by
