Intertwining Josephson and Vortex Topologies in Conventional Superconductors
Zhuo Chen,1, ∗Jiangxu Li,1, ∗Lun-Hui Hu,1, 2 Zhen Bi,3 and Rui-Xing Zhang1, 4, †
1Department of Physics and Astronomy, The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA
2Center for Correlated Matter and School of Physics, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3Department of Physics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA
4Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA
Recent experimental advances have unveiled promising evidence of vortex-bound Majorana quasi-
particles in multiple superconducting compounds. However, theoretical progress in understanding
these phenomena, especially from ab initio approaches, has been limited by the computational com-
plexity of simulating vortex structures.
To bridge this gap, we introduce the Josephson–vortex
correspondence (JVC), a theoretical framework that systematically maps the bound-state topologi-
cal properties of vortices to those of π-phase Josephson junctions in the same superconductor. This
correspondence allows vortex phase diagrams to be constructed directly from Josephson junction
calculations, thereby eliminating the need for large-scale vortex calculations. We demonstrate the
validity and predictive power of JVC across a variety of effective models, and further extend the
framework to the first-principles level. Applying our approach to 2M-WS2 and Sr3SnO, we identify
them as realistic, doping-tunable platforms for realizing vortex Majorana zero modes. Our theory
will pave the way for ab initio Majorana material discovery and design.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Topological principles in quantum condensed matters
can enable exotic quasiparticle excitations that are oth-
erwise unattainable [1–5]. For instance, Majorana zero
modes (MZMs), a class of non-Abelian quasiparticles,
are predicted to exist in topological superconductors
(TSCs) with unconventional pairing symmetries [6–11].
These MZMs hold transformative potential for quan-
tum technologies [12].
While definitive proof of TSCs
remains elusive [13], zero-bias peaks (ZBP) in the tun-
neling spectroscopy have been observed inside Abrikosov
vortices of multiple 3D s-wave superconductors with a
trivial ground-state topology, including FeTe1−xSex [14–
17], (Li0.84Fe0.16)OHFeSe [18], 2M-WS2 [19, 20], and
LiFeAs [21–23]. These ZBPs are often interpreted as sig-
natures of vortex-bound MZMs, but the definitive exis-
tence of such modes remains debated.
The identification of the above compounds follows a
key insight: the presence of a normal-state Dirac surface
state is considered crucial for the emergence of vortex
MZMs, as first highlighted by Fu and Kane in the con-
text of superconducting topological insulators (TIs) [24].
While the Fu-Kane paradigm has been instrumental in
shaping our understanding of vortex MZMs, real-world
superconductors, such as those discussed here, invariably
feature bulk Fermi pockets that facilitate Cooper pair-
ing instabilities [25].
These low-energy metallic bands
can obscure the surface states and potentially influence
the fate of vortex MZMs, complicating the direct appli-
cation of the Fu-Kane theory [26–29]. Moreover, while
the observation of a ZBP is necessary, it is not suffi-
cient to definitively identify MZMs experimentally. For
∗These authors contributed equally to this work
† ruixing@utk.edu
instance, near-surface impurities bind low-energy vor-
tex states that effectively mimic the phenomenology of
MZMs, leading to potential false positives [30]. These
theoretical and experimental challenges underscore the
difficulties in conclusively interpreting the nature of ZBP
signals in these systems.
Recent theoretical advances have introduced an alter-
native bulk perspective for understanding the origin of
vortex MZMs, viewing vortex lines in 3D type-II su-
perconductors as effective 1D class-D nanowires. Along
these “nanowires”, Caroli–de Gennes–Matricon (CdGM)
bound states necessarily form and disperse [31]. If these
1D CdGM states acquire topologically nontrivial char-
acteristics, MZMs will emerge as boundary modes at
the ends of the vortex line [32]. This vortex-line topol-
ogy (VLT) framework directly quantifies the condition
for realizing vortex MZMs, without requiring the disen-
tanglement of surface and bulk contributions. However,
evaluating VLT through vortex simulations presents sig-
nificant computational challenges, as the vortex geom-
etry breaks all in-plane translational symmetries, sub-
stantially increasing computational complexity. Conse-
quently, VLT studies to date have been largely limited
to effective k · p or tight-binding models with idealized,
often unrealistic, parameters, leaving their applicability
to real-world materials in question.
The overarching goal of this work is to enable VLT
characterization at the first-principles level, while over-
coming the numerical challenges discussed earlier. Our
approach is driven by a key geometric insight: a vortex
line can be smoothly deformed into a pair of perpendicu-
lar π-phase Josephson junctions. By focusing on a single
π-junction, or a “halved” vortex, we observe the emer-
gence of 2D dispersing Andreev bound states within the
bulk pairing gap. Similar to CdGM modes, these An-
dreev states can, in principle, develop emergent topolog-
ical features through sub-gap band inversions. We refer
arXiv:2504.07066v1  [cond-mat.supr-con]  9 Apr 2025
