simulation and data. These discrepancies involve the production kinematics of the B0
s
meson, the occupancy of the detector, and the efficiencies related to tracking and particle
identification.
4
Candidate selection
The candidate selection used in this analysis is identical to that in Ref. [18]. Online,
candidates are selected from events that are either triggered at hardware level by an
electron with large transverse energy, with a threshold in the range 2.4–3.0 GeV, or by
particles from the event that do not form part of the signal candidate. In the software
trigger, events are selected if they contain at least one reconstructed track with large
transverse momentum and a significant impact parameter (IP) with respect to every
proton-proton collision vertex (PV) in the bunch-crossing event. Two or more tracks are
required to form a vertex that is displaced from every PV and fulfills a set of topological
criteria [37,38].
Offline, B0
s →ϕe+e−candidates are formed by combining e+ and e−with K+ and K−
candidates. The electrons and kaons are required to have a significant IP with respect
to every PV and fulfil a set of particle identification criteria. The kaon pair is required
to have a mass within ±12 MeV/c2 of the known ϕ meson mass [39]; this narrow mass
window suppresses many potential sources of misidentified background. The resulting
B0
s candidate vertex is required to have a good vertex-fit quality and to be significantly
displaced from every PV. The B0
s candidate is required to be consistent with originating
from a PV by requiring a small B0
s IP and good alignment between the B0
s momentum
and displacement vectors.
Combinatorial background, formed by tracks from two or more different b-hadron
decays, is suppressed using a boosted decision tree classifier [40]. The classifier is trained
using simulated signal decays, generated with a SM-like distribution in q2 and the decay
angles, and a background sample comprised of candidates from an upper m(K+K−e+e−)
sideband. The classifier uses kinematic and topological information that is characteristic
of the signal decay. The classifier working point is chosen separately for each q2 region. A
second multivariate classifier is trained for the high-q2 region to reject background involving
poorly reconstructed electron candidates. This classifier is trained on simulated samples
and uses kinematic information as well as information related to the bremsstrahlung
recovery procedure.
There are relatively few specific background sources that the selection criteria does not
suppress to negligible levels. Potential background from decays with similar topologies,
e.g. from B0 →K∗0e+e−decays where the K∗0 meson decays to K+π−, is suppressed by
the narrow ϕ mass window and particle identification requirements applied to the kaon
candidates.2 Background from semileptonic B0
s →D−
s (→ϕπ−)e+νe decays, where the
negative pion is mistakenly identified as an electron, is removed by rejecting candidates
where the ϕe−mass is consistent with that of a D−
s meson, where a relatively broad range
[1920, 2000] MeV/c2 is vetoed to account for the misidentification. Background from doubly
semileptonic B0
s →D−
s (→ϕe−νe)e+νe decays cannot be fully suppressed and is accounted
for in the fits. Sources of potential background from other partially reconstructed decays
typically involve either a kaon or multiple particles that are not reconstructed, and typically
2The inclusion of charge conjugate processes is implied when discussing backgrounds.
5
