Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Figure S5: Training loss versus training epochs (left), loss of validation versus training epochs
(middle) and Temporal loss versus training epochs (right).
Table S4: Correlation between Predicted and True Latent Physical Quantities.
Latent Physical Quantities
Correlation (PINP)
Correlation (HelmFluid)
ux
0.9017
0.8891
uy
0.9109
0.8997
p
0.8984
-
constraint reaches a value of zero, demonstrating that we can effectively bound the temporal loss in
||c(x, t + 1) −c(x, t)||2
2, preventing it from degrading into:
LTemporal(x, t) = ||c(x, t′) −c(x, t)||2
2.
(S9)
As shown in Figure S5 (middle), the test metrics of validation decrease rapidly with the increase in
training epochs and then level off. In a sense, the physical constraints and temporal constraints act
as a form of regularization, providing some resistance to overfitting.
D
DISCUSSION ON LATENT PHYSICAL QUANTITIES
In this section, we will compare our estimated latent physical quantities with the baselines and
provide a detailed explanation.
Since the HelmFluid model is capable of estimating the velocity field (but not the pressure field), we
considered it a relevant comparison for our method. The comparative results of correlation on the
estimated latent physical quantities are shown in Table S4. We can see that our estimation subpasses
that of HelmFluid.
Additionally, it’s important to note that due to the unknown physical scale (since only the grayscale
video sequences of the concentration field are provided as the training data), our estimated velocity
fields and the true values have a scaling relationship, expressed as follows:
ˆu = αu,
(S10)
where α is a scaling constant related to the actual physical scale. When only concentration videos are
available, we cannot determine the exact physical scale of the region represented in the video (e.g.,
the scale may lie in any range such as from 10 cm to 1 m in the smoke dataset). This uncertainty
introduces a constant factor difference between the predicted and true values.
Thus, directly computing the MSE might be inappropriate. To address this, we considered two
methods for calibration:
- Case 1: Using the true initial velocity values (assumed known a priori) to compute α.
- Case 2: Using just one true data point to estimate α.
We then apply the computed α to correct the estimated results (note that HelmFluid also requires
calibration). The calibrated MSE values are shown in Table S5.
20
