1
Introduction
The advancement of our understanding of fundamental physics at high energies necessarily relies
on a detailed comparison between experimental measurements and theoretical predictions based
on first-principles quantum field theory. At the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), this approach
has consistently demonstrated its utility and efficiency over the years. It is therefore essential to
recognize that advancements in fundamental physics at the LHC can only be achieved through
the simultaneous improvement of experimental measurements and the development of precision
computations. For the latter, it has proven particularly beneficial to systematically monitor the
level of precision required to fully exploit the available experimental data. In this context, the
so-called Les Houches wishlist, motivated by the bi-annual workshops at Les Houches on physics
at TeV colliders, has been invaluable over the years.
In the first part of the document, some selected topics related to fixed-order techniques
and calculations as well as related phenomenological studies are briefly highlighted.
This is
followed by what constitutes the main part of the document, the precision wishlist of Standard
Model calculations. The present edition builds on the previous ones and in particular the one
of the 2021 edition [1]. For each process, the state of the art as of Ref. [1] is briefly summarised,
followed by an overview of the progress that has been made since then. Given the rapid and
continuous progress in the field of precision calculations, this summary is bound to be incomplete
and we apologize for any omissions.1 While the whishlist has served as a useful resource for
both theorists and experimentalists as a summary of the current stat-of-the-art calculations, it
does not constitute a comprehensive review on the topic of precision calculations. We instead
refer to dedicated reviews [2–6] for in-depths discussions.
2
Higher-order techniques
While the years before the Les Houches 2021 report [1] had been marked by significant progress in
the production of NNLO results in an almost industrial manner with most useful 2 →2 processes
having been calculated, the last two years have seen a saturation due to the unavailability of
2-loop amplitudes beyond 2 →2 scattering.
However, remarkable progress was achieved in
this direction by several groups and approaches culminating in the first 2 →3 calculations of a
hadron collider process. Closely related is the huge progress in the calculation of 2-loop 5-point
amplitudes, as well as 2-loop amplitudes for 2 →2 processes involving internal masses. For a
review of some recent developments see also Ref. [3].
However, it is not only the amplitude community that has seen impressive development.
There have also been significant steps forward on the side of subtraction schemes, and there are
in the meanwhile several subtraction and slicing methods available to deal (in principle) with
higher-multiplicity processes at NNLO (see below).
On the parton shower side, NLO QCD matched results and matrix element improved multi-
jet merging techniques have become a standard level of theoretical precision. The automation of
full SM corrections including NLO electroweak predictions has also seen major improvements.
Another challenge is to make the NNLO 2 →2 predictions or complex NLO predictions
publicly available to experimental analyses, and there has been major progress to achieve this
goal. Root nTuples have been a useful tool for complicated final states at NLO and allow for
very flexible re-weighting and analysis. More recently a similar approach was put forward at
NNLO dubbed HighTEA [7]. The cost for these approaches is the large disk space required to
store the event information.
Finally, the application of APPLgrid [8], fastNLO [9], and PineAPPL [10] interpolation
1The knowledge cutoff for this wishlist is 31st December 2024, we also remind the reader of the Les Houches
Disclaimer: never attribute to malice that which is adequately explained by incompetence.
3
