arXiv:2504.06009v1  [math.OC]  8 Apr 2025
Linear time-and-space-invariant relaxation systems
Tihol Ivanov Donchev1,
Brayan M. Shali1,
Rodolphe Sepulchre1,2
Abstract— This paper generalizes the physical property of
relaxation from linear time-invariant (LTI) to linear time-and-
space-invariant (LTSI) systems. It is shown that the deﬁning
features of relaxation—complete monotonicity, passivity, and
memory-based storage—carry over seamlessly to the spatio-
temporal domain. An LTSI system is shown to be of relaxation
type if and only if its associated spatio-temporal Hankel
operator is cyclically monotone. This implies the existence of
an intrinsic quadratic storage functional deﬁned uniquely by
past inputs, independently of any state-space realization. As in
the LTI case, LTSI relaxation systems are shown to be those
systems for which the state-space concept of storage coincides
with the input-output concept of fading memory functional.
I. INTRODUCTION
Relaxation systems have recently received renewed atten-
tion in systems and control theory due to their relevance in
structured optimal control, circuit synthesis, and modeling
of physical and biological processes [1], [2], [3], [4], [5].
Yet, existing literature mostly addresses relaxation from a
purely temporal perspective. Many real-world applications—
particularly in distributed-parameter systems governed by
partial differential equations—require a framework that also
accounts for spatial variations. In this paper, we propose such
an extension, generalizing the classical theory of linear time-
invariant (LTI) relaxation systems to systems that depend on
both time and space. Speciﬁcally, we address systems that
are also spatially invariant, resulting in a linear time-and-
space-invariant (LTSI) system.
In the LTI setting, the relaxation property admits two
classical characterizations [6]. From a state-space viewpoint,
relaxation systems are (internally) reciprocal and passive,
containing only one type of energy storage element. From
an input-output perspective, relaxation systems correspond
to convolution operators whose impulse responses are com-
pletely monotone, i.e., their memory decays monotonically
and without a hint of oscillation. The recent work [3] shows
that relaxation can be characterized as cyclic monotonicity
of the Hankel operator. The cyclic monotonicity of the
Hankel operator implies the existence of an intrinsic storage
functional uniquely determined by past inputs alone. The
latter is consistent with Willems’ notion of storage, hence
this result identiﬁes relaxation systems as those systems for
∗The research leading to these results has received funding from
the European Research Council under the Advanced ERC Grant Agree-
ment SpikyControl n.101054323. Email: tiholivanov.donchev@kuleuven.be,
brayan.shali@kuleuven.be, rodolphe.sepulchre@kuleuven.be.
1Department of Electrical Engineering (ESAT), KU Leuven, KasteelPark
Arenberg 10, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium.
2Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Trumpington-
Street, Cambridge CB2 1PZ, United Kingdom.
which the state-space notion of storage coincides with the
input-output notion of memory.
More recently, these ideas have been extended to the
nonlinear setting. Building on the state-space notions of
reciprocity and passivity, [5] deﬁnes nonlinear relaxation
systems as gradient systems with a Hessian Riemannian
metric satisfying both reciprocity and passivity conditions,
thus ensuring energy dissipation without oscillatory behavior.
An alternative deﬁnition is provided in [4], where nonlinear
relaxation systems are characterized from an input-output
perspective as fading memory operators with completely
monotone impulse responses. This characterization relies on
the universal approximation property of nonlinear fading
memory operators [7], which shows that a nonlinear fading
memory operator can be uniformly approximated by an LTI
system composed with a nonlinear static readout. The input-
output characterization introduced in [4] is consistent with
the state-space deﬁnition of [5] in the sense that the former
can be seen as a special case of the latter.
In this paper, we show that the deﬁning features of
relaxation—complete monotonicity, passivity, and memory-
based storage—carry over seamlessly to the spatio-temporal
domain. Speciﬁcally, we prove that an LTSI system is of
relaxation type precisely when its spatio-temporal Hankel
operator is cyclically monotone. As such, the latter is the
gradient of a closed convex functional deﬁned uniquely by
past inputs alone. This establishes a direct link between the
internal (state-space) and external (input-output) perspectives
on energy storage. The results are illustrated throughout this
paper with the diffusion equation as a canonical example of
spatio-temporal relaxation.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, we discuss how diffusion is a natural example
of spatio-temporal relaxation. Section III contains notation
and preliminaries. In Section IV, we deﬁne and characterize
(internal) relaxation for LTSI systems. In Section V, we
show that internal relaxation implies impedance passivity
with storage that is determined from the external behaviour.
In Section VI, we formalize the connection between inter-
nal and external by establishing properties of the Hankel
operator of an LTSI relaxation system. Finally, Section VII
summarizes our ﬁndings and discusses directions for further
work.
II. DIFFUSION AND RELAXATION
In this section, we will demonstrate that the diffusion
process is a natural example of spatio-temporal relaxation.
Historically, the relaxation property was ﬁrst studied system-
atically in electrical circuits composed exclusively of one
