PAGIONO
An ionospheric activity index
Dr.Paul.Kinsler@physics.org
Appendix: Supplementary Material:
LdT: A new index of ionospheric activity based on
GNSS-derived rates of change in TEC
Paul Kinsler, Biagio Forte
Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering
University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, United Kingdom
Appendix: A. Code and data processing
The code is a combination of (bash) shell scripts and
python3 code with minimal dependencies. The bash scripts
are mainly used for workflow management - i.e. supervising
the running of the python code with suitable arguments and in
the right order - but also is used with (e.g.) unix stream editing
tools to extract basics like satellite and ground station names,
and data timestamps from data and configuration files. The
python codes generally handle the more sophisticated opera-
tions, making heavy use of its list comprehension abilities to
filter and sort large lists to find and step-through appropriate
subsets. Output data is saved in a custom (but fairly generic)
space-separated text format, so that conversion of output into
other formats is simple.
The main processing steps proceed as follows:
1.
Downloads
RINEX files containing 30 second interval data are down-
loaded as hourly or daily sets from CDDIS [39]. This typi-
cally provides data from over 300 ground stations distributed
around the world. However, RINEX data from other sources
can also be processed.
2.
File conversion
To simplify processing we convert the downloaded RINEX
files into simpler (but less compact) lists, and extract some
summary information such as lists of reporting ground sta-
tion, their locations, the satellites that were seen, and so on.
The code can automatically extract all observation (receive)
times from the data, but usually we use the 30 second obser-
vation interval to directly construct a list of all possible ob-
servation times. A summary of GLONASS sideband usage
is also compiled, as precise frequencies are needed later for
cycle-slip detection.
Some of these conversions fail due to corrupted RINEX
data, so the code is written to be as tolerant as possible of
such complications.
3.
Satellite trajectory prediction
Given the list of observation times, we calculate each seen
satellite’s position at that time. Since this is a complicated pro-
cesss, we have checked the positions predicted by our codes
against those computed by gLAB [46] from the same navi-
gation data. For GPS, GALILEO, Beidou, and GLONASS
satellites, we see negligible differences when predictions are
compared.
4.
Ionosphere intersections
Here we assume a spherical Earth, and a thin shell-like
ionosphere at 350km. Since the spatial and temporal reso-
lution eventually used is rather coarse, any discrepancies due
to these simplifying assumptions are negligible.
With these assumptions, the computation of the line of
sight (LOS) intersections between each possible satellite and
ground station pair is a simple exercise in geometry. To en-
sure we can later correct for the LOS angle as it intersectes
the ionosphere, as well as keep track of any horizon-skimming
recieve events, we record its cosine in the resulting data files.
5.
Observations
Matching up the LOS intersections with the received data
is simply a process of correlating the LOS markers of time,
satellite, and station with those in the converted RINEX ob-
servation files. This step is, however, one of the more compu-
tationally demanding ones.
6.
Checking
Since we intend to compute and use TEC values from these
observations, we also filter the data to remove cycle slips with
an implementation of the Melbourne-Wubbena algorithm. In
addition, we also remove short data lines (since we need at
least two matched code-signals in different frequency bands),
and isolated detections (since we are only interested in differ-
ences).
The rejected observation lines are stored separately from
the acceptable ones, and can be use to e.g. plot or tabulate the
number of cycle slip events.
7.
TEC computations
Here we compute the slant TEC from every possible pair
of code-matched signals in different frequency bands, i.e. not
just L1C and L2C but all of the thirty or so possibilities, which
are listed on Table III. This simply requires measured phase
data by signal band and coding, signal frequencies, and the
the standard formula from (1).
8.
dTEC values (“events”)
Having computed the slant TEC, we then follow each
station-satellite pair and use the TEC’s change in time over the
30s observation interval to compute its time derivative (dTEC)
in TEC units-per-second. Note that since satellites are moving
above the Earth’s surface, no two TEC estimates ever corre-
spond to exactly the same intersection point with the iono-
sphere, but (as above) since our analysis is coarse-grained in
space – not going beneath 1-by-1 degree pixels – this motion
i
