Multilevel Quantum Rabi Models
Tabitha Doicin
School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Nottingham, University Park,
Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK
Andrew D. Armour
School of Physics and Astronomy and Centre for the Mathematics and Theoretical
Physics of Quantum Non-Equilibrium Systems, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK
Tommaso Tufarelli
School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Nottingham, University Park,
Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK
Abstract.
The quantum Rabi model, which describes the interaction between a
simplified atom and a mode of the electromagnetic field, is a cornerstone of modern
quantum optics.
One of the key assumptions of the model is that the ‘atom’ is a
perfect two-level system. We explore what happens when one generalizes the atom to
a multilevel system, with m ground and n excited states coupled to the same field. We
focus on the case where the excited and ground states form distinct, well-separated,
manifolds of near-degenerate levels (so that the spacing between the excited states on
a given manifold is much less than the average spacing between the manifolds) and
consider either uniform or random couplings between the individual ground and excited
levels. We find that the system reduces approximately to a direct sum of Rabi models
with a range of different couplings. Importantly, the strongest coupling is enhanced
in a way that depends on the number of levels, for the simple case where n = m, the
coupling scales with n for uniform couplings and 2√n for random couplings (in the
limit of large n). Our work thus suggests that multilevel Rabi systems could provide an
attractive alternative route to accessing regimes of very strong coupling in light-matter
systems.
1. Introduction
The quantum Rabi model (QRM) is the simplest fully quantum mechanical model of
light-matter interaction. It comprises a 2-level atom interacting with a single mode field.
Although originally described decades ago [1], an analytic solution was only obtained in
2011 [2] and the QRM remains a topic of very active research [3–8]. A key focus of work
on the QRM has been the exploration of regimes where the atom and field become very
strongly coupled [3–7,9], so that a rotating wave approximation (leading to the much
arXiv:2504.05916v1  [quant-ph]  8 Apr 2025
