Similarly, the zonally-averaged atmospheric circulations for the fixed-SST experiments are shown
in Figure 2. The circulation in the control run (Fig. 2, panel a) is quite similar to that in the
interactive-SST experiment. As expected, we observe a similar transition to equatorial superrota-
tion (Fig. 2, panel b). However, the jet is weaker than in the interactive SST experiments, suggesting
the existence of a positive feedback between surface temperature and the strength of the jet. This
could be part of a self-sustaining mechanism for superrotation, should this positive feedback be
strong enough to counterbalance damping in a setup with more typical forcings such as due to
increases in CO2 concentrations or SST. The changes in the mean meridional circulation are also
weaker, as relatively large circulation cells subsist at all latitudes. However, the direct cell in each
hemisphere no longer resembles a Hadley cell, as it moves poleward by about 10◦and weakens
roughly by a factor of 3. In each hemisphere, a new indirect cell arises between the direct cell and
the equator in the lower half of the atmosphere, while a weak direct cell subsists aloft. Like in the
interactive-SST case, the Ferrell cells move poleward and decrease substantially in intensity.
b. Surface temperature
Figure 3 shows the zonally- and time-averaged surface temperature profiles for the control run
(𝐹0 = 0 m.s-1.day-1) and in a forced superrotating state (𝐹0 = 4 m.s-1.day-1) for the simulations with
a slab ocean. We first note that the control run is relatively warm compared to the real Earth system,
particularly in the tropics, and has a strong equator-to-pole surface temperature gradient. These
features of our idealized experiments are likely related to prescribing a relatively small, spatially
uniform albedo and to the lack of a seasonal cycle for insolation, which leads to warmer tropics
and colder polar regions. The globally-averaged surface temperature is nevertheless comparable
to similar aquaplanet experiments (Hilgenbrink and Hartmann 2018, e.g.).
In the superrotating state, surface temperature increases almost everywhere. The largest changes
are in the mid-latitudes (between 30 and 70◦) and in the deep tropics (between 0 and 10◦). In the
subtropics (around 20◦), the surface temperature changes induced by forced superrotation almost
vanish.
The globally-averaged surface temperature increases by 3 K, a temperature response
comparable to that induced by a doubling of the atmospheric CO2 concentration (Forster et al.
2021). This result is remarkable: despite no external changes in the radiative properties of the
atmosphere and without injecting any heat into the system, we nevertheless simulate a strong
10
