CONTENTS
3
is naturally embedded in the dynamics. This work focuses on the second approach and the
insights it provides into the fate of quantum coherence under the influence of environmental
interactions.
To proceed, let us consider a very general set-up comprising a quantum system described
by a given time-dependent Hamiltonian H(t). The system is at zero temperature. Working in
units in which the Planck’s constant is unity, we consider the following dynamical scenario:
the system is undergoing unitary evolution in time, which is interspersed at random instants of
time distributed according to a Poisson distribution with application of pulses of infinitesimal
duration, up to a certain fixed time t. Our set-up follows the one proposed in Ref. [15]. The
evolution of the system between two successive instants of the application of pulses is unitary
and hence coherent, while non-unitarity and hence decoherence is induced repeatedly in the
evolution at time instants of the application of pulses. Thus, starting with a density operator
ρ(0), a unitary evolution for a random time is followed by an instantaneous interaction with
the pulses and which is modelled in terms of a time-independent interaction (super)operator
T . The result undergoes unitary evolution for another random time, followed by another
instantaneous interaction, and so on. Then, over the time interval [0, t ], a realization of the
evolution involves p ≥1 number of application of pulses at random time instants t1,t2,...,tp,
with the time duration τp′+1 ≡tp′+1 −tp′; p′ = 0,1,2,..., p −1; t0 = 0 between successive
interactions being random variables sampled independently from an exponential distribution
p(τ):
p(τ) = λe−λτ,
(1)
where λ > 0 is the inverse of the average time between two successive applications of pulses.
In other words, λ is the average frequency of application of pulses. The evolution ends with
unitary evolution for time duration t −tp.
We take the time-dependent Hamiltonian of the system as
H(t) = H0 + ∑
p≥1
Vpδ(t −tp),
(2)
where the time-independent part H0 dictates the unitary evolution of the system, while the
time-dependent part ∑p≥1Vpδ(t −tp), arising due to the application of pulses, appears only in
the interaction operator T . The average density operator (averaged over different realizations
of the dynamics outlined above) at time t reads as [20]
ρ(t) =
∞
∑
p=0
Z t
0 dtp
Z tp
0 dtp−1 ...
Z t3
0 dt2
Z t2
0 dt1 F(t −tp)e−iH×
0 (t−tp)
×T p(tp −tp−1)e−iH×
0 (tp−tp−1)T ...T p(t2 −t1)e−iH×
0 (t2−t1)T p(t1)e−iH×
0 t1ρ(0)
(3)
= U(t)ρ(0),
(4)
where H×
0
is the time-independent Liouvillian (super)operator corresponding to the
Hamiltonian H0, and F(t) =
R ∞
t dτ p(τ) is the probability for no interaction to occur during
time t. Here, we have defined U(t) as the time-evolution (super)operator. Note that we
