scenarios which are better understood after recalling some general facts about universality.
Universality is the property of classes of statistical systems with short range interactions
and the same internal symmetry of exhibiting the same critical exponents despite microscopic
diﬀerences such as a diﬀerent lattice structure (e.g., in two dimensions, square vs triangular).
For ferromagnets, universality arises because the tendency of the spins to point in the same
direction makes the number of neighbors irrelevant in the renormalization group sense. For
antiferromagnets, on the contrary, the number of neighbors is essential in establishing to
which extent the tendency of nearby spins to point in diﬀerent directions can be fulﬁlled. As
a consequence, antiferromagnets with the same Hamiltonian but diﬀerent lattice structure can
renormalize on diﬀerent ﬁxed points. Also in this respect, the ability of the scattering theory
in two dimensions to give at once the diﬀerent ﬁxed points allowed by a given symmetry is
remarkable and was illustrated in [14, 30] for the q-state Potts model. Here we simply recall
that q = 3 allows for a line of ﬁxed points7, and that it was predicted in [46] that three-state
Potts antiferromagnets on diﬀerent bipartite lattices can renormalize on diﬀerent points of
this line; it was numerically shown in [47] that this is indeed the case.
Clearly, frustrated random magnets, in which ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic bonds
are both allowed, may in principle exhibit nonuniversal critical behavior depending on the lat-
tice structure. Moreover, changing the disorder distribution P(Jxy) is an additional potential
source of nonuniversality. When weak disorder is relevant in the renormalization group sense
– for Ising this is the case in three dimensions but not in two – before the Nishimori point
there is an additional ﬁxed point which can be perturbatively shown [8] to be universal in the
class of the randomly dilute ferromagnet. In our present two-dimensional case, universality
for the magnetic ﬁxed points is consistent with our results as well as with the conclusions of
numerical studies which compared diﬀerent lattices and disorder distributions (see [21, 48]).
The spin glass ﬁxed point G, on the other hand, has strongest disorder and maximizes the
chances of nonuniversal behavior. There are two main scenarios depending on whether G
corresponds to solution C or to solution A+. Solution C leads to a single ﬁxed point, or at
most a few if diﬀerent sign choices are physically relevant. This in turn amounts to a sin-
gle universality class or to a small discrete set of universality classes. Solution A+, instead,
possesses Y1 as a free parameter and corresponds to a line of ﬁxed points. Diﬀerent lattices
and/or diﬀerent disorder distributions may then renormalize on arbitrarily close points along
this line.
7This is the line of ﬁxed points of the Gaussian model, which also makes possible a number of other
nontrivial phenomena in two-dimensional criticality, such as the BKT transition [39, 40], the continuously
varying exponents of the Ashkin-Teller model [41, 42], and the Luttinger liquid behavior of electrons in (1+1)
dimensions [43, 44, 45].
9
