7
g
h
i
Filament
Isosurface 
10-4
0.16
0.29
0.54
1
10-3
10-2
10-1
1
Figure 5. Radio and EUV synthetic images based on the MHD simulation of a flux-rope-filament eruption. (a)-(c) Synthetic
300 MHz radio images at t=96, 98, and 100. (d)-(f) Same as panels (a)-(c) but for the AIA 171 ˚A passband. Cyan contours in
panels (a)-(c) outline the EUV filaments in panels (d)-(f). (g)-(h) Synthetic 300 MHz radio images at t=100 from a side view.
A white isosurface, which corresponds to plasma density approximately five times greater and plasma temperature about one
order of magnitude lower than those of the quiet corona, along with magnetic field lines of the erupting flux rope, is overplotted
in panel (h).
brightness temperatures decreasing over time during the eruption. To further study the physical origin of the radio
depression, we synthesize radio and EUV images based on the MHD simulation of an MFR/filament eruption, which
show some similarities with the observations. It is suggested that the radio depression originates from the absorption
of the cool and dense materials within the MFR. The absorption seems to be stronger at the metric-decimetric bands
than that at the EUV and Hα bands, thus resulting in a disparity in visibility.
The nature of the radio depression at the metric and decimetric bands has been mentioned previously in Marqu´e
et al. (2002), where it was interpreted as the cavity with a lower plasma density than the background. In our study,
there is a strong correlation between the evolution of the EUV filament and that of the radio depression during the
eruption (Section 3.1), which indicates a close corelation existing between the radio depression and the cool plasma.
The simulated radio depression is found to be almost co-spatial with the high-density and low-temperature structure
(as shown by the isosurface in Figure 5 (h)), further suggesting that it is the absorption from the cold and dense
plasma leads to the decrease of the metric and decimetric radio emissions, rather than the reduction of the plasma
density within the cavity, in agreement with the interpretation of Hou et al. (2025). This is also supported by a
simple estimation using Equation 2. With an optical thickness τ = κds = 1 and typical parameters of filaments
(ne = 1010cm−3, T = 104K) and corona (ne = 108cm−3, T = 106K), ds are estimated to be ∼50 m and ∼400
Mm, respectively. It means that the radio radiation can be strongly absorbed by cool filament materials. During
the expansion stage, the plasma density within the MFR decreases, weakening its absorption of the solar background
radiation. However, the foreground radiation above the filament decreases more rapidly at the beginning (see Appendix
A for details), leading to the darkening of the radio depression. As the expansion progresses, the foreground radiation
becomes increasingly weak, and the plasma density within the radio depression continues to decrease, ultimately make
it invisible. This is consistent with the result that no clear bright core is observed in the CME. In contrast, the EUV
filament appears to be fragmented early in the eruption (shown in Figure 5 (f)), which could be due to the fact that
only sufficiently cool and dense materials can appear to be dark at the EUV bands.
