provides a real-world use-case for the application of SNNs,
yielding fast and precise detection of coincident particle
events.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Positron Emission Tomography
PET is based on attaching a radioactive β+-emitter to a
metabolic substance, e.g. sugar, and injecting this so-called
radiotracer into the subject of study. The tracer accumulates
in certain tissues according to its metabolic properties, where
it undergoes a β+-decay. The emitted positrons annihilate with
electrons in the surrounding tissue, resulting in two 511 keV
photons which move in opposite directions and are measured
using scintillating crystals organized as a ring-detector. By
connecting coincident pairs of detected photons as so-called
lines of response (LOR), an image can be reconstructed from
the entirety of all LORs, i.e. the sinogram, as an inverse
problem.
Since radioactive decay is a stochastic process, measure-
ments are conducted over a time-span to acquire sufﬁcient
signal. In a clinical setting, the goal is to keep the radioactive
dose to the patient as low as possible. Therefore, long mea-
surement times at low activities are used to gather sufﬁcient
statistics. However, these low-activity measurements do not
allow the observation of fast kinematic processes that happen
on the seconds-to-minutes scale and are usually completed
within a fraction of the acquisition-time of a PET image. For
research purposes, preclinical studies are conducted on mice
and rats, allowing for much higher radiation doses and faster
acquisition times. For example, the SAFIR-project [4] provides
a detector capable of processing vastly increased measurement
activities, shortening the image acquisition time from several
minutes to less than 10 seconds.
PET image reconstruction is based on sorting the indi-
vidually detected photons into coincidence pairs. However,
a signiﬁcant fraction of photons is lost due physical effects
such as the limited detection efﬁciency and time-resolution of
the detector, as well as photons being subject to photoelectric
absorption processes in the body. Hence, a lot of single
events are registered, only a fraction of which has a detected
coincidence partner. A major preprocessing step in PET image
reconstruction is thus ﬁltering out all coincidence pairs from
the entirety of detector hits.
To date, coincidence pair matching is still performed using
non-ML approaches. Common techniques rely on storing all
detected photons as a list of ‘single’ events with a given
energy, time and location (singles list-mode data), and it-
eratively ﬁltering this list post-acquisition [3]. The Single-
Coincidence-Window-sorting (SCW) algorithm, a commonly
used variant, sequentially processes such a time-sorted list of
single events using a ﬁxed time ‘window’ dependent on the
detectors timing resolution. For a given event, the algorithm
examines if the time-difference to the next single event is
smaller than the window. If not, the Type I event is rejected
as a ‘single’, and the algorithm moves on to the next event
in the list. If yes, then both are accepted as coincident Type
II event and translated into a line-of-response (LOR). Should
more than one event ﬁt inside the ‘time-window’, all are
rejected (Type III), as it cannot be known which two hits
among the multiple correspond to a LOR. Conventionally,
the SCW algorithm is additionally supplied with geometrical
information, rejecting highly unlikely coincidences such as
those between neighboring crystals. A schematic detailing the
algorithm is shown in Figure 1. Due to its sequential nature,
the SCW algorithm scales heavily with the signal acquisition
rate, a property that becomes especially problematic at high
frequency measurements as those encountered in preclinical
PET.
B. Leaky Integrate Fire Spiking Neural Networks
Spiking neural networks try to mimic information propa-
gation as closely as possible to the biological analog of the
brain [1]. The most prominent difference to ANNs is the
integration of the temporal component, i.e. the activation of
a spiking neuron is time dependent, and spike propagation in
a network takes place asynchronously. The Leaky Integrate
and Fire (LIF) neuron is a common mathematical approach
to model neural activity in spiking neural networks [5], [6].
Formally, LIFs can be described recursively as follows:
Mt+1 = WXt+1 + αMt −αSt
(1)
St =
(
1,
if Mt > Mthreshold
0,
otherwise
(2)
where t denotes the discretized time step of the input spike
train X, M the membrane potential, Mthreshold the maximum
membrane capacity, S the output spike, W a trainable weight
matrix and α = exp(−1/τ) a decay value for the potentials,
with τ being the time constant of the neuron’s membrane. α
is usually a constant, scalar hyperparameter to the model in
the range [0.9, 0.99], but may also be learned and dynamically
inferred [7].
The above formalism allows the interpretation of a spiking
neural network with LIF neurons as a recurrent neural net-
work and by extension enables gradient-based training with
backpropagation through time [8], [9]. To overcome the dead
neuron phenomenon, resulting from the non-differentiability
of the Heaviside spiking function, surrogate gradient tech-
niques can be employed during training [10]. In particular,
the Heaviside gradient is smoothed out and replaced with the
arctan function to enable training with widely used stochastic
gradient descent approaches as follows:
∂S
∂M =
1
π(1 + [Mπ]2).
(3)
III. SPIKING NEURAL NETWORKS FOR PET
A. Problem Statement
We formulate coincidence pairing as a supervised learning
problem in which a set of binary time series for each crystal
is denoised and time-normalized to only identify Type II
