the description of the Standard Model (SM) of Elementary Particle Physics. Specifically
assuming that the description of the total space-time manifold takes the form of a direct
product MD = M4×B, where B is a compact Riemannian space with a non-abelian isometry
group S, it was found that the dimensional reduction of the higher-dimensional gravity
theory leads to gravity coupled to a Yang-Mills theory, based on S as the gauge group and
scalars in four dimensions. The most attractive feature of this scheme is the geometrical
unification of gravity with the rest of the interactions and moreover, it provided a natural
explanation of gauge symmetries. Unfortunately, this scheme also has problems, such as the
fact that a classical ground state corresponding to the direct product structure of MD cannot
be found. The most serious problem though, from the low-scale physics point of view, is
that the inclusion of fermions in the original action does not lead to chiral fermions in four
dimensions [6]. By adding Yang-Mills in the original action, the serious problems are resolved
at the cost of losing the geometrical descriptions of all interactions. Introducing Yang-Mills
fields in higher dimensions and considering that they are part of a Grand Unified Theory
(GUT) together with a Dirac section [7, 8], the restriction to obtain chiral fermions in four
dimensions is limited to the requirement that the total dimension of space-time has to be of
the form 4k + 2 (see e.g., ref. [9]). At this point, it is worth noting that the schemes which
will be mostly discussed in the present article go towards the other extreme, namely that all
interactions can be described as gauge theories. Nevertheless, it should be emphasised that
for several decades the Superstring theories (see e.g., refs. [10–12]) dominated the research
involving the consideration of extra dimensions.
Superstring theories consist a solid framework, with the heterotic string theory [13] which
is defined in ten dimensions being the most attractive, in the sense that, in principle, they
can at least be experimentally compatible, since the Standard Model gauge group can be
accommodated into the gauge groups of the Grand Unified Theories that result after the
dimensional reduction of the initial E8 × E8 one. It is worth noting though, that even be-
fore the superstring theories era, another framework had been developed that focused on the
dimensional reduction of higher-dimensional gauge theories, which has provided another di-
rection for exploring the unification of fundamental interactions [14–18]. The latter approach
to unify fundamental interactions, which shared common objectives with the superstring the-
ories, although less ambitious, was first examined in detail by Forgacs-Manton (F-M) and
Scherk-Schwartz (S-S). F-M have established the concept of Coset Space Dimensional Re-
duction (CSDR) [14–17], which can lead naturally to chiral fermions while S-S focused on
the group manifold reduction [19], which although does not admit chiral fermions, its basic
idea was used later as a prototype in many superstring model building attempts. Recent
developments and attempts in the framework of CSDR towards realistic models that can be
confronted with experiments can be found in refs. [20–24].
It should be added that in the attempts to achieve the goal of unification of all interactions,
another direction has been developed directly in four dimensions based on the obvious inter-
face of the notion of gauge invariance. Concretely, the Standard Model of Particle Physics is
clearly based on gauge theories, while it was long known that gravity may be regarded as a
gauge theory as well [25–34]. Therefore, it appeared as a very interesting challenge to further
examine this relationship. One of the main reasons for the renewed interest in this subject
before the superstrings period was the progress that was made in supergravity theories [35,
36], which can very profitably be regarded as gauge theories. More recently, the interest was
2
