be concluded that increasing µ significantly reduces the initial disadvantage of cooperators,
shortens the time required for the system to reach a stable state, and enhances cooperation
across the system, including within ΥSDG and ΥPDG.
Now, the bottom row of Fig. 9 presents the cooperation fraction in the richer and poorer
groups over time for the entire system, ΥSDG, and ΥPDG when σ = 0.5 and µ = 0.2.
The corresponding results for additional values of σ = 0.05, 0.1, 0.8, 1.0 are shown in
Fig. A2 in the Appendix. It can be observed that for small values of σ, throughout the
entire evolutionary process, the cooperation ratio in the richer and poorer groups follows
the same pattern as in the case of small µ: it initially decreases, reaches a minimum,
and then continuously increases until the system reaches a stable state. As σ increases,
cooperation is significantly enhanced across the system and within the groups in ΥSDG.
However, in ΥPDG, when σ is high, the cooperation fraction in the poorer group exceeds
that in the richer group throughout the entire evolution process. This phenomenon can be
explained in terms of social dilemmas. When σ is large, cooperators in ΥSDG and defectors in
ΥPDG benefit from more favorable conditions. In contrast, cooperators in ΥPDG face greater
difficulty in spreading their strategy to other individuals to acquire resources. Consequently,
they are more likely to be replaced by other strategies and lose resources. As a result, in
ΥPDG, the cooperation fraction remains lower in the richer group than in the poorer group.
These findings confirm that σ plays a crucial role in shaping cooperative behavior within the
richer and poorer groups of both ΥSDG and ΥPDG, as well as influencing the overall resource
distribution across individuals in different game settings.
We continue by analyzing how resources are distributed across strategy-based and game-
based subpopulations and this is impacted by the coupling parameter µ and the sucker’s
payoff σ. The first row in Fig. 10 shows the evolution of the average resources for cooperators
and defectors in the entire system, as well as within ΥSDG and ΥPDG, as a function of
time, for σ = 0.2 and µ = 0.5. The corresponding results for other values of µ (µ = 0,
0.2, 0.8, 1.0) are shown in Fig. A3 (Appendix).
In Fig. 10(a) and the first column of
Fig. A3, the evolution of the mean resources of cooperators and defectors is illustrated. It
can be observed that when µ = 0, 0.2, 0.5, the mean quantity of resources of cooperators
initially increase before stabilizing, while the mean resources of defectors initially decrease
before reaching a steady state.
At all stages of the evolution, cooperators consistently
maintain higher resource levels than defectors. As µ increases, the magnitude of change
21
