17
FIG. 7. Bulk and Josephson topological characterizations for Sr3SnO. (a) Crystal structure of Sr3SnO. (b) Bulk electronic
band structure computed using FPLO (red lines) and Wannier interpolations (blue dots) along high-symmetry lines. (c) BZ
and high symmetry points. (d) Mx-indexed Wilson loop spectrum for occupied bulk electrons, showing a nontrivial mirror
Chern number Cx = 2. (e) Mxy-indexed Wilson loop spectrum for occupied bulk electrons, showing a nontrivial mirror Chern
number Cxy = 2. The red and blue points denote ±i mirror sectors, respectively. (f) The Andreev spectrum of an ˆx-directional
π junction at Γ point. (g) At µ = 0, we calculate the Wilson-loop spectrum for Andreev bound states of (001) π junction.
(h) A zoom-in view around kz =2π shows a helical Wilson loop winding, agreeing with a Z2 nontrivial JT with ν0=1. (i) At
kz = 0, we plot the gap distribution of the (001) π junction as a function of µ and ky, with the red solid circles marking the
JT transitions. We find two on-TRIM JT critical points and two off-TRIM JT critical pairs, which quantitatively agree with
Fig. 5 (a). (j) and (k) show the zoom-in plots for both off-TRIM critical points.
2. The vortex features two ΘM-protected MZMs when
µ ∼[−0.2, 0].
In experiments, Sr3SnO becomes intrinsically supercon-
ducting when it is hole-doped. This is exactly when we
expect the vortices to feature a pair of overlapping yet
decoupled Majorana modes.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSIONS
To summarize, we have introduced the Josephson-
vortex correspondence (JVC) as a novel framework for
understanding and diagnosing vortex topological physics
in s-wave superconductors. This correspondence estab-
lishes a direct mapping between the emergent topologi-
cal properties of 2D π-junctions and 1D vortex lines in
the same bulk superconductor. Using a dimensional re-
duction approach, we analytically derive JVC relations
across multiple symmetry classes and uncover a strik-
ing quantitative match between the topological critical
points of π-junctions and vortices. This insight enables
the efficient construction of vortex topological phase di-
agrams directly from their Josephson counterparts, by-
passing the need for computationally intensive vortex
simulations.
Validating the JVC across a range of ef-
fective models, we demonstrate consistent agreement be-
tween deduced and explicitly computed vortex phase di-
agrams. By designing an ab initio computational work-
