4
FIG. 2. Stabilizer Renyi entropy S2, filtered stabilizer Renyi entropy FS2, mana M, and FCI binding energy Efci as a function
of the interatomic distance. These magic proxies exhibit a pronounced peak precicely at the value of the interatomic distance
where the extrinsic curvature of the binding energy curve is extremized, as indicated by the vertical dashed line. The inset
depicts the second derivative of the FCI binding energy, confirming the relation between the magic proxies and the curvature
of the binding energy curve.
limit (ℓ→∞), the hydrogen atoms are essentially iso-
lated. The electronic wavefunction factorizes, leading to
a state that is close to a product state. In such a regime,
the fermionic correlations are minimal and the associated
magic (or non-stabilizerness) is low, consistent with the
notion of a classically tractable system.
At interatomic distances near ℓ⋆, where the binding en-
ergy curve shows maximal extrinsic curvature, the wave-
function represents a delicate balance between the two
determinants.
This is the regime where the chemical
bond is forming.
The competition between the ionic
and covalent contributions results in a highly correlated
state. Our analysis shows that this is the very point at
which the quantum state would demand a larger number
of non-Clifford operations for its simulation, as reflected
by the peak in magic proxies. The extrinsic curvature κ is
a geometric measure of the sensitivity of the binding en-
ergy with respect to interatomic distance. Its maximum
marks a rapid change in the energy landscape, signature
of a transition in the electronic structure.
This ener-
getic reorganization is directly correlated with the rise in
non-stabilizerness, indicating that the very formation of
the covalent bond is accompanied by an increase in the
quantumness of the state.
Very interestingly, note that the ground state (8) can
be understood as the state of a qubit upon interpret-
ing the two determinants as computational basis states
˜0

= |1100⟩and
˜1

= |0011⟩. We know that at very
short interatomic distances, including the equilibrium
bound state distance, the ground state of the system is
very well approximated by setting θ ≃0, namely by the
state
˜0

. Adiabatic increase of the bond length can then
be interpreted as implementing the following unitary op-
eration:
|ψ(θ)⟩= U(θ)
˜0

= cos(θ)
˜0

+ sin(θ)
˜1

,
(11)
with U(θ) the rotation around the y-axis
U(θ) = Ry(2θ) =
cos θ −sin θ
sin θ
cos θ

.
(12)
Note that one can conjugate this rotation into a rotation
