3
The circuit for our transport measurements is depicted
in Fig. 1(b). DC current (IDC) is applied to the lower left
ohmic contact and drains to the lower right ohmic con-
tact. Once IDC exceeds the critical current of the Joseph-
son junction, a DC voltage VJ is generated between
the two superconducting leads. The potential difference
across the junction is measured at the upper left and right
ohmic contacts such that VJ = V+ −V−. Low-frequency
(<100 Hz) AC plus DC voltage bias VT (B) is applied to
the top (bottom) ohmic contacts through current ampli-
fiers, and the currents at the top (bottom) ohmic contacts
are measured using a standard lock-in measurement tech-
nique, with conductance of the top (bottom) tunnel junc-
tion given by GT (B) =
dIT (B)
dVT (B) . Tunneling spectroscopy
is performed by measuring conductance as a function of
VT (B). The tunneling conductance is proportional to the
local DOS. All transport measurements are conducted
in an Oxford Triton 500 cryogen-free dilution refrigera-
tor with a base mixing chamber temperature of 10 mK
equipped with a 6-1-1 T vector magnet.
III.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND
ANALYSIS
Fig. 2(a) displays tunneling spectroscopy measured
at the bottom tunneling probe as a function of IDC
and VB at B∥= 100 mT and Vmiddle = −0.75 V.
Fig. 2(b) presents I-V characteristics measured simul-
taneously with the tunneling spectra. As indicated by
two white dashed lines in Fig. 2(a) and two black dashed
lines in Fig. 2(b), the entire investigated range of IDC
can be divided into three regimes: (i) the DC Joseph-
son regime, (ii) the AC Josephson regime, and (iii) the
normal regime where eVJ > 2∆Al such that supercon-
ductivity is destroyed. The DC Josephson regime is de-
fined by IDC ≤Ic where Ic = 0.2 µA in our device. In
this regime, the supercurrent is carried by dissipationless
Andreev bound states (ABSs) located in the bare 2DEG
region confined from both sides by Al-covered InAs and
may be associated with the VJ = 0 regime in the I-
V curve, as shown in Fig. 2(b). In the AC Josephson
regime, IDC > Ic such that the DC voltage VJ is non-
zero but smaller than twice the superconducting gap of
the two Al leads, ∆Al. In this region, the supercurrent
is time-dependent, oscillating with frequency of 2eVJ/ℏ,
where e is the charge of the electron, and ℏis the Planck
constant. This AC Josephson regime is the main focus
of our study.
Without DC current bias and at small in-plane mag-
netic field, the superconducting phase difference between
the two leads ∆ϕ is close to zero, resulting in the mini-
mum energy of the Andreev bound states residing close
to ∆ind, the proximity-induced superconducting gap. As
shown in Fig. 2(a), at IDC = 0 µA, the minimum energy
of the ABS is extracted by examination of the tunneling
spectra and is estimated to be 200 µeV, approximately
equal to ∆ind for this heterostructure. Measurements of
∆ind for this wafer are discussed in the Supplementary
Materials. Each Andreev bound state carries a super-
current of −2e
h
dEABS
dϕ
, where EABS is the energy of the
ABS. As the DC current bias increases, the system mod-
ifies ∆ϕ to match the supercurrent with the DC current
bias, leading to the modulation of EABS. However, in the
DC Josephson regime, modulation of EABS is not readily
identified in the tunneling spectra shown in Fig. 2(a).
A likely reason for absence of modulation in EABS is
that the tunneling probe is not coupling to the Andreev
bound states but instead directly to the proximitized su-
perconducting leads surrounding the junction. We note
that the critical current may be reduced in our geome-
try due to varying transmissions of individual ABS [15–
17]. The injection of electrons from the normal tunnel
probe may also decrease the critical current. A reduction
in critical current may also contribute to the absence of
EABS modulation. A more detailed discussion of critical
current suppression can be found in the Supplementary
Materials.
When IDC > Ic, a finite DC voltage VJ is generated
as seen in the AC Josephson regime of the I-V data pre-
sented in Fig. 2(b).
In this regime, four conductance
peaks (P1-P4) become visible and disperse with an in-
crease of IDC, as illustrated by the red and blue dotted
lines in Fig. 2(a). The midpoint between the conductance
peaks P1 and P3 is centered around zero bias, while the
midpoint between the peaks P2 and P4 disperses to a
higher voltage as IDC increases, as highlighted in blue
for P1, P3 and red for P2, P4 in Fig. 2(a). The separa-
tion in voltage between the conductance peaks decreases
as IDC increases, as shown in blue for P1, P3 and in red
for P2, P4 in Fig. 2(a).
When eVJ > 2∆Al, or IDC > 1.3 µA in Fig. 2(a), the
superconductivity in the Al film is destroyed, eliminating
all sharp features in the tunneling spectra. This behav-
ior emphasizes that the four conductance peaks observed
in the AC Josephson regime originate from superconduc-
tivity. The superconducting gap of the Al film is esti-
mated to be 250 µeV from VJ at the transition current
IDC = 1.3 µA.
In Fig. 2(a), the blue and red points track the disper-
sion of the conductance peaks (P1 - P4) with increasing
IDC. Points are identified by a peak finding script in the
range IDC = 0.6 µA to IDC = 1.3 µA. In the AC Joseph-
son regime, when IDC ≤0.6 µA, P3, and P4 overlap
such that they cannot be reliably distinguished. Simi-
larly, from 0.92 µA ≤IDC ≤1.23 µA, P2 and P3 merge
and cross. The voltage separation between the centers of
two pairs of conductance peaks is defined as follows:
∆V = V2 + V4
2
−V1 + V3
2
(1)
where Vi indicates the voltage of ith conductance peak
as shown in Fig. 2(a). ∆V is proportional to the energy
separation between the two apparent gaps. In Fig. 2(c),
∆V as a function of IDC is plotted with brown circles
and overlaid on a plot of VJ as a function of IDC. It is
