Academic Editor: Andrei Khrennikov
Received: 10 March 2025
Revised: 2 April 2025
Accepted: 3 April 2025
Published: 7 April 2025
Citation: Elze, H.-T. The Dirac
Equation, Mass and Arithmetic by
Permutations of Automaton States.
Entropy 2025, 27, 395. https://
doi.org/10.3390/e27040395
Copyright: © 2025 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Article
The Dirac Equation, Mass and Arithmetic by Permutations of
Automaton States
Hans-Thomas Elze
Dipartimento di Fisica “Enrico Fermi”, Universitá di Pisa, Largo Pontecorvo 3, 56127 Pisa, Italy; elze@df.unipi.it
Abstract: The cornerstones of the Cellular Automaton Interpretation of Quantum Me-
chanics are its underlying ontological states that evolve by permutations. They do not
create would-be quantum mechanical superposition states. We review this with a classical
automaton consisting of an Ising spin chain which is then related to the Weyl equation
in the continuum limit. Based on this and generalizing, we construct a new “Necklace
of Necklaces” automaton with a torus-like topology that lends itself to represent the
Dirac equation in 1 + 1 dimensions. Special attention has to be paid to its mass term,
which necessitates this enlarged structure and a particular scattering operator contribut-
ing to the step-wise updates of the automaton. As discussed earlier, such deterministic
models of discrete spins or bits unavoidably become quantum mechanical, when only
slightly deformed.
Keywords: Dirac equation; Weyl equation; cellular automaton; permutations; Ising spin;
qubit; ontological state; superposition principle; quantum mechanics
1. Introduction
This work is motivated by an hypothetical deterministic ontology to understand
natural phenomena which are studied in physics and chemistry and possibly beyond. This
might contrast with the perception of an intrinsic fundamental randomness especially in
the dynamics of microscopic objects, such as Standard Model ‘elementary’ particles, atoms,
or molecules, which is described, for example, in the references [1–3]. Related ideas are
obviously founded on very successful developments and applications of quantum theory
in the study and experimental manipulation of the microscopic world.
Here, we do not base our discussion on quantum theory. Yet, we will quickly find
it convenient to borrow elements from its most efficient language and formalism. Our
working hypothesis is what we observe in experiments, we ‘see’ in terms of descriptions
employing the language of mathematics and especially of quantum theory.
We follow the Cellular Automaton Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics, namely that
quantum mechanical features can be found in the behavior of certain classical cellular au-
tomata [4,5]. Thus, deterministic dynamics is considered to underlie any change occurring
with an object, i.e., a change of its ontological state.
The universe is always in a specific, even if unknown to us, ontological state. In
the ‘toy models’ presented in the following, the model universe consists of a countable
number of two-state Ising spins that evolve according to deterministic automaton rules.
Incidentally, the yes–no or spin-up–spin-down alternatives here may be described as
occupation numbers of fermionic degrees of freedom, i.e., with values 0 or 1. This possibility
has been explored in quantum field theories of fermions built from classical probabilistic
cellular automata, e.g., in reference [6].
Entropy 2025, 27, 395
https://doi.org/10.3390/e27040395
arXiv:2504.06883v1  [quant-ph]  9 Apr 2025
