Setup type
CHSH value
QBER
Raw bit rate
Distance
point-to-point SPDC
η, E
E
η, B
η
Event ready
T2,E
T2,E
η, B
T2
Table 3: Summary of relevant DI-QKD parameters and technical characteristics affecting them for both point-to-point
photonic setups with SPDC sources, and event-ready setups using stationary qubits. Here η is the overall photonic detection
efficiency, E is the decoherence of photonic quantum systems in the optical link, T2 is the decoherence time of stationary
node qubits, and B is the overall “brightness” (entangled pairs created/sec) of the source.
[458, 459]. These efficiencies do not typically depend upon the propagation distance within the optical
channel.
The link efficiency ηℓ, on the other hand, does depend upon the propagation distance, decaying
exponentially with the length ℓof the channel [460, 360, 461]. In particular, ηℓ= 10−γℓ/10, where γ
is the attenuation coefficient in dB/distance. Losses in an optical fiber link include contributions from
attenuation (typically value ∼0.2dB/km in the telecom band) that accumulate over distance, as well as
from fiber splices connecting different sections of fiber. Mechanical splices using barrel connectors typically
have losses greater than 0.5dB/connection, while fusion splicing can give losses less than 0.01dB/splice in
standard single-mode fiber, showing the necessity of dedicated high-quality optical fiber links for DI-QKD.
Moreover, networking hardware, such as optical switches, can also present losses of several dB.
Achieving the critical detection efficiency required for DI-QKD (typically η > 80%, see Section 3)
in an all-photonic setup (such as a single SPDC source) presents significant technical challenges. Even
considering ηc = ηm = ηd = 1 and that all link loss is due to attenuation, ηℓ= 0.8 (or about 1dB loss)
corresponds to ∼4.85km of propagation in an optical fiber. Fortunately, “event ready” setups can be
used to overcome the probabilistic nature of most sources of entangled particles, as well as low collection
efficiency and losses between source and the detection stations. These are schemes in which the presence
of the entangled state at the respective detection sites is heralded by a separate detection event [164–166].
While there have been proposals and experiments involving all-photonic event-ready setups, a considerable
advantage arises when employing stationary quantum systems such as ions, atoms, quantum dots and NV
centers, since these can be measured with efficiency close to unity, making event-ready setups involving
entangled stationary qubits one of the most promising path towards useful implementation of DI-QKD.
We discuss event-ready sections in further detail in Section 6.3.2. In addition, we note here that there
has been theoretical progress in reducing the CDE for DI-QKD, by including pre- and post-processing,
as discussed in Section 3.
6.3. High-quality entanglement sources
High-quality sources of entangled quantum systems are a necessary resource for DI-QKD. Quality
refers not only to robust violation of detection loophole-free Bell-inequalities, but also a high brightness
B (or repetition rate R), as these two characteristics have a direct effect on the key rates obtainable. In
addition to the overall detection efficiency discussed in Section 6.2, decoherence in the channel (such as
depolarization, dephasing, etc) will also degrade the quality of entanglement. In the next two subsections,
we describe the two principle entanglement sources used for DI-QKD. A summary of the merits of these
sources for DI-QKD in terms of the relevant experimental parameters is given in Table 3.
6.3.1. Spontaneous Parametric Down-Conversion sources
A major step in experimental Bell tests was the development of spontaneous parametric down-
conversion sources (SPDC) as a source of entangled photon pairs in the 1990’s [462, 463], which offered
much higher count rates than the first generation of experiments based on atomic cascade [464, 172].
The most efficient SPDC sources today are based on periodically poled nonlinear crystals in Sagnac in-
terferometers, as shown in Fig. 17. An adequate choice of crystal length and optics produces highly pure
entangled polarization states, reaching state fidelities over 99.5%, where the transverse spatial mode of
the photons is optimized for coupling into single-mode fibers [465, 466, 52]. Coupling efficiencies over
95% have been achieved [52]. SPDC is a probabilistic source of photon pairs, and the state fidelities
refer to the post-selected state obtained when two photons are registered. Taking into account the full
SPDC output described by two-mode squeezed vacuum, the absence of post-selection results in a limited
violation of Bell inequalities [467]. The probabilistic nature also places a trade-off between the bright-
ness achievable and the fidelity, since multiple-pair events become non-negligible at high pump intensity,
and limit the quality of the two-photon state, especially for pulsed sources [468]. SPDC sources have
been used for point-to-point DI-QKD [52], and can also be incorporated into event-ready setups using
72
