4.2.2
Rigid-rotor approximation
The ion Hamiltonian in Eq. (52) is historically the starting point of a lengthy analysis of translational,
rotational, and vibrational modes [73, 74, 72]. Here we primarily follow the geometrical construction of
Ref. [74] and incorporate some aspects of Ref. [72]. Conceptually, our goal is to perform, for each species s,
a coordinate transformation in R3ηs
ion:
Rs 7→(Rs
CoM, Ss, Qs
1, ..., Qs
3ηs
ion−6
|
{z
}
Qs
)
(53)
such that the operator Eq. (52) factorizes into three approximately independent sets of terms on:
• The 3 translational CoM DoF denoted by Rs
CoM,
• The 3 (or 2 for linear molecules, 0 for periodic substrates or isolated atoms) rotational DoF around
axes Ss passing through the CoM,
• The remaining 3ηs
ion −6 (or 3ηs
ion −5 for linear molecules, 3ηs
ion −3 for periodic substrates, 0 for isolated
atoms), which represent the remaining DoF denoted by Qs.
The space of Qs, formally defined as the quotient of R3ηs
ion by the special Euclidean group for non-linear
molecules,14 will be called shape space, even though it also a includes a degree of freedom measuring the
overall size or scale of the system. For example, shape space for a water molecule consists of the bond angle,
the ratio of OH bond lengths, and the overall scale or size (e.g. the CoM moment of inertia). Alternatively,
we may choose the bond angle and the two OH bond lengths. While separating out the 3 CoM translational
coordinates is straightforward, as discussed in Sec. 4.1.2,15 fully separating the rotations and shape degrees
of freedom (molecular vibrations) is not possible.
The “translation-reduced configuration space”, R3ηs
ion−3, obtained after separation of the CoM degrees of
freedom, can be mathematically endowed with the structure of a principal fiber bundle, with the base space
being shape space and the fiber space being the SO(3) group manifold,16 parameterized by 3 Euler angles
that specify the rotational orientation of the molecule. The Hamiltonian is a Hermitian operator defined
using a section of the fiber bundle, where a section is a suitably continuous choice of reference orientation
for rotations at each shape point, i.e. a choice of a fiber point at each base point, often called the body
frame. This is a gauge choice which determines the form of the Hamiltonian, although the total energy is
gauge-invariant.
We want to use the fiber bundle structure with a well-chosen gauge in order to maximally decouple
rotation and shape interactions. In this spirit, the Hamiltonian can be thought of as a sum of three terms: a
term that depends on the base point/shape and its change, measuring the vibrational energy of the molecule;
a term that depends on the change in the displacement along the fiber from the reference section, measuring
the energy in overall rotation; and a coupling term between the base and fiber, measuring the the rotational-
vibrational interaction energy. We want to choose a gauge/section in which the latter term is small relative
to the former terms, particularly near the equilibrium configuration of the molecule. A historically successful
choice is the Eckart gauge (or Eckart frame), which is a choice of section given by 3 linear conditions,
FEck(Rs) =
X
I∈Is
RI × Rs,0
I
= 0,
(54)
14For linear molecules, the symmetry group of rigid body rotations and translations is the subgroup of SE(3) that fixes an
axis of rotation.
15We can also use 3ηs
ion −3 Jacobi coordinates ρα such that the kinetic energy becomes,
Tion = −
X
I∈Is
1
2MI
∇2
I = −
1
2Ms
tot
∇2
CoM −
3ηs
ion−3
X
α=1
1
2µα
∇2
α,
where µα are suitably defined reduced masses based on the choice of ρα. The Jacobi coordinates are theoretically cleaner since
they explicitly separate the CoM with no mass polarization term and leave the form of the kinetic energy unchanged. See
Ref. [74].
16Recall this is RP3, the 3-sphere with antipodal points identified.
23
