CHI ’25, April 26-May 1, 2025, Yokohama, Japan
Jian Zhang, Wafa Johal, and Jarrod Knibbe
each physical object can represent (through the space between the
downscaling threshold – DT – and the upscaling threshold – UT).
These results show that, for the three 8° objects, the range of the
illusion space (formed from 2*JND, expressed as a percentage) gets
smaller as the physical object’s size increases. Across the three 6cm
physical objects, as the taper angle increases, the PSE gets smaller
towards the true size of the physical object, and the illusion spaces
are also larger.
The results of angle perception are shown in Fig. 6. These results
showcase how the just noticeable difference of taper angle decreases
as object sizes get larger, but that absolute equality perception is
the least accurate for mid-sized objects. For objects with larger
taper angles, participants underestimate the angle of the physical
object. These results also reveal that the physical object of 6cm-0°
has different patterns from the others. As the virtual angle ranges
of this object include both inverted and regular trapezoid shapes,
any angle perceived to be non-zero is ‘more tilted’ than the physical
object. This leads to a different pattern of results for this object.
However, this data requires a different analysis function and violates
the underlying principles of the 2AFC method (when the object is
perceived to be the same, it is not clear that the participants would
be choosing between the answers completely at random). Because
of the ambiguity of the 2AFC question, we cannot derive a sigmoid
for this data. Thus, we choose not to analyse this data further.
4.2
Perception Thresholds with Both Size and
Angle Incongruences
Previously, the ability of a physical object to represent different
virtual objects has been estimated with only the incongruence of
a single property (e.g., size, taper angle, or curvature [6, 16, 41])
while all the other properties are congruent between the physical
and virtual objects. Exploring how the detection thresholds change
with multiple incongruent properties can expand the possibility
for physical objects to represent virtual ones. In addition to the
thresholds estimated for each physical object and each property,
the patterns of how the thresholds change with the incongruence
of the other property are demonstrated here.
Fig. 5 shows the size perception thresholds and PSEs when the
virtual angles are congruent with the physical ones. When the
angles are incongruent, e.g. the physical angle of 8° and the virtual
angle of 10°, a fit can also be plotted and thresholds can be calculated
using the same method. Therefore, for one physical object, when
being presented with different virtual angles, the results of the
perception of size are estimated. The same approach is also applied
to angle perception results with size incongruences.
For all physical objects, the size perception results are fitted to a
sigmoid function (2) and the upscaling threshold (UT), downscaling
threshold (DT), PSE and JND are calculated.
The results of perception estimation of physical objects 1-5 are
shown in Table 2 - Table 3.
5
Derived Analysis
The results from our modelling demonstrate that the ability of
physical objects to represent different virtual objects varies when
either physical or virtual properties change. Our results reveal a
non-uniform interplay between object sizes and taper angles and,
as such, vary from those seen in previous studies of size and taper
angle perception individually [6, 16]. We begin by discussing how
we build illusion spaces from our results and how those spaces
compare to results seen in prior work. We discuss the patterns we
see in the perception thresholds and points of subjective equality
and how these change with the interplay between size and taper
angle. At each step of the analysis the sizes and taper angles are
coupled and thus we can add dimensions gradually on the illusion
spaces model to reveal the coupling patterns. Based on our results,
we derive a broader, multi-dimensional illusion space across size
and taper angle.
5.1
Single-dimensional Illusion Space
For each physical object without virtual angle incongruence (i.e.,
where the virtual angle is the same as the physical angle), a single-
dimensional illusion space is formed from the upscaling threshold
(UT) and downscaling threshold (DT) of size perception (these are
the points beyond which participants can reliably distinguish be-
tween physical and virtual object’ sizes. The distance between these
thresholds is 2*JND (expressed as a percentage) which is also hereby
defined as the range of the illusion space. Within the confines of
this single-dimensional illusion space, the size differences between
the physical and the virtual objects are not noticeable. We use the
same approach to construct illusion spaces for the taper angles,
where the virtual sizes are congruent with the physical.
Fig. 5 shows the size thresholds of perception for our five physical
objects. These results reveal differences with those seen in the prior
work of Bergström et al. [6], where the perception thresholds for
physical objects of 3cm, 6cm and 9cm were 89%-146% (JND: 21.5%),
90%-122% (JND: 16.0%) and 78%-102% (JND: 12.0%), respectively. For
our group of 3cm, 6cm, and 9cm physical objects with a taper angle
of 8°, the thresholds are 76.3% -135.0% (JND: 29.4%), 91.5%-126.3%
(JND: 17.4%) and 93.2%-110.9% (JND: 8.85%). While the thresholds
vary, the corresponding JNDs are similar for each size. This shows
that the ranges of the illusion spaces (from JNDs) are similar, but
that the consistent 8° taper angle makes smaller objects feel smaller
and larger objects feel larger. The size perception results of our 6cm-
0° object (95.7%-128.7% - JND: 16.5%) are very similar to Bergström
et al. [6]’s. This helps to confirm that the differences seen in our
results stem from the impact of the taper angle.
In another prior study on size perception, de Tinguy et al. [16]
found a JND for a 4cm object of 9.75%. This is quite different to the
results seen in our study and in Bergström et al. [6]’s study (based
on the interpolation of our 3cm and 6cm results, as neither our
study nor the Resized Grasping study considered 4cm objects per
se). These differences could exist for a range of reasons, and likely
highlight the potential interplay of some other property or factor.
For example, research has shown how surface textures and weight
of physical objects can affect the pressure required for grasping [39],
and this would likely impact size perception.
The JNDs for angle perception in our study for the physical ob-
jects 3cm-8°, 6cm-8°, 9cm-8° and 6cm-16° are 42.0%, 32.4%, 31.9% and
29.0% respectively. In a prior study, de Tinguy et al. [16] estimated
the JND for a 4cm physical object with 10° taper angle was 44.7%
which is similar to the 42.0% JND of our 3cm physical object with
8° taper angle.
