12 
 
of the coupling layer from the out-of-plane direction increases progressively from Case 1 to 
Case 4, indicating that greater deviation of the coupling layer contributes to faster switching. 
In our simulation, we only consider coupled magnetization dynamics; however, additional 
effects, such as spin pumping, could further contribute to the damping enhancement43–45. 
Overall, a larger HCP and a smaller Hk2 facilitate faster switching by increase the deviation of 
the coupling layer during the free layer switching. 
In our devices, smaller-sized MTJs exhibit lower stability, as MTJ stability is proportional to 
its volume and thus scales with the square of the diameter. This reduced stability of the coupling 
layer thus contributes to the observed faster switching. Meanwhile, we note that the HCP is not 
strictly constant. In an SAF structure, the coupling strength between the two layers varies with 
pillar size, primarily due to changes in the dipole field46. The plot of loop center field versus 
1/diameter (Extended Data Fig. 1(c)) confirms that as the pillar size changes, the increased 
dipole field interacts with the interlayer exchange coupling, thereby modifying the overall 
coupling strength. Although this effect suggests that larger devices should switch faster, the 
size-dependent stability effect dominates. In the ideal scenario, where the VCEC-induced 
effective field is sufficiently strong to enable bipolar switching, the coupling strength will 
always increase during switching, leading to an enhanced damping effect and, consequently, 
faster switching. 
Conclusions 
In summary, we have demonstrated that VCEC enables ultrafast and directional magnetization 
control in pMTJs. Using nanosecond-scale voltage pulses, we observed the persistence of a 
directional exchange field under sub-nanosecond conditions, confirming the fast response of 
VCEC. These results provide experimental evidence that exchange coupling can be modulated 
electronically besides ionically, fundamentally distinguishing the VCEC mechanism from 
magneto-ionic approaches that rely on ionic diffusion. By combining this effect with VCMA, 
we achieved deterministic magnetization switching within 87.5 ps. Macrospin simulations 
reveal that the torque responsible for voltage-driven switching is field-like, in contrast to the 
damping-like torques in STT or SOT mechanisms. This field-like torque benefits from 
enhanced angular momentum dissipation through exchange coupling, leading to faster 
relaxation and switching dynamics. These effects were further amplified in smaller devices and 
might be further enhanced in SAF structures with stronger interlayer coupling. Together, these 
results establish VCEC as a voltage-driven mechanism capable of fast, deterministic, and 
energy-efficient switching. Looking forward, further engineering of the device architecture 
may lead to even faster and more robust operation, shedding light on a pathway toward high-
speed, low-power spintronic memory and logic applications. 
 
References 
