3.2.2
TEMPLATE GUIDED GENERATION
In this task, we investigate the use of an existing material to serve as a template for the diffusion process.
Instead of sampling AT , XT , and LT from their prior distributions at T = 1000—representing the gener-
ation from complete noise—we initiate the diffusion process at T < 1000. This approach involves adding
noise to a specified template material at the chosen timestep. Similar to the masked generation task, only a
subset of the atoms of the template material is conditioned on a target DOS, while the DOS of the uncondi-
tioned atoms can vary freely. This type of task can be useful when performing inverse design within specific
materials classes such as perovskites or two-dimensional materials. For illustration, we use Zn2Sn62 as the
template material and initialize the diffusion process at T ∈{200, 350, 500}. In this task, the Zn atoms in
Zn2Sn6 are conditioned to match Ni’s DOS. We generate 50 candidate structures for each T and select a
representative structure to visualize its conditioned atoms’ DOS with the ground truth in Fig. 5.
Template: Zn2Sn6
FeNiSeSn5
CoCoSn6
CoCoAu4Sn2
Figure 5: Density of states (DOS) for generated materials from starting timestep T ∈{200, 350, 500}. The
template material Zn2Sn6 is shown on the far left. The orange curve represents the DOS of the first atom
in each generated material, conditioned on Ni’s DOS from Au3Ni (shown in blue). The conditioned atoms
are underlined, with the first atom highlighted in red to indicate that the plotted DOS corresponds to it.
Visualizations of all structures are of a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell.
From Fig. 5, we can observe that the DOS of the first atom in the generated materials closely aligns with
the target DOS, but still maintains the 3D structure of the original template. Due to the diffusion process
starting from a template material noisified at T < 1000, the final composition exhibits a strong bias towards
the original Sn, though at higher T, the composition moves farther away from Sn to become other elements.
Interestingly, the original Zn atoms, which are conditioned on Ni’s DOS, are replaced by other element
types such as Fe and Co rather than Ni. This suggests that DOSMatGen can propose chemically viable
substitutions for the conditioned atoms by considering the overall composition, even when the target DOS
is directly associated with that of Ni.
3.2.3
FIXED ATOM TYPE GENERATION
In this task, we explore the feasibility of fixing the first atom’s element type to an arbitrary specified element.
Similar to the masked generation task, the diffusion process begins at T = 1000, meaning the materials
are generated entirely from noise. The key difference in this task is that the first atom is constrained to a
predefined element type, whereas in the masked generation task, the model can freely diffuse the first atom
into any element type. The first atom in the generated structure is still conditioned on the DOS of Ni from
Au3Ni. In our experiments, we define a constraint on the element type to be Ti, Co, Cu, or Pd. Co and Cu
are selected because their proximity to to Ni in the same period, and similarly Pd is chosen for being in the
same group as Ni. Meanwhile, Ti is included as an element which bears little chemical similarity to Ni,
to test if the model can nevertheless generate an atomic environment to enable Ti to behave electronically
like Ni. For each element type, we generate 50 candidate structures and select a representative structure to
visualize its first atom’s DOS with the ground truth in Fig. 6.
Fig. 6 reveals that when the first atom is constrained to neighboring transition metals such as Co, Cu, and
Pd, the resulting density of states (DOS) demonstrates remarkable alignment with the target DOS. This is to
be expected due to the proximity of Pd, Co and Cu to Ni in the periodic table. Meanwhile, the DOS of the
Ti-constrained case is not as similar to target DOS, though it still exhibits a peak near the ground truth peak
location, suggesting that this is a harder task, but one which DOSMatGen is still able to follow the guidance
to some extent. In addition, in all four generated structures shown in Fig. 6, we observe high compositional
diversity in the unconditioned atoms. These are exciting observations, as it suggests that DOSMatGen can
provide viable elemental substitutions while maintaining a similar electronic structure. This concept can
conceivably be expanded to tackle pressing materials design challenges such as finding earth-abundant and
low-toxicity substitutions to existing functional materials such as noble metal catalysts or lead-based halide
perovskites.
2Materials Project ID: mp-971919.
7
