74
Evidence for Intrinsic charm in the proton
4FNS Charm PDF constrained by experimental data for Q > Q0
• NNPDF4.0 dataset • NNLO QCD calculations
4FNS Charm PDF parametrised at Q0
• Deep-learning parametrisation • Monte Carlo representation of uncertainties
4FNS to 3FNS transformation
NNLO or N3LO matching conditions
Intrinsic (3FNS) Charm
• Scale-independent • PDF and MHO uncertainties
QCD evolution
QCD evolution
Figure 3.6: The 4FNS charm PDF is parametrized at Q0 and evolved to all Q, where it is constrained by
the NNPDF4.0 global dataset. Subsequently, it is transformed to the 3FNS where (if nonzero) it provides
the intrinsic charm component.
input parametrization scale Q0. Next, this 4FNS charm PDF is transformed to the 3FNS at
some scale matching scale Qc by inverting Eq. (1.101). The choice of both Q0 and Qc are
immaterial. The former because perturbative evolution is invertible, so results for the PDFs
do not depend on the choice of parametrization scale Q0. The latter because the 3FNS charm
is scale independent, so it does not depend on the value of Qc. Both statements of course
hold up to fixed perturbative accuracy, and are violated by MHO corrections. In practice, we
parametrize PDFs at the scale Q0 = 1.65 GeV and perform the inversion at a scale chosen equal
to the charm mass Qc = mc = 1.51 GeV. The scale-independent 3FNS charm PDF is then the
sought-for intrinsic charm.
Calculation of the 3FNS charm PDF.
The Monte Carlo representation of the probability
distribution associated to the 4FNS charm PDF determined by the global analysis contains
an intrinsic component mixed with a perturbatively generated contribution, with the latter
becoming larger in the x <∼0.1 region as the scale Q is increased. In order to extract the
intrinsic component, we transform PDFs to the 3FNS at the scale Qc = mc = 1.51 GeV using
EKO (Section 2.1.1). In this study we have performed this inversion at NNLO as well as at N3LO
which as we shall see provides a handle on the perturbative uncertainty of the NNLO result.
This work has performed when not all the N3LO matching conditions were fully known. In
particular A(3)
gg [101] and A(3)
Qg [102, 103] were published in a later stage. The impact of the
N3LO corrections on intrinsic charm is discussed further in Section 4.3.4.
