5 
 
 
To unveil the cracking mechanisms, we use the all-inorganic halide perovskite CsPbBr3 for 
comparison. There is no crack on the surface of the CsPbBr3 single crystal after an e-beam radiation 
of 224 seconds under 8E9 e/µm3 @ 10 keV, as shown in Figure S1 (Supplementary material), 
which suggests that the unstable organic groups play a key role in crack growth. Figure 2 shows 
the in-situ energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) analysis results and reveals that the 
contents of C and N elements in both FAPbBr3 and MAPbBr3 single crystals decrease under 150-
second e-beam radiation. Cracks after EDS experiments are observed in Figure S2 (Supplementary 
material). Typically, contamination from impurities increases the EDS signals of C contents over 
time [33,34], but the remarkable decrease of C and N contents indicates that the organic 
components in OIHP single crystals volatilize during e-beam radiation. Besides, the amount of C 
and N elements in MAPbBr3 reduces more and faster than that in FAPbBr3, corresponding to the 
higher crack density of MAPbBr3. The contents of C and N in MAPbBr3 tend to remain unchanged 
after 50 seconds, while they continue decreasing in FAPbBr3 after 100 seconds. The element 
content fluctuations also increase after long-duration radiation due to contamination [34]. 
 
 
Figure 2. EDS analysis of the atomic percent (at%) changes of (a) C and (b) N elements in 
FAPbBr3 and MAPbBr3 single crystals under the e-beam radiation up to 150 seconds.  
 
2.2.  In-situ synchrotron XRD analysis 
The synchrotron X-ray provides high energy radiation in a small area, and the synchrotron grazing 
incidence X-ray diffraction (GI-XRD) is an ideal tool to analyze the evolution process on the 
surface of OIHP single crystals [35,36]. Figures 3a and 3b show the in-situ GI-XRD results of the 
FAPbBr3 and MAPbBr3 single crystals under 5E9 ph/µm3 @ 11 keV. More GI-XRD results of X-
ray beam energies at 14 keV and 17 keV are shown in Figure S3, and the XRD pattern evolutions 
