29
2016; Vocke et al., 2018). For example, the observation
of amplified scattered waves from a rotating fluid of light
has provided an experimental demonstration of Penrose
super-radiance in an analogue system (Braidotti et al.,
2022). Typical experiments consist in creating a rotat-
ing superfluid by imposing a rotating phase to the fluid of
light and observing the scattering of a plane wave on both
side of the center of rotation. Under specific conditions,
well described by analogue gravity model of ergoregion
instability (Giacomelli and Carusotto, 2020), the plane
wave is amplified extracting energy from the rotating su-
perfluid.
C. Out-of-equilibrium dynamics and quenches
The study of out-of-equilibrium dynamics in fluids of
light, particularly their response to sudden parameter
changes (quenches) is especially relevant in this system
since there is an interaction quench directly embedded in
the geometry of the platform. Indeed, when light enters
the nonlinear medium at the initial time (input face), it
experiences a drastic change of the photon-photon inter-
action from virtually zero (in air) to a finite value in the
medium. A second quench occurs when the light exits the
medium (output face) and the interaction is again set to
zero. These quenches have been used to study the non-
equilibrium pre-condensation of classical waves (ˇSanti´c
et al., 2018), the emergence of coherence (Abuzarli et al.,
2022; Fusaro et al., 2017), and the excitation of elemen-
tary modes such as Bogoliubov phonons (Fontaine et al.,
2020; Steinhauer et al., 2022).
Condensation and pre-condensation of classical waves
has long been an important topic for fluids of light (As-
chieri et al., 2011; Connaughton et al., 2005; ˇSanti´c et al.,
2018; Sun et al., 2012). Recently, a different approach has
been studied with a focus on the dynamical evolution of
non-equilibrium states, particularly the phenomenon of
pre-thermalization following an interaction quench and
the emergence of a quasi-equilibrium state.
In this framework, the emergence of pre-thermal states
has been observed (Abuzarli et al., 2022). These states
retain partial memory of their initial conditions while re-
sembling their thermal counterparts. In this study, the
emergence of long-range algebraic correlations spread-
ing within a light cone—a signature of a quasi-steady
state resembling a 2D thermal superfluid—was proposed
in (Bardon-Brun et al., 2020) and observed through di-
rect measurements of the first-order correlation func-
tion in (Abuzarli et al., 2022).
This approach enables
the study of transitions between different correlation
regimes within pre-thermal states. A controlled increase
in fluid fluctuations revealed a crossover from algebraic
to short-range (exponential) correlations, drawing a di-
rect analogy to the Kosterlitz-Thouless transition in ther-
mal equilibrium (Hadzibabic et al., 2006; Situ and Fleis-
cher, 2020). These findings suggest the presence of non-
equilibrium precursors to thermodynamic phase tran-
sitions, providing an interesting direction for applying
fluids of light to study quantum phase transitions and
many-body physics far from equilibrium.
The intrinsic quenches embedded in the experimental
platform leads to the excitation of elementary modes and
complex relaxation dynamics. One direct consequence of
these quenches is the spontaneous generation of Bogoli-
ubov phonons, which propagate through the fluid and
imprint a characteristic oscillatory structure in both real
and momentum space. The static structure factor S(k)
has been measured in fluids of light as described in Sec-
tion VI.F and reveals the formation of ring-like inter-
ference patterns, indicating a well-defined phase relation
between excitations. These oscillations provide a direct
probe of the system’s coherence and response to sud-
den interaction changes. Correlated quasiparticle pairs
emitted due to the quench can be tracked using density
correlation measurements. The emergence of expanding
spatial modulations in the fluid’s density fluctuations re-
flects the system’s attempt to relax toward a new steady
state.
By analyzing the Fourier transform of the cor-
relation function, experiments have revealed oscillatory
structures that encode information about pair production
and collective excitations following the quench (Stein-
hauer et al., 2022).
So far, these measurements have
been limited to classical noise above the standard quan-
tum limit. In these experiments, quantum noise is ex-
pected to be dominant, as the modes at k⊥̸= 0 are as-
sumed to be in a vacuum state or similarly that the spa-
tial intensity noise of the laser is at the shot noise limit.
In principle, quantum depletion (Chang et al., 2016), or
a non-equilibrium response with an envelope linked to
the quantum depletion should be visible. However, low-
frequency technical noise in the temporal domain has so
far prevented the observation of quantum correlations.
D. Photonic lattices and analogies with condensed matter
systems
Fluids of light have also been explored to study analo-
gies with condensed matter systems. Photonic lattices
provide a powerful tool for exploring wave dynamics in
structured optical media as illustrated in Fig. 19.
In this approach, a periodic potential is introduced
through a transverse modulation of the refractive index,
creating an effective lattice for photons. The evolution of
light within such lattices can be either static or dynami-
cally modulated along the propagation axis z, effectively
simulating time-dependent Hamiltonians. These systems
allow for the study of fundamental effects such as Bloch
oscillations, topological transport, and the emergence of
photonic Landau levels.
In the linear regime, photonic lattices enable the study
