its mechanical performance (Hutchinson et al., 2022). Resulting residual stresses and microstruc-
tural heterogeneities play a crucial role in mechanical behavior of martensitic steels, influencing
fatigue crack initiation, which can occur intergranularly along grain boundaries and transgranu-
larly through the grains (Wildeis et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2022; Park et al., 2024). The propagation
of short cracks is influenced by multiple microstructural factors such as the prior austenite grain
boundaries (Kunio et al., 1979), lath morphology (Sun et al., 2025) or dislocation density (Saha
et al., 2020). These factors are also depicted in Fig. 1.
Figure 1: Schematic representation of crack propagation in martensite.
Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM) provides a framework for analyzing crack behavior in
materials, assuming linear elasticity (Anderson & Anderson, 2005; Broberg, 1999). According to
LEFM, the stress σ(r) near a crack tip is given by:
σ(r) =
k
√
2πr,
(1)
where k is a stress intensity factor and r is the distance from the crack tip. At r = 0 this equation
predicts a singularity (i.e., infinite stress), which is not physically. A similar situation holds true
for the strain around a crack tip.
The simultaneously acquisition of synchrotron-based x-ray diffraction (XRD) and x-ray fluorescence
(XRF) has been proven to be a powerful tool for enhancing the understanding of material properties
on the micrometer scale. Examples include the interplay of local strain and material composition
on the performance of thin film solar cells (Ulvestad et al., 2019; Calvo-Almazan et al., 2019), the
characterization of extraterrestrial samples (Lanzirotti et al., 2024) or the application in chemical
analysis (Su et al., 2024). In this study, we combined micro XRD, XRF, and optical microscopy
to map strain fields around crack tips with micrometer resolution in order to determine the factual
strain around crack tips.
This was done for three samples, two shot-peened samples and one
un-modified sample.
2
