Calcite cement
Quartz
Opaque mineral
CT greyscale
TS
Figure 11: Comparison of paired images: grayscale CT and TS. The TS image provides additional information on
cementation and mineralogy that is not clearly visible in the CT plane.
weathering effects—features not discernible in CT images alone. Integrating multimodal imaging improves material
property assignment based on actual geological characteristics.
This study demonstrates the potential of multimodal image registration to enhance digital rock-based effective property
computations. The proposed method also lays the foundation for data-driven super-resolution techniques and improved
numerical simulations leveraging multimodal imaging. Future work could extend this approach to 3D reconstructions
using machine learning, further enhancing the predictive capabilities of digital rock physics by incorporating high-
resolution thin-section information into 3D models.
Data Availability Statement
The code and data for reproducing the results will be published on GitHub after the publication acceptance.
Acknowledgments
We acknowledge Shell for financial support and for providing the digital rock images. In particular, we appreciate Dr.
Ronny Hofmann for sharing insights into the challenges of image registration in practice and industry. This study was
primarily conducted using the Sherlock cluster at Stanford University. We are grateful to Stanford University and the
Stanford Research Computing Center for providing computational resources and support for this research. We also
acknowledge the sponsors of the Stanford Center for Earth Resources Forecasting (SCERF).
References
YI Zhu, Patrick J Fox, and Joseph P Morris. A pore-scale numerical model for flow through porous media. International
Journal for Numerical and Analytical Methods in Geomechanics, 23(9):881–904, 1999.
Jacob Bear and Alexander H-D Cheng. Modeling groundwater flow and contaminant transport, volume 23. Springer,
2010.
Yu Chen, Albert J Valocchi, Qinjun Kang, and Hari S Viswanathan. Inertial effects during the process of supercritical
CO2 displacing brine in a sandstone: Lattice Boltzmann simulations based on the continuum-surface-force and
geometrical wetting models. Water Resources Research, 55(12):11144–11165, 2019.
13
