4.2.2
Keeping the difference of radial coordinate fixed —both detectors are static (SS)
In this subsection, we maintain all configurations identical to those in the previous subsection, with the exception that
we now vary the distance of detector A from the horizon while keeping the difference in radial coordinates between both
detectors, denoted as d(rA, rB), fixed at a fixed Painlev´e-Gullstrand (PG) time slice. This would correspond to the
fixed proper distance between detectors in PG coordinates. The corresponding correlation measures with conformally
coupled two-point functions W HHI
ψ,c
defined in (18), W Unruh
ψ,c
defined in (26), and W Boulware
ψ,c
defined in (33), as plotted in
Fig. 7, exhibit the same relative ordering of correlation measures as in the preceding subsection, as well as in Fig. 2; i.e.,
the mutual information and the concurrence are maximal for the Boulware state and minimal for the HHI state. This
again suggests that the presence of Hawking radiation in HHI and Unruh states diminishes the vacuum correlations.
Furthermore, near the event horizon, the correlation measures are close to zero for the HHI and Unruh states, suggesting
the gravitational redshift also leads to diminishing the vacuum correlations. In Fig. 8, we have plotted the graphs for
concurrence and mutual information for the two-point functions W HHI
ψ,s
defined in Eq. (22), W Unruh
ψ,s
defined in (30),
and W Boulware
ψ,s
defined in (35).
It can be observed that at any separation scale, the concurrence in all three states
demonstrates a similar pattern, which remains nonzero and finite close to the horizon. Moreover, the mutual information
is also nonzero near the event horizon for the Unruh and the HHI states. This behavior differs from that observed in
the case of scalar fields, as analyzed in [13], where all forms of correlations vanish near the horizon for static detectors
in both the Unruh and HHI states. The discussion in the current paragraph suggests that the vanishing of fermionic
field entanglement near the horizon depends on the choice of the interaction Hamiltonian. One can choose an interaction
Hamiltonian such that the anti-Hawking effect takes place, enhancing entanglement, as opposed to the Hawking effect,
which degrades it. One can refer [98], for the state dependence of the decay of the entanglement in the Fermionic field
under the infinite acceleration limit, which is the case near the horizon.
It can be seen from the bottom-right and top-right plots of Figs. 7 and 8 that, apart from the decreasing behavior of
correlation measures near the horizon, the total correlation, as well as the concurrence, exhibits a local maximum away
from the horizon. This behavior is not evident from the top left plot because the mutual information for large-scale
separated detectors varies slowly in comparison to the small-scale separated detectors. This contrasts with the bottom
left plot, which shows that the concurrence for large-scale separated detectors decays rapidly and goes to zero as one
moves away from the horizon. Near the horizon, both mutual information and concurrence for the Unruh vacuum closely
resemble those of the HHI state, while farther from the horizon, these measures align more closely with the Boulware
state. The plots in Fig. 8 also suggest that, far from the horizon, the concurrence is minimized for the Boulware state
and maximized for the HHI state. However, Fig. 7 show that mutual information and concurrence are minimized for
the HHI state and maximized for the Boulware state. This reversal suggests that the anti-Hawking effect, observed for
the two-point function used in Fig. 8 (see Fig. 5), enhances entanglement. The HHI state’s correlation measures for the
case considered in Fig. 8 are maximized due to the dominance of the anti-Hawking effect far from the horizon, whereas
for the case of the two point function corresponding to conformal symmetry preserving frame tetrad in Fig. 7, Hawking
radiation diminishes correlations in the HHI state.
One also observes that for smaller separation between detectors, all plots of Fig 7 follow a similar pattern, which
is consistent with the observation in the previous subsection 4.2.1 that the entanglement properties on a small scale
follow a similar trend in all vacua. Additionally, as the detectors are positioned at greater separations, the concurrence
diminishes, especially at larger distances from the horizon. Here, by diminishes, we mean that the concurrence becomes
small enough to implement a harvesting protocol with this energy gap. The observations of this section imply that
the anti-Hawking effect, in conjunction with Hawking radiation and the gravitational redshift, plays a pivotal role in
determining the entanglement properties in the vicinity of a black hole. To explore whether the decay of all correlations
in the plots near the horizon is due to the high gravitational redshift and to investigate the role of the anti-Hawking
effect further, we consider two freely falling detectors in the next subsection.
4.2.3
Two freely falling detectors (FF)
In the realm of quantum physics, a unique characteristic emerges, where the structure of the Hilbert space can undergo
substantial variations among different observers, and the nature of entanglement is contingent upon how one decomposes
the state space. The process of black hole evaporation is a physical phenomenon, and, as such, the mass of the black
hole must diminish from the perspective of any observer. Consequently, a freely falling timelike detector in the HHI and
Unruh states will also perceive the presence of radiation (which need not be thermal) from the black hole [99; 13; 86; 100].
Additionally, a freely falling detector will also perceive a time-dependent vacuum polarization in all three vacua. These
facts also motivate us to envisage both detectors as being in free fall from infinity, with Gaussian switching function
peaked at different times. We choose detectors to be initially at rest at spatial infinity so that the adapted coordinate
22
