level-two trigger such as those employed in particle detection
experiments, as [33] details as well. There, SNN’s have been
studied in relation to their ability to detect high-pT events at
the Large Hadron Collider, a related approach to PETNet’s
attempt to detect coincident particle events in PET.
A key concept in current applications of SNNs is that
of
spike-encoding. Existing
software
packages
such
as
snntorch [18] differentiate between three separate methods;
rate-encoding, in which input features are represented as
spike frequencies, latency-encoding, in which input features
determine the arrival time of individual spikes, and delta-
modulation, where spikes indicate the temporal change of
input features. As a result, common loss functions target one or
several aspects of these encodings. Examples for classiﬁcation
tasks include cross-entropy-spike-count loss, encouraging the
correct class to ﬁre at all times, while suppressing all others.
Equally, cross-entropy-temporal loss, which similarly encour-
ages the correct class to ﬁre before all others. Alternatively,
losses such as the mean-squared-error-membrane loss target
the output layer’s membrane potentials instead of the spike
count. Recently, more sophisticated methods such as the Infor-
mation Maximization Loss presented by [34] aim to improve
SNNs with insights into Information theory.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this work we present PETNet, a spiking neural network
architecture for coincidence photon detection in positron emis-
sion tomography. PETNet introduces a novel multi-objective
loss function which accounts for spike counts and timing
jointly. It further provides a method to model the a-priori
known detector geometry using window functions. Our eval-
uations on simulation data from two application use-cases
demonstrate that PETNet can yield a prediction accuracy
surpassing the state-of-the-art analytical approach while dras-
tically reducing computation time.
Our approach provides a proof of concept with promising
initial results, indicating that utilizing SNNs for coincidence
detection in PET is a path worth pursuing. On a broader
scale, our work highlights the potential of SNNs to be used as
efﬁcient level two trigger mechanisms such as those utilized
in various particle detectors, with coincidence detection in
PET being merely a specialized example. Future research
could focus on many more such applications across the ﬁeld
of particle physics. One advantage worth noting is that the
SNN approach allows deployment for real time prediction
during scan time. The potential deployment of SNNs on
low-power neuromorphic hardware [35] enables integration
of the algorithm directly into the detector ring for on-board
prediction with minimal computational requirements. This
could drastically reduce data transfer between the scanner
and the ofﬂine compute infrastructure, since only registered
coincidences need to be transmitted. Moreover, the online
prediction can be used for iterative image reconstruction, and
thus the option to stop the scan prematurely when sufﬁcient
image quality is reached.
Our study reveals current challenges in real world appli-
cations of SNNs. Although SNNs utilize, in theory, sparse
computations, current software implementations still operate
on dense matrix-matrix multiplication, making the algorithm
vastly inefﬁcient and causing the need for large scale com-
putational resources. As this goes against the overarching
promise of SNNs being highly energy-efﬁcient, future work
requires truly sparse implementations of tensor computations.
Nonetheless, our results demonstrate the great potential of
SNNs for efﬁcient modeling of sparse, binary, time-resolved
data.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Roy, A. Jaiswal, and P. Panda, “Towards spike-based machine
intelligence with neuromorphic computing,” Nature, vol. 575, no. 7784,
pp. 607–617, 2019.
[2] L. Deng, Y. Wu, X. Hu, L. Liang, Y. Ding, G. Li, G. Zhao, P. Li,
and Y. Xie, “Rethinking the performance comparison between snns and
anns,” Neural networks, vol. 121, pp. 294–307, 2020.
[3] J. F. Oliver, I. Torres-Espallardo, R. Fontaine, S. Ziegler, and M. Rafecas,
“Comparison of coincidence identiﬁcation techniques for high resolution
pet,” in 2008 IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium Conference Record.
IEEE, 2008, pp. 4732–4735.
[4] C. Ritzer, R. Becker, A. Buck, V. Commichau, J. Debus, L. Djambazov,
A. Eleftheriou, J. Fischer, P. Fischer, M. Ito, P. Khateri, W. Lustermann,
M. Ritzert, U. R¨oser, M. Rudin, I. Sacco, C. Tsoumpas, G. Warnock,
M. Wyss, A. Zagozdzinska-Bochenek, B. Weber, and G. Dissertori,
“Initial characterization of the saﬁr prototype pet-mr scanner,” IEEE
Transactions on Radiation and Plasma Medical Sciences, vol. 4, no. 5,
pp. 613–621, 2020.
[5] L. Lapicque, “Recherches quantitatives sur l’excitation electrique des
nerfs,” Journal of Physiology and Pathology, vol. 9, pp. 620–635, 1907.
[6] K. Yamazaki, V.-K. Vo-Ho, D. Bulsara, and N. Le, “Spiking neural
networks and their applications: A review,” Brain Sciences, vol. 12,
no. 7, p. 863, 2022.
[7] J. Ding, B. Dong, F. Heide, Y. Ding, Y. Zhou, B. Yin, and X. Yang,
“Biologically inspired dynamic thresholds for spiking neural networks,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 6090–
6103, 2022.
[8] J. H. Lee, T. Delbruck, and M. Pfeiffer, “Training deep spiking neural
networks using backpropagation,” Frontiers in neuroscience, vol. 10, p.
508, 2016.
[9] Y. Wu, L. Deng, G. Li, J. Zhu, and L. Shi, “Spatio-temporal backpropa-
gation for training high-performance spiking neural networks,” Frontiers
in neuroscience, vol. 12, p. 331, 2018.
[10] E. O. Neftci, H. Mostafa, and F. Zenke, “Surrogate gradient learning
in spiking neural networks: Bringing the power of gradient-based opti-
mization to spiking neural networks,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine,
vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 51–63, 2019.
[11] G. Bellec, D. Salaj, A. Subramoney, R. Legenstein, and W. Maass,
“Long short-term memory and learning-to-learn in networks of spiking
neurons,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 31,
2018.
[12] M. Ciurletti, M. Traub, M. Karlbauer, M. V. Butz, and S. Otte, “Signal
denoising with recurrent spiking neural networks and active tuning,” in
International Conference on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks. Springer, 2021,
pp. 220–232.
[13] H. Fan, H. Su, and L. J. Guibas, “A Point Set Generation Network for
3D Object Reconstruction from a Single Image,” in Proceedings of the
2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 605–613.
[14] J. A. Fessler and B. P. Sutton, “Nonuniform fast fourier transforms using
min-max interpolation,” IEEE transactions on signal processing, vol. 51,
no. 2, pp. 560–574, 2003.
[15] P. R. Mendes, P. Bruyndonckx, M. C. Castro, Z. Li, J. M. P´erez, and
I. S. Mart´ın, “Optimization of a monolithic detector block design for
a prototype human brain pet scanner,” in 2008 IEEE Nuclear Science
Symposium Conference Record.
IEEE, 2008, pp. 4927–4930.
