8
D.
The red-rec algorithm (parallel implementation)
In this section, we describe how we parallelize our en-
hanced red-rec algorithm using GPUs. A GPU can exe-
cute a very large number of threads concurrently. These
threads are grouped into thread blocks, where coordi-
nation across threads within the same block is efficient,
whereas coordination across different blocks introduces
greater overhead.
In our parallelization of the red-rec
algorithm, we assign each thread block to reconfigure
an entire column. Threads in the same block work to-
gether to calculate the surplus of the column using a par-
allel reduction operation [28], and to reconfigure the col-
umn using our parallel exact 1D algorithm described in
Sec. III B. Different blocks reconfigure different columns.
To fully utilize the GPU hardware resources, we aim
to execute as many thread blocks simultaneously as pos-
sible. Hence, we must extract as many columns as pos-
sible that can be reconfigured simultaneously. However,
the sequential red-rec algorithm is designed to reconfigure
the columns one after the other. To extract columns that
can be reconfigured in parallel, we employ two strategies.
First, we reconfigure columns with positive surplus at the
beginning along with columns with zero surplus. Second,
we extract a partial order of the columns with negative
surplus and group together those that can be reconfig-
ured independently.
The rest of this section describes
the details of our parallel implementation.
Reconfiguring columns with non-negative sur-
plus.
In the sequential red-rec algorithm, columns with
zero surplus are reconfigured first because they are nei-
ther donors or receivers.
On the other hand, columns
with positive surplus are reconfigured during the main
loop of the algorithm or at the end, after they have do-
nated to the receiver columns they are paired with. In
the parallel algorithm, to increase the number of columns
that can be reconfigured simultaneously, we reconfigure
both zero surplus and positive surplus columns from the
outset. All the columns are reconfigured in parallel by
different thread blocks.
Reconfiguring columns with negative surplus.
Once the columns with non-negative surplus have been
reconfigured, the columns with negative surplus remain.
In the sequential red-rec algorithm, the main loop of the
algorithm repeatedly identifies the best donor-receiver
pair, redistributes atoms across the pair, then recon-
figures at least one of the columns in the pair.
The
redistribution-reconfiguration cycle is repeated until all
negative surplus columns have been saturated. To paral-
lelize such an inherently sequential algorithm, we observe
that although identifying the pairs is a sequential process,
actually solving the pairs via redistribution and reconfig-
uration can sometimes be done in parallel. For example,
consider the case where the first pair to be solved con-
sists of columns a and b, and the second pair to be solved
consists of columns c and d. Although we cannot identify
that (c, d) is the second pair before identifying that (a, b)
is the first pair, we can actually solve (a, b) and (c, d)
independently once they have been identified. Hence, in-
stead of identifying (a, b), solving (a, b), identifying (c, d),
then solving (c, d), as the sequential algorithm does, we
can identify (a, b) then (c, d) sequentially, and then solve
them both in parallel.
Of course, if the first pair was
(a, b) and the second pair was (a, c), then they cannot
be solved in parallel because they share a column. But
still, if the third pair was (d, e), then it can be solved in
parallel with (a, b) before (a, c) because it is independent
of both.
Based on this observation, our parallel red-rec algo-
rithm reconfigures columns with negative surplus by se-
quentially identifying the donor-receiver pairs and up-
dating their surpluses but without immediately resolving
them, constructing a partial order of the pairs, traversing
the partial order to construct groups of pairs that can
be solved independently, then finally solving the pairs
in the same group in parallel. The process of identify-
ing the groups of donor-receiver pairs to be executed in
parallel is performed by a single thread block while the
remaining thread blocks remain idle. Once that thread
block is done, it broadcasts the grouping to the other
thread blocks. The thread blocks then iterate through
the groups, and for each group, solve the pairs in paral-
lel, with each thread block solving a different pair. Note
that in both the sequential and parallel algorithms, the
pairs are identified according to the same rules, the re-
ceivers are solved in the same way, and every token is
guaranteed to move at most once. The concept of de-
layed moves is also preserved.
Single kernel implementation.
Since we evaluate
our implementation on small problem sizes, the overhead
of calling a GPU kernel can be significant. To limit the
impact of this overhead, we implement the entire parallel
red-rec algorithm using a single GPU kernel. Doing so
also allows frequently used data to remain in the GPU’s
shared memory, avoiding the need to reload it from global
memory across kernel calls.
To enable a single-kernel
implementation, each thread block must have enough
threads to map each thread to a trap within a specific
column or map each thread to a column. For this rea-
son, we configure the kernel with W thread blocks each
having max(H, W) threads, where H and W denote the
height and width of the input graph, respectively.
E.
The bird algorithm
In the section, we describe the newly-proposed bird al-
gorithm (see Alg. 2). The bird algorithm is a heuristic
algorithm that solves atom reconfiguration problems on
grids. It achieves greater operational performance than
the red-rec algorithm (Sec. III C). However, unlike red-
rec, which can be adapted to handle arbitrary target con-
figurations on grids, the bird algorithm requires target
