On the other hand, ğ›¿Eddy and ğ›¿MDyn have the same sign in high-latitude regions, around 30â—¦, and
at the equator; there both effects provide roughly similar contributions to the total Pâˆ’E changes.
A natural interpretation is that the positive contribution of eddy transport to moisture convergence
changes at high-latitudes can be attributed to the poleward shift of the mid-latitude jets, while
the changes in the tropics result from horizontal mixing associated with eddies generated by the
equatorial jet. Indeed, the meridional structure is very similar to the structure of the changes in
eddy energy transport (Fig. 5), dominated by latent heat in this region.
The fixed-SST case (Fig. 13, b) is similar to the interactive-SST case, with a number of interesting
differences. Most importantly, the spatial structure of the total Pâˆ’E change follows less closely the
MMC change contribution. The main differences are found in the subtropics and regions poleward.
First, there remains here a much more vigorous and vertically extended meridional circulation in
the subtropics, which converges moisture around 20â—¦and accounts for the larger peak in ğ›¿MDyn
compared to the interactive-SST case. In addition, the eddy moisture transport changes are also
larger than in the interactive-SST case in the 20â—¦-40â—¦region, like for the eddy energy transport
changes (Fig. 5).
We conclude that the moisture transport changes, and therefore the precipitation changes, are a
direct consequence of the circulation changes and are in particular dominated by the changes in
the MMC, with a locally important contribution from eddy transport changes (at the equator and
at high latitudes).
7. Conclusion
In this work, we have investigated the climate changes induced by a major reorganization of the
large-scale circulation in the tropical atmosphere, leading to the emergence of an eastward jet at
the equator. A transition to a state of this type, called equatorial superrotation, could occur under
various circumstances leading to enhanced diabatic heating in the tropics. Because it remains
unclear under which conditions state-of-the-art coupled models can simulate such a state, and such
conditions might depend on parameterizations which are not very well constrained, we have decided
to circumvent the two-way coupling in a first step and ask how a transition to superrotation, forced
dynamically, affects climate more generally, and in particular surface conditions. Our main result is
that even in the absence of any direct radiative forcing, the consequences of the circulation changes
30
