arXiv:2504.05834v1  [physics.flu-dyn]  8 Apr 2025
Elongation-Induced Segregation in Periodically Textured Microﬂuidic Channels
Fatemeh S. Ahmadi,1 Hossein Hamzehpour,1, 2 and Reza Shaebani3
1Department of Physics, K.N. Toosi University of Technology, Tehran 15875-4416, Iran
2School of Quantum Physics and Matter, Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences (IPM), Tehran 19538-33511, Iran
3Department of Theoretical Physics and Center for Biophysics,
Saarland University, 66123 Saarbr¨ucken, Germany
We numerically investigate the motion of elongated microparticles in microﬂuidic channels at low
Reynolds numbers. In channels with smooth walls, asymmetric initial conditions– including particle
orientation and lateral position– lead to continuous variations in particle trajectories, potentially
exhibiting repeated behavior depending on the channel geometry and initial conditions. However, we
ﬁnd that introducing periodically textured walls induces alignment of the particle with the channel
centerline within a speciﬁc range of texture wavelengths.
This occurs as the textured pattern
disrupts the uniformity of the ﬂow, creating localized high-velocity nodes that repeatedly guide the
particle toward the centerline as it moves downstream. Notably, the characteristic length scale over
which this alignment forms reduces with increasing particle elongation and diverges with increasing
Reynolds number.
Our ﬁndings reveal that elongation-induced alignment can be leveraged for
microﬂuidic ﬁltering applications, enabling the eﬃcient separation of microparticles based on their
geometric properties. This work opens new avenues for designing microﬂuidic devices tailored for
high-precision particle sorting, with broad implications for biomedical and industrial applications.
Understanding the ﬂow of particles in microscale en-
vironments is crucial for advancements in technology,
medicine, and industry. The complexity arises from the
interplay of particle properties, ﬂuid characteristics, and
boundary conditions [1–4]. Of particular interest is parti-
cle motion in narrow slender passages. For example, lat-
eral dispersion in blood vessels plays a key role in drug de-
livery and transport of biomaterials [5]. Moreover, there
are broad applications in microﬂuidic devices for particle
puriﬁcation, sorting, and ﬁltration [6–11]. Microﬂuidic
separation techniques have evolved along two major ap-
proaches: Active methods utilize external ﬁelds– such
as acoustic, electric, magnetic, or optical– to manipulate
particles [11–16].
While these techniques are eﬀective,
the forces applied may pose risks to sensitive biomate-
rials, e.g. in cell sorting. In contrast, passive methods
exploit the intrinsic interactions between particles, mi-
crochannel architecture, and ﬂuid to achieve separation
[8–12]. A prominent passive method is deterministic lat-
eral displacement, which employs an array of obstacles
within the microchannel to separate spherical particles
based on size or softness [6, 7, 17–20]. As particles tra-
verse the array, their trajectories are inﬂuenced by their
physical characteristics, enabling precise separation.
Conventional microﬂuidic separation devices however
fail to function eﬀectively for real-world non-spherical ob-
jects [21]. While I-shaped pillar arrays have been success-
fully used for disc-shaped red blood cells [22], no univer-
sal design exists for arbitrary particle shapes, and fab-
rication constraints may limit feasibility. Recent studies
highlight the role of shape, showing that objects with
a single mirror-symmetry axis can self-align and focus
to the centerline in Stokes ﬂow [23, 24], though thermal
ﬂuctuations can aﬀect alignment [25]. In contrast, par-
ticles with two mirror-symmetry axes [23, 26] or asym-
metric surface properties [27] exhibit persistent rotation
and lateral migration. Despite these insights, the eﬀects
of shape asymmetry remain poorly understood, hinder-
ing the development of eﬃcient separation techniques for
non-spherical microparticles.
Here we investigate the motion of elongated particles
in microﬂuidic channels and propose a novel separation
technique using periodic wall textures to disrupt ﬂow uni-
formity and create high-velocity nodes. This method se-
lectively guides particles based on elongation, enabling
alignment and centerline focusing.
By tuning chan-
nel and texture geometries, our approach oﬀers precise
elongation-based microparticle separation, with promis-
ing applications in biomedical and materials science.
Model.— We consider the motion of elongated rigid
particles suspended in a steady unidirectional ﬂow
through a straight 2D rectangular channel of length L
and width W (Fig. 1). The particles are modeled as el-
lipses with an aspect ratio κ = D2
D1 , where D1 and D2 are
the major and minor diameters, respectively. The aspect
ratio varies from κ=0 for a rod (D2=0) to κ=1 for a disk
of radius R(=D1=D2). The particle’s orientation θ is de-
ﬁned as the angle between its major axis and the y-axis,
FIG. 1. Sketch of the simulation setup. The particle’s
orientation θ(t) and lateral position λ(t) generally change as
the particle moves along the channel.
