> 200 with the optimal CV but decreases with increasing θ, and is close to 1 with poor CVs.
For each CV, we added Poisson resetting at the optimal resetting rate on top of MetaD and
plotted the speedups with orange triangles. The speedup decreases with θ at a much slower
rate, and even poor CVs provide speedups close to that of the optimal CV. This result shows
that SR can be an alternative or complementary method to CV optimization.
Ref.39 gives two molecular examples that show the same qualitative behavior. First, the
transition between two metastable states of alanine tetrapeptide was accelerated using three
diﬀerent CVs, based on internal dihedral angles. For deﬁnitions of the angles, see Ref.39 The
φ3 dihedral angle, which is the optimal CV for the transition, provides a speedup of more
than four orders of magnitude, and resetting does not give additional acceleration. The ψ3
angle, a suboptimal CV, provides a speedup by two orders of magnitude, which is doubled
when adding SR at the optimal resetting rate. Lastly, φ2 is an extremely poor CV, providing
a speedup of less than an order of magnitude without SR. But, by resetting, the speedup
becomes close to that achieved by ψ3. As another example, the folding of the chignolin
mini protein (Figure 4) was enhanced using two CVs.
A CV based on harmonic linear
discriminant analysis85 provided speedups of two orders of magnitude, and resetting further
increased the speedup by a factor of ∼1.5. A CV based on the C-alpha root-mean-square
deviation (RMSD) from a folded conﬁguration provided speedups of ∼10 without resetting,
but > 100 with SR.
To better understand the cause of this trend, we plot the survival function for alanine
tetrapeptide in Figure 3(b). The unbiased FPT distribution (top left) is indeed exponential
(Note that the survival function of an exponential distribution is linear on a semi-log scale).
The COV=1, and resetting cannot be used as a standalone method. However, the bias of
MetaD disturbs the dynamics and changes the FPT distribution dramatically. Biasing along
φ3, the distribution decays much faster than exponential, and the COV is < 1 (top right).
With ψ3, the distribution has an exponential tail but decays faster at short times, and the
COV=1.2 (bottom left), which leads to acceleration by resetting. With the poorest CV,
φ2, the distribution is much broader (notice the diﬀerent range of the x-axis) and we ﬁnd
COV=3.1, explaining the great acceleration by resetting in this case.
We expect resetting to have a similar inﬂuence on additional CV-based enhanced sampling
methods apart from MetaD. The reason is that CV-based methods accelerate the exploration
of phase space by ﬂattening the free energy surface.
While this lowers energy barriers,
resulting in accessible transitions between metastable states, it can also encourage sampling
of high-energy regions of phase space away from the barrier, which are often not interesting
or even nonphysical. Simulations with suboptimal CVs are particularly susceptible to this.
Resetting can help avoid this by returning the system to local minima. As resetting is known
to be particularly useful for ﬂat landscapes, it naturally compensates for this drawback.
We note that when resetting MetaD simulations, all the bias is zeroed. In addition, we
emphasize that, when combining SR with enahnced sampling methods, it is much easier
to know whether resetting is favorable and what rates to use than for the standalone case.
Since transitions are fast in comparison to unbiased simulations, it is easier to sample them
without resetting and estimating the COV. Given several trajectories without resetting, a
practitioner may evaluate the MFPT under any resetting rate through Equations 2 or 4,
with no computational cost. Resetting can then be used to expedite additional sampling.
12
