topological invariants of X. This ﬁxes b and the ambiguity in σ is only related to the change
to a symplectic basis. For Calabi-Yau backgrounds (X, α) it should be possible to ﬁnd a
generalization of this.
The example X5 discussed in Section 6 relied on taking the regular period of the mirror
of a degree 5-polarized genus one curve, at the conifold point that is closest to the large
volume limit. In [14] it was observed that after ﬁbering the curve over a surface, the conifold
point induces a MUM-point in the stringy K¨ahler moduli space of the genus one ﬁbered
threefold that is associated with the relative Jacobian ﬁbration together with a non-trivial B-
ﬁeld topology. The ﬁbers of the Jacobian are sextic curves in P2
1,2,3. Note that the Hadamard
product of the fundamental period of the mirror of this sextic curve with itself is precisely the
fundamental period of the mirror of X(6,6). We have veriﬁed that applying the construction
from Section 6 to families of degree N-polarized curves, for N ≤5, one obtains a Picard-Fuchs
operator that is associated to an almost degeneration of X(6,6) with torsion B(X) = ZN. This
suggests that every torsion that can be realized by taking the relative Jacobian of a genus
one ﬁbration with an N-section is also realized for a degeneration of X(6,6). It would be very
interesting to understand this phenomenon and in particular to ﬁnd the explicit geometries.
One hint is perhaps given by the observation that the Hadamard products can be interpreted
as periods of ﬁber products of elliptic surfaces, see for example [75–78].
Whether or not a given smooth Calabi-Yau threefold exhibits a conifold transition to an
almost generic geometry can be deduced from the genus zero Gopakumar-Vafa invariants, as
is also illustrated in our examples in Section 5. In order to ﬁnd new almost generic Calabi-
Yau threefolds, a brute force approach that one can take is therefore to just scan over a set
of geometries and use the Gopakumar-Vafa invariants to identify interesting examples. For
CICY Calabi-Yau threefolds with h1,1 ≤9, the genus zero invariants have for example been
calculated in [79]. More generally, and this is perhaps the most ambitious question to answer,
it would be interesting to know what are the possible torsion groups that can appear in the
set of all almost generic Calabi-Yau threefolds.
A
The BCOV ring
We will now review the construction of the propagators, the BCOV ring and the polynomial
structure of the topological string free energies observed in [80, 81] that allows us to integrate
the holomorphic anomaly equations (3.22).
Let us ﬁrst collect some useful relations. The Christoﬀel symbols that are associated to
the Weil-Petersson metric on Mcs are given by
Γz
zz = Gz¯z∂¯z∂z∂zK ,
Γ¯z
¯z¯z = Gz¯z∂z∂¯z∂¯zK .
(A.1)
To illustrate, the action of the covariant derivatives Dz, D¯z on a section
Vz¯z ∈(T ∗Mcs)1,0 ⊗(T ∗Mcs)0,1 ⊗Lm ⊗L
n ,
(A.2)
– 39 –
