examples, eq. (8) is now truly non-local. We may write the top and bottom plate patterns using a
gauge function χ(x, y) in the form
θt(x, y) = χ(x + X∗(x, y), y) + 1
2(qπ −
λ
2πq κ(x + X∗(x, y), y)),
θb(x, y) = χ(x, y) −1
2(qπ −
λ
2πq κ(x, y)),
(18)
where X∗(x, y) is determined by the implicit equation
B(x + X∗(x, y), y) = X∗(x, y).
(19)
Solving for θt(x, y) requires first solving eq. (19) and then substituting it into eq. (18).
To obtain a single-valued function for θt, one must demand a unique solution to eq. (19). Thus,
we require that {ΓX} are function graphs; namely, for each X, ΓX = (x(y), y). We must further
require that ∂B
∂x > 1 everywhere, namely the disclination line must travel slower than the top plate.
Notably, if B is one-sided Lipschitz with respect to x then we may multiply it by a constant factor
to fulfill this criterion, namely ask that the top plate is moved “faster”.
Stability.
From eq. (3) we get
∂f
∂X = −2πq ∂θt
∂X

ΓX−X ˆx, which turns eq. (12) into
2π ∂θt
∂X

ΓX−X ˆx
q ˆT ⊥· ∇B < 0.
(20)
This is a similar condition the the case of global rotation, since translation induces a local rotation
of the director proportional to ∂xθt. We can use our gauge freedom in χ to fulfill this condition,
thus stability poses no real constraint on B.
Discussion
We have shown that surface patterning in the parallel-plane setup practically allows full control
over the shape of disclination lines. Whenever an additional control parameter exists in the system,
e.g. the temperature, relative translation or rotation between the boundary plates etc., a single
surface pattern gives rise to an entire family of curves, that emerge as equilibrium disclination
curves at different values of the control parameter, as illustrated in Figure 2. For several realizable
control parameters, we gave explicit formulae for the surface patterns as function of the desired
family of curves. As shown, restrictions may apply on the families of curves that could be stably
designed using our method as result of the local dependence on the control parameter. Nonetheless,
in an experimental realization one typically has some flexibility over which control parameter to
use; in which direction and how fast to change it to switch between the desired target curves,
and an additional inherent gauge freedom in splitting the pattern between the top and bottom
plate. This flexibility removes many of the restrictions and makes our protocol useful and handy
for practical applications. Among these applications are optical devices, dynamical circuiting and
printing devices (through disclination-based directed assembly [4–6]) and more.
In the above analysis we only discussed curve homotopies for the sake of obtaining explicit
formulae, however this it is not generally required that paths change continuously. Multiple con-
nectivity alternatives in systems with more than a pair of surface defects commonly give rise to
8
