In the recent work [8] the authors analyzed the rapidity distribution in the Lieb–Liniger
model and derived exact relations for its derivatives at the Fermi level, which they evaluated at
weak and strong couplings. Their weak coupling expansion in g was an asymptotic series, which
did not include exponentially suppressed corrections. Thus plugging our trans-series expressions
into their formulas can provide the full non-perturbative results for the sound velocity, the
Luttinger parameter or other interesting observables.
We would like to compare our results also to the interesting conjectures in [32, 33]. Based on
partial resummations of patterns in the large γ expansions of the energy density, the authors of
these papers proposed a heuristic structure for the small γ regime that is analytically different
from the asymptotic expansions studied by us. The relation of these two types of representations
was already pursued in [33] for the Gaudin–Yang model. Figuring out whether this connection
can be extended to the trans-series level might improve on the understanding, how the weak
and strong coupling regimes can be related analytically.
In relativistic models, the source of the analogous non-perturbative corrections thought to
have physical origin, either in terms of instantons [16, 19] or renormalons [34, 15]. The first has a
semiclassical interpretation related to saddle points of the path integral, and there are attempts
to relate renormalons to them as well [35, 36]. The trans-series of correlation functions was also
connected to vacuum condensates [37]. It is then compelling to ask whether the corrections
we calculated here can be attributed to semiclassical effects. For the case of the Gaudin–Yang
model, the superconducting gap was identified as the source of the large order behaviour of
the perturbative series, instead of the semiclassical features of the path integral [11]. In the
Lieb–Liniger case less is known.
There are non-perturbative objects that arise as coherent
structures in Bose-Einstein condensates, the so-called dark/bright solitons [38].
They were
studied extensively in the Lieb–Liniger case [39, 40], as the classical solutions of the Gross-
Pitaevskii/nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation that appears in the second quantized formalism of
the bosons. It would be interesting to examine whether these solutions can have any relevance
in the non-perturbative effects we obtained from the TBA description in this work.
Acknowledgements
We thank Zoran Ristivojevic for the fruitful discussions at an early phase of this project and also
for drawing our attention to the numerical method in [31] and sharing us its implementation.
This work was supported by the NKFIH research grant K134946. DlP is supported through a
Feodor Lynen Fellowship by the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation. The work of IV was also
partially supported by the NKFIH excellence grant TKP2021-NKTA-64.
A
More on the checks of the trans-series solution
In this appendix we will introduce some useful notation and fill in some details we omitted in
Section 4.2. Moreover, we will explicitly show that the trans-series ansatz solves the differential
equations (33)–(35). The remaining equations (31) and (32) are not independent.
A.1
Notation and identities
Non-perturbative quantities.
To simplify the proofs, it is convenient to define the non-
perturbative objects
ˆCα,β = e(α+β)b ˆAα,β,
ˆCα = eαbˆaα .
(113)
26
