arXiv:2504.06392v1  [hep-th]  8 Apr 2025
Oﬀ-shell supersymmetry via manifest invariance
J. Fran¸cois∗
University of Graz (Uni Graz), Heinrichstrase 26/5, 8010 Graz, Austria, and
Masaryk University (MUNI), Kotl´aˇrsk´a 267/2, Veveˇr´ı, Brno, Czech Republic, and
Mons University (UMONS), 20 Place du Parc, 7000 Mons, Belgium.
L. Ravera†
Politecnico di Torino (PoliTo), C.so Duca degli Abruzzi 24, 10129 Torino, Italy, and
Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare (INFN), Section of Torino, Via P. Giuria 1, 10125 Torino, Italy, and
Grupo de Investigaci´on en F´ısica Te´orica (GIFT),
Universidad Cat´olica De La Sant´ısima Concepci´on, Concepci´on, Chile.
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
A fundamental challenge in supersymmetric ﬁeld theory is that supersymmetry transformations
on ﬁeld variables generally form an algebra only on-shell, i.e. upon imposing the ﬁeld equations.
We show that this issue is defused in a manifestly relational – and thus automatically invariant –
formulation of supersymmetric ﬁeld theory, achieved through the application of the Dressing Field
Method of symmetry reduction, a systematic tool to exhibit the gauge-invariant content of general-
relativistic gauge ﬁeld theories.
Keywords: Oﬀ-shell supersymmetry, Supersymmetric ﬁeld theory, Manifest gauge invariance, Relationality.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Finding a general oﬀ-shell formulation of supersym-
metric ﬁeld theories, a very desirable goal aiming to-
wards their description as quantum ﬁeld theories, is a
major challenge of theoretical physics of fundamental
interactions. For theories with more than eight super-
charges such a formulation is typically problematic, both
in the rigid supersymmetry (susy) and in the supergrav-
ity (sugra) cases. The diﬃculties are magniﬁed when cou-
pling N-extended theories to hypermultiplets, i.e. matter
multiplets with maximum spin 1/2 and whose number of
d.o.f. remains stable when moving from massive to mass-
less representations.
An oﬀ-shell supersymmetric de-
scription in ordinary superspace M D|NN , with N = 2D/2
and D the number of spacetime dimensions, can be for-
mulated only for a very restricted class of supermultiplets
[1–10]. A general oﬀ-shell description of representations
for N-extended models, with fully manifest susy, was
shown to be possible at the cost of including an inﬁnite
number of auxiliary ﬁelds, thereby circumventing the no-
go theorems of susy stating that adding any ﬁnite number
of auxiliary ﬁelds cannot help to achieve the closure of
the oﬀ-shell algebra [11–13]. The most successful frame-
works in which oﬀ-shell theories have been technically
developed involving an inﬁnite number of auxiliary ﬁelds
are projective superspace [14, 15] and harmonic super-
space [16]. However, the physical and group-theoretical
meaning of having an inﬁnite number of auxiliary ﬁelds
remains unclear.
It is important to recall what is expected, within the
standard supersymmetric ﬁeld theory framework, regard-
∗jordan.francois@uni-graz.at
† lucrezia.ravera@polito.it
ing a general oﬀ-shell formulation. Such a formulation is
indeed structured around two fundamental criteria:
(i) The oﬀ-shell matching of bosonic and fermionic de-
grees of freedom (d.o.f.), which must also reappear
on-shell. However, this matching is initially com-
puted only at the kinematical level, taking into
account the gauge transformations of the ﬁelds –
typically – or any constraints, depending on the
approach adopted.
(ii) The closure of an oﬀ-shell algebra for the susy
transformations acting on the ﬁelds. This means
that the ﬁelds form an oﬀ-shell representation of
the superalgebra, or the superalgebra is represented
oﬀ-shell on the ﬁelds – this is the so-called oﬀ-shell
closure.
Typically, in the absence of auxiliary ﬁelds, the “alge-
bra” of susy transformations closes only on-shell on ﬁeld
variables, i.e.
only when the equations of motion are
used. This implies that susy transformations do not ac-
tually form a true algebra but rather what is sometimes
referred to as an open or soft algebra [16].
The above two points should be emphasized separately,
as in some cases it is possible to construct oﬀ-shell super-
multiplets even with a ﬁnite number of ﬁelds, ensuring
the matching of bosonic and fermionic degrees of free-
dom. However, the susy transformations do not close oﬀ-
shell on the ﬁelds, they only close on-shell. Consequently,
in such cases, one cannot speak of a manifestly oﬀ-shell
supersymmetric theory. For example, as noted in [17] and
more recently revisited in [18], this occurs in the case of
the so-called double tensor multiplets [19–21]. Similarly
in N-extended models and in higher-dimensional theo-
ries, see e.g. [22]. Moreover, the opposite issue may arise,
namely oﬀ-shell closure without matching of bosonic and
fermionic degrees of freedom.
