n = 0 at the initial time; however, this is not a simple solution. After horizon re-entry, the graviton
spectrum is expected to persist as a remnant of the primordial gravitons, requiring a return to the
original symmetry-broken phase. Thus, the final spectrum depends on the choice of vacuum, and
one must project the symmetric state onto the symmetry-broken vacuum. The challenge lies in
the implementation of this projection, as stimulated emission becomes significant prior to horizon
re-entry. Even if we set n0 = 0, the vacuum-stimulated emission, introduced by the factors of 1/2,
arises and is resonantly amplified, resulting in secular growth in the IR limit. We will revisit this
issue in the next section.
The second issue concerns the robustness of perturbation theory. One might think that the
Heisenberg equation is useful because it can partially resum the loop spectrum at each time step,
making it valid in the nonlinear regime, similar to the Boltzmann equation. However, we argue
that the Born approximation, assumed at the outset, may break down. The interaction term is
proportional to x−2, suggesting a breakdown of perturbative expansion on superhorizon scales.
Rigorously speaking, we cannot justify the Born approximation in Eq. (3.24) without considering
the other dimensional constants, while we can only do this after obtaining the Heisenberg equation.
This ambiguity arises from the dimensional coupling in general relativity. Naively, the correction
terms can be expanded in a series of 1/(βMpl) ∼
p
H/Mpl. However, any negative power of x
may arise, which completely breaks perturbativity for x < 1 at the level of the Heisenberg equation
before the Born approximation.
As discussed above, the subtlety of gravitons in general relativity and the issue of perturbativity
suggests that the reliable regime is only a few Hubble times after reheating, i.e., x ≳1. In Fig. 4, we
illustrate the stimulated emission for xR = 1, which corresponds to the gravitons inside the horizon
when inflation ends with instantaneous reheating. In this regime, the issues discussed above are
absent, and our equation of motion is reliable. Even for xR = kτR = 1, stimulated emission is
observed. In the right panel of Fig. 4, n/n0 is shown as a function of x = kτ and xR = 1, 0.5, 0.1.
Solid lines represent the Heisenberg equation, and dashed lines represent perturbation theory. As
xR decreases, the initial gravitons become softer, leading to a larger stimulated emission.
Finally, we close this section with a comment. Even without interaction (ϵ = 0), n and λ = ξ+iη
couple due to cosmic expansion, meaning that λ = 0 cannot be taken as a consistent ansatz in the
expanding background where x ∼1 is allowed. This indicates the failure of the assumption behind
the standard kinetic theory, where x →∞is implicit. Quantum mechanical states are inevitably
squeezed in a time-dependent background, even if they are initially separable.
6
IR regularization and large gauge transformation
The secular term in the graviton number implies the superhorizon evolution of the IR mode [27].
In this section, we discuss the IR dynamics and present a prescription for eliminating the secular
term from a symmetry perspective.
Free IR graviton modes obey the linearized Einstein equation:
h′′
ij + 2a′
a h′
ij = 0.
(6.1)
This equation of motion is invariant under the large gauge transformation
ξi = 1
2ϵijxj,
(6.2)
which turns into a constant shift in hij:
hij →hij + ϵij.
(6.3)
– 15 –
