Hadronic molecules and multiquark states
15
Fig. 10 Illustration of the decomposition of tetraquark states into different components within the Dyson-Schwinger approach. The
molecular component, the hadroquarkonium component and the compact tetraquark component are shown as diagram (a), (b) and (c),
respectively. The figure is from Ref. [244].
(a)
(b)
(c)
For the singly heavy, positive parity open flavor states chiral symmetry constraints impose that the interaction of the particles in the [15], is
repulsive and thus no state should be found in this channel.
Thus, a crucial test of this interpretation is connected to the existence of the [6] state with a pole located at 2451 MeV and the absence of
a pole in the [15]. In contrast to this, quark model states with a quark composition c¯u or c ¯d can appear only in the flavor [¯3] representation.
One way to unravel the SU(3) structure underlying the spectrum of the lightest open charm scalar states is to unambiguously establish
the existence of the state in the [6], by determining whether it appears as a near threshold pole in the case when the Goldstone Boson mass
(i.e. the pion mass) is even larger and near the SU(3) symmetric point, as predicted by unitarized chiral perturbation theory [240]. This
needs to be accompanied by the absence of a state in the [15]. First results indicated that, indeed, the [15] state is repulsive and the [6] state
is attractive, thus providing strong evidence for this state’s molecular nature [241]. This finding was confirmed recently [242] by a detailed
L¨uscher analysis imposing similar quark masses.
While these findings look like a strong support for a molecular structure of the mentioned states, it remains to be studied, what e.g. the
compact tetraquark picture predicts for this system. In particular, in Ref. [243] it is claimed that only scalar diquarks should contribute to
the formation of the mentioned states. Then it is indeed a consequence of the Pauli principle, that also compact tetraquarks only appear in
the flavor [¯3] and [6] representations and not in the [15]. Further experimental and theoretical studies are necessary to reveal the nature of
the lightest positive parity open flavor states.
7 Candidates for light multiquarks
The emerging multiquark states in the light quark sector like the light scalar mesons f0(500), f0(980), K∗
0(700) and a0(980) and the Λ(1405)
where already discussed in some detail in other sections of this text. We therefore do not repeat those discussions here but refer the readers
to the corresponding sections in this encyclopaedia.
8 Closing discussion on multiquark states
The sections above focused on the observable implications of various possible structures if they were realised in an isolated form. These
are the scenarios that most of the literature is so far dealing with. However, before closing this chapter, recent approaches that allow one to
study the interplay of different scenarios should be mentioned.
Phenomenologically the interplay of conventional mesons with multiquark states was studied in various works, however, the different
works do not draw a clear picture. While e.g. Refs. [245, 246] call for a significant mixing of molecular and conventional components,
Refs. [247, 248] claim, that in a limit of large coupling of conventional states to the continuum, the molecular structures that appear as
collective phenomena of the whole tower of quark model states decouple from the conventional state.
One possible route with closer connection to QCD to access this field is to employ functional methods. Those were already introduced
in other chapters of this encyclopedia, and applied to four-quark structures in Ref. [244, 249, 250]. The emerging ansatz for the four-body
equations is shown in Fig. 7. In principle the method allows one to investigate the relative importance of the different components in the
wave function of the exotic studied. The underlying interaction is already fixed from other studies. The technical problem here is that the
equations can be solved with well established techniques in the space like regime, however, there are still some issues to overcome for a
controlled continuation in the time-like regime, especially in the presence of various continuum thresholds.
Another very promising ansatz is the Born-Oppenheimer Effective Field Theory (BOEFT) [251–254]. This effective field theory inher-
ited from molecular physics uses from static quark-quark or quark-antiquark potentials as input for tailor made coupled-channel Schr¨odinger
equations. A first exploratory study of the X(3872) and the Tcc(3875) can be found in Ref. [255]. This effective field theory holds the promise
to combine hadronic and quark-gluon degrees of freedom in a field theoretically sound set up. It still needs to be see how the subtle analytic
structure of e.g. the one pion exchange amplitude discussed in the previous section can be embedded into the formalism.
