1
Introduction
Some of the simplest modifications of the Standard Model (SM) involve a single axion-like
particle (ALP), which is a pseudo-Goldstone boson of a suitable, spontaneously broken
global symmetry. In contrast to the QCD axion [1–4], this symmetry is subject to a large
explicit breaking, which induces an ALP mass that is simply taken as a free parameter.
Of particular interest are masses in the MeV–GeV range, which lead to a very rich phe-
nomenology at particle colliders [5], depending on the precise form of ALP interactions
with SM particles. Though the explanation of the dark matter abundance is one of the
main motivations of these scenarios (see, e.g. refs. [6–34]), it is important to map current
limits from laboratory experiments, astrophysics and cosmology into the general parameter
space of the ALP Lagrangian.
While this task has been performed in much detail for ALP couplings to photons, cou-
plings to leptons have received far less attention (notable exceptions include refs. [34–40]).
In the present work, we aim to systematically study the model-independent laboratory
constraints on “leptophilic ALPs”, which, by definition, couple dominantly to charged lep-
tons1. As a result, we provide an exhaustive overview of the relevant constraints from
beam-dump, flavour and collider experiments on leptophilic ALPs, which complement lim-
its from astrophysics [37, 42–44].
We restrict ourselves to flavour-diagonal couplings and consider four simple scenarios,
where either the coupling to a single lepton family dominates (e, µ, τ) or the ALP couples in
a flavour-universal way to leptons. In contrast to previous analyses, we explicitly consider
two cases of possible leptonic ALP interactions, which take the form of either pseudoscalar
or derivative couplings. It is well-known that these interactions are largely equivalent for
tree-level processes involving a single ALP but differ for multi-ALP interactions and, in
particular, by an effective ALP-photon coupling induced by the chiral anomaly. Therefore,
the two leptophilic interactions lead to different predictions for observables that involve an
effective ALP-photon-photon interaction, which is induced by a leptonic loop. The asso-
ciated vertex function depends on the external momenta and, thus, on the typical energy
scales of the relevant process (apart from a constant part depending on whether pseu-
doscalar or derivative couplings are considered). This energy dependence implies that the
phenomenology of the leptophilic ALP cannot be simply obtained from existing limits on
the ALP-photon coupling but has to be re-calculated using the full momentum dependence
for all processes involving ALP-photon interactions [29, 37]. The complete analysis of the
resulting limits from E137 [45], NA64 [46, 47] and LEP [48] represents the main result of
this work.
Although such loop-induced processes are suppressed with respect to tree-level dia-
grams involving only leptons, we will show that beam dump experiments like E137 can
give highly relevant constraints on leptophilic ALP, even when both the production and
decay of the ALPs proceed exclusively via photon couplings. When the relevant energy
scales are much larger than the ALP and lepton masses, the loop function becomes sup-
pressed. The resulting vertex inherits this suppression for pseudoscalar interactions, while
1The case of ALPs that couple dominantly to neutrinos was recently discussed in ref. [41].
– 2 –
