11 
 
Fig. 5(a) illustrates the torque directions for STT switching and voltage-induced effective field 
switching. In STT switching (Fig. 5(a), left), the spin current primarily exerts torque on the 
local magnetization through the anti-damping-like torque (along m
⃗⃗⃗ × m
⃗⃗⃗ × p⃗ ). Switching 
occurs only if this torque overcomes the damping-like torque (along m
⃗⃗⃗ ×
dm
⃗⃗⃗ 
dt ), which acts like 
friction. To enhance switching efficiency and speed, significant efforts are needed to reduce 
the damping constant of the ferromagnetic layer. However, the switching mechanism changed 
in voltage-induced switching (Fig. 5(a), right). Here, the applied voltage reverses the sign of 
the effective field (H⃗⃗ eff), causing the magnetization to precess around the new H⃗⃗ eff. In this case, 
the accompanying damping-like torque (along m
⃗⃗⃗ ×
dm
⃗⃗⃗ 
dt ) acts as the driving force for switching. 
As a result, a larger damping constant becomes desirable for faster switching. To validate this 
concept, a macromagnetic simulation was performed to examine the effect of damping on 
switching speed. The simulation models the case of V = 4 V for a 500 nm device 
(Supplementary Section 5). The switching trajectory of the free layer’s normalized magnetic 
moment under selected damping constants is shown in (Extended Data Fig. 4, Case1), and the 
corresponding switching times are plotted in Fig. 5(b). The results indicate that the switching 
speed increases with increasing α (α < 1). However, achieving sub-ns switching at the same 
voltage, as observed in the experiment, would require an exceptionally high damping constant. 
Moreover, the size-dependent variation in α is unexpected (Fig. 4(c)), as all devices, regardless 
of size, should share the same intrinsic α value, given that they are patterned from the same 
material stack. 
We note that effective damping can be influenced by the movement of the coupling layer’s 
magnetization, which is triggered by the onset of exchange coupling. This motion, in turn, 
affects the switching efficiency in our stack. Ideally, the coupling layer should remain fully 
fixed during the free layer’s switching process. In this scenario, the strength of the exchange 
coupling would not influence the damping constant, similar to a single-spin case. However, 
since the easy axis of the coupling layer is along the z-direction, an in-plane component of the 
effective exchange coupling field can induce a slight tilt in the coupling layer, causing it to 
rotate in the in-plane direction along with the free layer during the switching. This out-of-phase 
rotation introduces an additional source of spin momentum dissipation, effectively increasing 
the damping constant of the free layer. To account for this effect, we incorporate additional 
cases into the simulation. In Case 2, we set HCP=50 mT, Hk2=500 mT (where Hk2 is 
intentionally set to an unrealistically high value). Here, HCP and Hk2 represent the interlayer 
exchange coupling field and the effective anisotropy field of the coupling layer, respectively. 
By comparing Case 1 and Case 2, we observe that even a slight tilt in the coupling layer’s 
magnetization angle during the switching leads to a significant (~10%) reduction in switching 
time when exchange coupling is present. In Case 4, where HCP = 50 mT and Hk2 = 50 mT (Hk2 
closely matching the experimental value), the switching speed is further enhanced. To isolate 
the contribution of the exchange coupling field, we reduce HCP to 25 mT while keeping Hk2 = 
50 mT in Case 3. This results in a slower switching speed compared to Case 4, but it remains 
faster than Case 1, where HCP = 0 mT. As shown in Extended Data Fig. 4(a, b), the deviation 
