Polytopic Safe Set 
Approximation




		
(a) Polytopic safe set approximation [1].
Nonlinear Safe Set
Approximation





	



(b) Nonlinear safe set approximation.
Fig. 3: The use of multiple CBFs has been proposed to mitigate issues arising from varying relative degrees. Here, we illustrate the boundaries of
approximated safe sets for the approach from [1] and our proposed method. In these illustrations, the true safe set C and the approximated safe set CQ are
shown in blue and green, respectively. For each case, the boundary of an individual CBF, ∂Cq, is shown as a dark gray solid line, and the corresponding
level sets are illustrated in light gray. The arrows on the boundary ∂Cq indicate the positive gradient directions. (a) In [1], we proposed using a polytopic
set to under-approximate C. In this case, the safety boundaries are hyperplanes. This approach is conservative and is restricted to convex sets. (b) In this
work, we instead use multiple CBFs, where the individual CBFs can have nonlinear boundaries to better preserve the geometry of the original safe set.
This approach can be generalized to certain non-convex safe sets where the condition in (5) can be satisfied for all pairs of points on ∂Cq for all q.
where ∇ˆh(x) = ∇T h(x)/||∇h(x)|| is the normalized gra-
dient vector at a point x. This condition allows us to
define hypersurfaces with consistent parallel level curves.
For convex sets, we can extend the boundary ∂Cq ∩∂C by
defining consistent hypersurfaces that satisfy the condition
in (5) for every pair of points in ∂Cq. For non-convex sets, to
best preserve the geometry of the safe set, we first compute
the convex hull of the safe set, Conv(C). The set of CBF
boundaries is then defined to consist of the disjoint sets
in ∂C \ (∂Conv(C) ∩∂C), along with further partitions in
∂Conv(C) ∩∂C. An example is shown in Fig. 1.
As discussed in Sec. IV, the varying relative degree issue
can arise from two sources: either the gradient of the function
h vanishes in the interior of compact sets, or the gradient
is orthogonal to gi(x) at the boundary. The first issue is
mitigated by introducing multiple continuously differentiable
functions with non-compact zero-superlevel sets. However,
the second problem still needs to be addressed. We note that
if such a point exists, the original set cannot be rendered
safe without encountering the same problem. To address this
issue, we consider a local inner approximation of the safe
set (e.g., through the use of single or multiple hyperplanes
with constant gradient norms that best match the local
geometry while not being orthogonal to gi(x)).
This approach allows us to handle non-convex safe sets as
long as we can find a set of partitions where the condition
in (5) can be satisfied for all pairs of points in ∂Cq. We do
note that the approach is restricted to connected safe sets,
though this is not overly restrictive in practice. If the safe set
comprises separate sets, a system initialized within one of the
sets will remain within the set. Thus, for a given initial state
x0 ∈C, at any given time, only the constraints associated
with the relevant connected set need to be enforced.
C. Gradient Design
We consider a set of Q CBFs with gradients parameterized
in the following form:
∇hq(x) = g(x)αq(x) + b(x)βq(x), ∀q ∈Z[1,Q],
(6)
where αq(x) ∈Rm and βq(x) ∈Rn−p(x) are parameters of
the target CBF gradient with p(x) denoting the rank of g(x),
The matrix b(x) ∈Rn×(n−p(x)) has orthonormal columns
that span the orthogonal complement of the column space of
g(x) such that the columns of b(x) and g(x) together span
Rn. Note that if p(x) = n, we do not require additional
vectors to span Rn. While we keep the formulation general,
the rank of g(x) is often constant over X in practice.
Each of the CBF candidates defines a nonlinear contour
with positive gradient directions pointing toward the interior
of the safe set. We can design the gradient of each CBF
candidate to ensure that each level set of hq(x) preserves the
shape and orientation of the zero-level set ∂Cq. The union
of all the gradients ∇hq(x) for all x ∈∂Cq spans a cone
Kq. Let sq be the vector of length one that corresponds to
the central axis of the cone Kq, then we specify the gradient
for CBF candidate hq for all x ∈X as
∇hq(x) = ∇hq(x∗
c),
where x∗
c is the intersection of the boundary ∂Cq and the set
L = {x + σqsq ∈X | σq ∈R}.
Since the columns of g(x) and b(x) together span Rn,
we can parametrize ∇hq(x) in the form of (6). To ensure
that the non-zero Lie derivative condition is satisfied for all
x ∈X and the overall input set Ucbf is non-empty, we need
to introduce additional constraints on the gradient parameters
αq(x) and βq(x). To this end, we define
∇˜hq(x) = g(x)˜αq(x) + b(x)˜βq(x)
(7)
and formulate an optimization problem to find parameters
˜αq(x) and ˜βq(x) such that ∇˜hq(x) closely matches the
desired target gradient ∇hq(x) while ensuring that the addi-
tional Lie derivative and feasibility conditions for qualifying
hq as multi-CBFs are satisfied.
To facilitate the design verification of the feasible input
set, we consider a set of parametrized functions γq ∈Ke
with corresponding parameters denoted by θq (e.g., in the
linear case γq(ξ) = cqξ, the parameter θq is the slope cq).
