 
11 
(AJA) with a low power of 20 W. We then utilized UV lithography and Ar ion milling 
technique to fabricate Pt/FCGT/CrSBr Hall bar devices. Notably, during the fabrication 
process, the direction of b-axis in CrSBr is parallel to the direction of two opposing 
electrodes to fix the direction between pulsed current and CrSBr crystal orientation.  
In the experiment, the vdW magnetic material and devices were always kept in the 
glovebox enclosure with inert gas atmosphere. Before taking out of the glove box, the 
devices were sealed in a vacuum package to prevent oxidation degradation. The FCGT 
flakes were exposed to air only during the transferring process from the package to 
sputtering system. By optimizing the fabrication process, the total transferring time was 
strictly controlled to be <3 min. Besides, we kept the FCGT flakes in the sample box filled 
with inert gas during the transferring process, which can further reduce the oxidation 
degradation. 
Characterization of vdW crystals and devices 
The chemical compositions were identified by the energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) 
measurements at different microregions on the fresh cleavage surface of one single crystal. 
The crystallographic phase of these single crystals was characterized using room-
temperature X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements (X'Pert Pro MPD diffractometer) with 
Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å). The magnetization data were measured in a Physical 
Property Measurement System (PPMS) system. 
The characterization of the morphology of the nanoflakes and devices was performed by 
optical microscopy (Olympus). The cross-section microstructure was investigated using a 
transmission electron spectroscopy (TEM, JEM-F200, JEM-ARM 200). Devices for TEM 
were prepared with a focused ion beam system (FIB, TESCAN). 
Transport measurement of vdW devices 
Keithley 2400 source meter and 2182 nanovolt meter were used to apply currents and to 
collect the Hall resistances, respectively. Specifically, for the SOT switching test, the 
direction of current pulse was applied along the in-plane magnetic field. A switching 
current pulse with 1 ms width was applied followed by a relatively small current to read 
the magnetization state. We define the critical switching current density Jc = (Jc+ + Jc-)/2, 
where Jc+ (Jc-) indicates the current density of switching process started (completed). The 
low temperature magnetotransport properties of the devices were performed in the VSM 
