Entropy 2024, 26, 612
2 of 84
description of its basic properties, its relaxation to equilibrium, and its application to
dynamical structure formation in cosmology.
Although the connection between the idealized OGS and natural astrophysical systems
can be tenuous, the accuracy and ease with which their dynamical evolution may be
simulated has remained the principal motivation for continued study of the OGS. Unlike
3-dimensional self-gravitating systems, in which the motion of the (point) masses must be
numerically integrated, the OGS admits direct computation of the particle (or sheet, or shell)
crossings. This provides the accurate computation of the evolution of the system over many
dynamical time scales. Furthermore, a number of interesting questions concerning the
statistical properties of the OGS remain open, including whether it can attain a state of true
equilibrium from arbitrary initial conditions [5], its ergodic behaviour, the circumstances
(if any) under which equipartition of energy can be attained [12], and the appearance of
fractal behaviour [3,13].
For three decades, studies of the OGS have been in a non-relativistic context, assuming
Newtonian gravity with its standard causal structure [3,7,8,12,14–22]. Research into rela-
tivistic one-dimensional self-gravitating systems (ROGS) was generally ignored. In large
part, this was because relativistic effects do not play a dominant role in stellar dynam-
ics, but it was also due to the lack of a theoretical framework for relativistic gravity in
one spatial dimension. The Einstein tensor is identically zero in this (1 + 1)-dimensional
space–time context, and so Einstein’s equation at face value would simply imply vanishing
stress–energy. However, a reduction in the number of spatial dimensions in a relativistic
context can be expected to be quite useful since gravitational radiation (at least due to
spin-2 gravitons) cannot exist in less than three spatial dimensions. However, most (if
not all) of the remaining conceptual features of relativistic gravity are retained in lower
dimensions, and so one might hope to obtain insights into the nature of relativistic classical
and quantum gravitation in a wide variety of physical situations by studying the ROGS.
It is straightforward to find a set of equations governing the motion of particles—these
are furnished by the geodesic equations. In addition to this, what is needed to study ROGS is
a set of equations governing the dynamics of the space–time metric in a self-consistent way.
Early versions of (1 + 1)–dimensional gravity [23,24] set the Ricci curvature scalar equal to a
constant, yielding trivial dynamics for the space–time metric (although containing sufficiently
interesting features [25] such that this theory is still of interest today [26]). The intensive
investigation of a wide variety of gravitational theories ensued a few years later, primarily
motivated by a quest to understand quantum gravity in a simplified context [27]. The over-
whelming majority of such investigations were concerned with the (quantum) dynamics of
the space–time metric, and not with the dynamical motion of particles in such space–times.
At about the same time that interest in the (1 + 1)-dimensional quantum gravity began,
investigations into the ROGS also began. The purpose of this article is to review the origins,
results, and status of relativistic one-dimensional self-gravitating systems. After a brief
review of the OGS, I begin by reviewing how the D →2 limit of D-dimensional general
relativity [28] can be self-consistently coupled to point particles, thereby yielding the ROGS.
The equations of motion for the particles are obtained using the canonical formalism, which
I describe in some detail. I shall then consider in turn the 2-body, 3-body, 4-body, and N-
body ROGS, discussing their distinctions from the OGS, their salient features, their chaotic
behaviour, and their statistical properties, as relevant. I conclude by discussing a number of
interesting open problems for relativistic one-dimensional self-gravitating systems. While
other constants will retain their values throughout, the speed of light c will generally be set
to unity, and only explicitly written where relevant for instructive purposes.
2. Non-Relativistic Self-Gravitating Systems
For a system of particles, the Hamiltonian in Newtonian gravity in two dimensions is
H = ∑
a
p2
a
2ma
+ πG
N
∑
a,b=1
mamb | za −zb |
(1)
