12
Figure 9. Spin entanglement created with laser and electron
beam parameters as in Fig. 8 but now in the LP set-up. In
(a) and (b), the energy spectrum dPc/dsc and polarisation
Γ1(sc) of the Compton photon beam generated in the first
laser pulse are given for two cases of finite acceptance angles:
∆θ = 32 µrad and 128 µrad. In (c) and (d), the double light-
front spectrum d2Pt/dscdsb and concurrence C(sc, sb) of the
electron-positron pair created by the photon beam within the
angular acceptance ∆θ = 128 µrad are plotted. Dependence
of the probability dPt/dsc and concurrence C(sc) on the light-
front momentum of the photon are also presented in (c) and
(d) with the right-hand vertical axis respectively. In (e) and
(f), the same quantities are plotted as in (c) and (d) with the
photon beam acceptance decreased to ∆θ = 32 µrad.
(see Fig. 8 (e)).
One may also note that the main part of the created
pairs with the probability dPt/dsc > 10−12 by the pho-
tons within ∆θ = 32 µrad, see the red solid line in
Fig. 8 (e) around the photon energy sc = 0.5, could con-
tribute to the measurement of spin entanglement with
the concurrence C(sc) > 0.2, magenta solid line in Fig. 8
(f). However for the photon within ∆θ = 128 µrad, the
only pairs, which can contribute to the spin-entanglement
measurement with C(sc) > 0.1, are created by the pho-
tons with the energy sc < 0.25 and probability dPt/dsc <
3.5 × 10−14, which would thus significantly reduce the
measurement efficiency for the pairs’ spin entanglement.
The LP set-up is the same as for the CP case, ex-
cept with linearly polarised photons, and the analysis is
shown in Fig. 9. As can be seen, the concurrence can
reach as large as C ≈0.6. The photon polarisation Γ(sc),
and thus the concurrence, are much less affected by the
change of angular acceptance compared to the CP case.
For both the CP and LP cases we see the probability
for pair-creation maximal near sc ∼0.5−0.7, and the
concurrence reducing to zero for sc close to 1.
How-
ever the important difference is in the overlap of regions
of large concurrence with regions where pair-creation is
more probable. The concurrence C(sc, sb) here remains
sizeable for sc ≳0.5 for both ∆θ = 32 and 128 µrad,
where the overlap with the probability d2Pt/dscdsb for
pair-creation is also large for both acceptances.
This
is in contrast with the CP case, where the overlap be-
tween C(sc, sb) and the probability d2Pt/dscdsb is highly
suppressed for the ∆θ = 128 µrad, and comparable to
LP case for ∆θ = 32 µrad. Therefore at larger angular
acceptance, i.e. smaller pulse separations, the LP sce-
nario appears more favourable for observing concurrence
in the NBW pair creation, while at smaller angular accep-
tance the difference becomes less important. This figure
can potentially be increased by optimising beam parame-
ters for the largest concurrence and this could potentially
form the subject of future work.
IV.
CONCLUSION
We have studied the entanglement of electron-positron
pairs produced in the collision between a high-energy
photon and a high-intensity laser pulse via the nonlin-
ear Breit-Wheeler process.
Several parameter regimes
have been considered that could be probed by upcoming
experiments, such as LUXE [51].
We investigated the
concurrence measure of spin-polarisation entanglement
in an intensity range spanning the perturbative ξ ≪1
to non-perturbative ξ ≫1, energies ranging from low
values η ≪1 to the high energy range of harmonic pair
creation η > 2(1 + υξ2), for a range of photon polarisa-
tions in a circularly-polarised or linearly-polarised back-
ground. After considering mono-energetic photons, we
presented results for an experimental scenario featuring
two-stages: I) where photons are produced via nonlinear
Compton scattering by a first laser pulse followed by II)
where the photons collide with a second laser pulse to
create pairs.
It was found that the concurrence, C, depends in a
complicated way on laser intensity, photon energy and
polarisation. Of particular interest was the finding that
increasing the intensity of the plane wave background can
sometimes lead to an increase in the concurrence. For
example, in a linearly-polarised background, the concur-
rence can reach values as high as C ≈0.9 in the interme-
diate intensity regime i.e. at laser parameters that are
available in experiment today. In the two-stage scenario
which used a Compton distribution of photons, the con-
currence could be maintained at a level as high as C ≈0.6
using angular cuts in the photon spectrum that could be
realised in experiment e.g. by using collimators, and this
figure can potentially be optimised upwards.
