in terms of homological projective duality [11]. Another pair of non-birational Calabi-Yaus is due
to Hosono and Takagi [12] and was described in terms of GLSMs in [13]. Many more constructions
have been given since then. Typically one geometric phase realises its geometry through purely per-
turbative means, as the vanishing locus of a set of polynomial equations given by the critical locus
of the GLSM superpotential, while the other phase realises its geometry through a nonperturbative
mechanism enabled by the nonabelian dynamics of a strongly coupled phase.
The aim of this work is to study a new pair of one-parameter Calabi-Yau threefolds that share the
same moduli space, which generalise the known constructions in a non-trivial way. One can search
for such examples by investigating the set of GLSMs that realise one-parameter Calabi-Yaus which
are not complete intersections in toric ambient spaces. A well-studied source of examples of this are
free quotients of complete intersections in products of projective spaces. The GLSM for a complete
intersection in a product of projective spaces is abelian, with gauge group U(1)m where m is the
number of Pn factors in the ambient variety. But to realise freely acting quotients by symmetry
groups ZM that cyclically permute M of the ambient Pn, one must replace this gauge group with
the nonabelian group U(1)m ⋊ZM. This provides a natural generalisation of the Hosono-Takagi
examples with their gauge group U(1)2 ⋊Z2, as described in [13].
Complete Intersection Calabi-Yau threefolds (in products of projective spaces), or CICYs, were the
first substantial database of Calabi-Yau threefolds assembled [14]. The set of freely acting symme-
tries of CICYs that descend from automorphisms of the ambient product of projective spaces was
classified in [15], and all of their Hodge numbers are computed by the means of [16]. Prior to the
complete solutions of these latter two works, [17–19] impressed the significance of systematically
studying these quotient threefolds and obtaining their Hodge numbers.
The tables of [20] col-
lect, from the previously mentioned and further additional sources, Calabi-Yaus with small Hodge
numbers which one can peruse with a mind to finding new GLSMs to study.
In general, one should not expect to find a second geometry in the moduli space of a CICY quotient.
To find potential candidates for this, it is useful in the one-parameter case to study the associated
Calabi-Yau differential operators [21, 22]. In all known examples with two geometries the associated
differential operator has two points of maximal unipotent monodromy (MUM points). Searching
the relevant databases, and also informed by the considerations in [23], we were led to the following
Calabi-Yau:
Y ∼=
P2
P2
P2


1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1


h1,1=1, h2,1=16
/Z3
.
(1.1)
This notation indicates that we take the intersection of three hypersurfaces in P2 × P2 × P2, each
hypersurface is the vanishing locus of an equation that is degree (1, 1, 1) in the homogeneous
coordinates of P2 × P2 × P2, and we quotient by a freely acting Z3 symmetry. This Z3 symmetry
of the complete intersection is induced by the symmetry of the ambient P2 × P2 × P2 that cycles
the three P2 factors, which gives a freely acting symmetry of the intersection for suitable choices of
defining polynomials. This Calabi-Yau and its simply connected cover have recently been discussed
in the context of type IIB flux compactifications [24].
2
