Multilevel Quantum Rabi Models
2
simpler Jaynes-Cummings model [1]) is no longer valid. Recent work has uncovered the
richness of the physics that the QRM can display, including entangled ground states
with non-zero photon populations, as well as identifying a range of possible applications
in quantum technology [7,9]. Furthermore, there has also been very rapid experimental
progress in engineering quantum devices in which the QRM model can be realised with
couplings many orders of magnitude larger than those which can be achieved with more
traditional atomic systems [7,9].
Strongly enhanced couplings can also be achieved in systems described by
generalisations of the Rabi model. The best known example is the Dicke model [9],
where a single mode interacts with n identical two-level atoms, leading to an effective
interaction strength that scales as √n.
Very recently, it was shown that a similar
√n enhancement can be achieved in a version of the Jaynes-Cummings model where a
mode couples a single atomic ground state to a set of n almost-degenerate excited states
when the coupling strength is uniform [10]. This model can be seen as an interesting
theoretical generalisation, but it also has practical significance: it has been used to
explain the observation of strong coupling effects in experiments involving colloidal
quantum dots and a plasmonic nanoresonator [11].
In this paper we take a further step, generalising to consider a multilevel Rabi model
in which a single field mode couples a set of m nearly degenerate atomic ground states
to a set of n nearly degenerate excited states. Using a series of simple examples, we
explore in detail the connection between different specific forms of the multilevel model
and the standard QRM. In the simplest cases, where degeneracy exists for both the sets
of excited and ground states, the system reduces to a direct sum of standard two-level
Rabi models which can be labelled by the eigenvalues of a new symmetry operator. We
find that the couplings within the individual Rabi models in general depend sensitively
on the specific way in which the levels are coupled to the field. Turning to larger systems
and focusing on the case where n = m, we investigate the scaling of the strongest
coupling with n. For a uniform matrix of couplings between each of the different ground
and excited states, the scaling goes as n. The case of random couplings is much more
involved, but using results from random matrix theory we obtain a detailed expression
that can describe the scaling for n ≥2 and which tends asymptotically to 2√n in the
large-n limit. We also show that, as one might expect, small detunings between the
levels generally have a small impact on the spectrum of the system, except for isolated
regions of the parameter space where the small detunings induce avoided crossings.
The rest of this paper is organised as follows. In Sec. 2 we introduce the multilevel
generalisation of the Rabi model and define the notation. Next, in Sec. 3, we illustrate
the phenomenology of the multilevel system and its connection to the original two-level
Rabi model through a series of simple examples containing just a pair of excited and
grounds states (n = m = 2). Then, in Sec. 4, we consider much larger systems, focusing
in particular on the scaling of the maximum light-matter couplings with the number of
levels. Finally, we summarise, draw our conclusions and discuss interesting avenues for
future work in Sec. 5.
