Inverse Design of Parameter-Controlled Disclination Paths
Yehonatan Tsubery1 and Hillel Aharoni1
1Department of Complex Systems, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
7610001, Israel
Abstract
Topological defects, such as disclination lines in nematic liquid crystals, are fundamental
to many physical systems and applications. In this work, we study the behavior of nematic
disclinations in thin parallel-plate geometries with strong patterned planar anchoring. Build-
ing on prior models, we solve both the forward problem—predicting disclination trajectories
from given surface patterns—and an extended inverse problem—designing surface patterns to
produce a tunable family of disclination curves under varying system parameters. We present
an explicit calculation for pattern construction, analyze parameter limitations and stability
constraints, and highlight experimental and technological applications.
Introduction
Topological defects play a crucial role in various physical systems, from condensed matter physics
(vortices in superconductors, dislocations in crystals) to cosmology (cosmic strings, monopoles).
Many physical phenomena in these systems strongly depend on defect characteristics and interac-
tions, including their formation and combination rules, charges, geometry, forces, etc. Therefore,
understanding and controlling defect structure and behavior in situ may be extremely useful for a
variety of applications.
Disclination lines in nematic liquid crystals (NLCs) are a simple and elegant class of topological
defects, making them a good subject for both theoretical and experimental studies [1]. They are
one-dimensional topologically-protected singularities in the nematic orientational order [2], and may
appear either as transients or as a result of incompatible boundary conditions or elastic frustration.
Nematic disclination lines have applications in directed assembly of particles and molecules [3–7],
optical devices [8,9], microfluidics [10] and others. With major recent advances in spatial patterning
of liquid crystal alignment [11,12], NLC disclinations make excellent candidates for designing and
tuning defect geometries.
In the parallel-plate setup, a thin layer of NLC is placed between two flat plates (typically glass).
The plates are pretreated using a variety of chemical, optical and mechanical techniques [12–17]
to impose a molecular orientation in a preferred direction within the plane, sufficiently strong to
constrain the nematic director in their immediate vicinity. These conditions are known as strong
patterned planar anchoring and are abundant in experiment. Disclination lines in such systems
are induced either via surface defects or via strong twist reversals [18]. The parallel-plate setup
(Fig. 1) enables realization of line arrays [19–22], arbitrary defect geometries [18, 23], and defect
line sources [24].
1
arXiv:2504.05870v1  [cond-mat.soft]  8 Apr 2025
