polyelectrolytes under an electric field10. The study showed that the elastic modulus of a 
polyelectrolyte can increase by 45% under a simulated electric field (E = 0.2 V/m) due to better 
chain alignment and an increase in number of ionic crosslinks. However, the stiffening is 
physically induced and only occurs with charged polymers while under constant application of an 
electric field, meaning the material would soften once the electric field is removed10. In contrast, 
electrochemistry has been used to produce chemical reactions within materials resulting in 
permanent structural modifications1,8. However, electrochemical reactivity is highly dependent on 
both the surface of the electrodes as well as  the conductivity of the material11. Chemical reactions 
that can be triggered and controlled through the use of electric fields with minimal current flow 
thus offer an interesting alternative. Nevertheless, it has been difficult to use electric fields to 
directly induce chemical reactions in a material – relying only on surface electrodes or infeasibly 
high electric field (107 to 109 V/m) to mediate chemical changes.  
Previously, our group demonstrated a self-strengthening behavior in an adaptive material induced 
by applied vibration mediated by ZnO (piezoelectric) nanoparticles12,13. In observing the literature 
on piezoelectric energy-harvesting materials, we formulated a hypothesis that ZnO nanoparticles 
could be activated via an external electric field instead of mechanical vibration, as both electric-
field induced deformations and strain-induced internal electrical fields have been detected in ZnO 
nanostructures14–16. In this work, we present a novel approach to conduct thiol-ene polymerization 
and crosslinking reactions via an applied electric field. This electrically-controlled reaction relies 
on low strength electric fields (250-1000 V/m) to activate ZnO nanoparticles, which in turn 
promote the piezochemical generation of radicals and subsequent radical-mediated thiol-ene 
reaction. Additionally, this approach enables far-range chemical reactivity within a material, which 
permanently alters its composition and mechanical properties. We showcase two examples of the 
capabilities of this approach. In the first example, we placed an organo-gel embedded with multi-
functional thiol-ene monomers and ZnO nanoparticles within an electric field and modify its 
stiffness by triggering a crosslinking reaction.  (Fig. 1a). The elastic modulus of the resulting gel 
can be controlled by adjusting the parameters of the electric input (Supplementary Fig. 1). In a 
second example, we adjust the formulation and reaction conditions to produce a fast, electrically-
curable adhesive with strong binding properties to various surfaces.  
Electrically-controlled thiol-ene polymerization  
First, we tested whether ZnO could initiate a polymerization when subjected to an electric field. 
We used the thiol-ene linear polymerization between tri(ethylene glycol) divinyl ether (TEGDE) 
and 2,2′-(ethylenedioxy) diethanethiol (EDT) as a model reaction. We chose tetraethylammonium 
tetrafluoroborate (Et4NBF4) as supporting electrolyte in DMF (Supplementary Fig. 2)12. A reaction 
mixture containing TEGDE (3 mmol), EDT (3 mmol), and piezoelectric ZnO nanoparticles (7.5 
wt%) was subjected to an alternating electric field (8 Vrms, 500 Hz, 500 V/m). Experiments were 
conducted in the dark to eliminate the possibility of photocatalysis. The reaction progress was 
monitored by 1H-NMR and gel permeation chromatography (GPC) at 1 h intervals. A short 
polymer (number-averaged molecular mass, Mn = 4200 Da) was obtained with 90 % monomer 
conversion, showing the typical kinetic profile of a step‐growth polymerization (Fig. 1c) 12,17. In 
the GPC traces of Fig. 1d, the emergence of the refractive index (RI) peak at longer retention times 
denotes less reaction has occurred.  
