Hence, we will need δ′ + δBE|t| = δ. For example, we may choose δ′ = δ/2, which can be achieved with
|τ|e
2
+ log

2c
δ

+ 2
(130)
applications of ˜Usa which hence requires,
δBE =
δ
2|t|.
(131)
This guarantees that the output block-encoding is δ-close to e−iHt, while in practice we expect much less
stringent requirements will arise, due to error cancellations.
In practice, there are multiple sources of inaccuracy in the compilation that lead to an imperfect block
encoding. Indeed, some are highlighted in the tables in Section 5.1; all the parameters listed in red are
adjustable parameters that constitute finite bit-precision for floating-point operations. In the resource esti-
mates that follow, we try to provide an apples-to-apples comparison with [29] by adopting the same fixed
prescription for precision of arithmetic and uniform state preparation. In principle, however, one should con-
struct a more detailed error propagation and find the choice of parameters that minimizes the computational
resources while satisfying a total error of no more than δBE. We leave this to future work.
6
Quantum chemical identification
Recalling from Sec. 2.3 that the fingerprints are described in terms of pseudoion spatial geometry, consider
an expansion of the wavefunction in the position basis,
|ψ⟩=
X
R1,...,Rηion,r
ψ(R1, ..., Rηion, r)|R1, ..., Rηion, r⟩,
with r collectively denoting all electron coordinates, over which we shall perform no computation. We define
a unitary UXα that performs a coherent implementation of the fingerprint-based species counter CXα on the
coordinates (see Sec. 2.3) and writes the result in an auxiliary register encoding non-negative integers:
U Xα
c
|ψ⟩|0⟩=
X
R1,...,Rηion,r
ψ(R1, ..., Rηion, r)|R1, ..., Rηion, r⟩|CXα(R1, . . . , Rηion)⟩.
Performing the counts for all listed chemical species UX = QM
α=1 UXα provides the desired species identifi-
cation.
6.1
Validating Example
As a concrete example, we show in this section how the quantum chemical identification (QCI) procedure
is implemented for a specific subreaction that often plays a rate-limiting step for the WGS reaction – the
dissociative adsorption of CO2 into CO and atomic oxygen on a catalytic surface. We pick an Ir(100) surface
for our simulation, as previous investigations based on density-functional theory (DFT) show that this surface
has one of the smallest barriers for CO2 dissociation [83].
6.1.1
Molecular fingerprinting
We first identify the desired molecules – or, more broadly, chemical species Xα – that shall be identified
by our fingerprinting approach, as discussed in Sec. 2.3.
For this simple reaction, it suffices to build a
fingerprinting for CO2 and CO. We must first find computationally inexpensive functions which, given a
set of pseudoionic positions x = (R1, ..., Rηion), output the features FXα(x) as defined in Eq. (13). We
first estimate the potential energy EXα(x) of Xα at various ionic configurations x close to the equilibrium
structure. For that, we perform tight-binding calculations using the xTB package [84] within the GFN2-xTB
molecular parameterization [85]. For each molecule of interest, we sample a variety of ionic configurations
43
