Up-to-constants estimates on the interior and boundary two-arm events for SLEκ were respectively
obtained in [3] and [34], for all κ ∈(0, 8), yielding (resp.), among other things, the Hausdorff
dimension of SLEκ and a quantitative description of the proximity of SLEκ to the boundary. Later
on, it was proved in [42] for κ ∈(0, 4) (also see similar results in [44, 43] for κ ∈(4, 8)) that
P( eAj) ≍εξ+
j
and P(A2j) = εξ2j+o(1) as ε →0, where
eAj (resp. A2j) stands for some specific
boundary j-arm (resp. interior 2j-arm) event, namely that the SLE curve makes j (resp. 2j) arms,
following a particular order and topology, between ∂Bε(z) and a given arc at macroscopic distance
from z, where z is a boundary (resp. interior) point in the domain. Here, the symbol ≍means
that the ratio between the two sides remains bounded away from 0 and ∞, and Bε(z) denotes the
open ball with radius ε centered on z (in the following, we drop z from the notation when z = 0).
Thanks to the convergence of the Ising (resp. FK Ising) interfaces to SLE3 (resp. SLE16/3) [6, 16],
the estimates from [42, 44, 43] on SLE arm exponents then yield [42, 43] the arm exponents for the
critical Ising and FK Ising models.
Nevertheless, we have identified an essential gap in the proof of the upper bound P(A2j) ≤
εξ2j+o(1) for the interior 2j-arm event in [42, Proposition 4.1], for κ ∈(0, 4) and j ≥2 (similar gaps
also exist in the proofs of the upper bounds in [43, Proposition 3], on three different types of interior
SLEκ arm events, for κ ∈(4, 8)). More precisely, we believe that the proof of this upper bound
needs not only an estimate on a well-ordered boundary arm event as an input (as it is claimed
there), but actually needs to rely on an estimate for a rather general boundary arm event, which
is lacking in that paper. On the other hand, it seems that the proofs in [42, 44, 43] on SLE arm
events are highly dependent on the specific order and topology of the crossings, so they should
require additional nontrivial arguments to get rid of these constraints. We refer to Remark 6.3 for
more details.
In this paper, we derive up-to-constants estimates for a general form of four-arm events, with
no condition on the order of crossings, for both the boundary case and the interior case, and for
both CLEκ and SLEκ, for κ ∈(8/3, 4]. A chordal SLE has two endpoints on the boundary of the
domain, hence corresponds to the interface in a statistical physics model with Dobrushin boundary
conditions. In contrast, the CLE describes the loop interfaces inside a model with “homogeneous”
boundary conditions. Since a CLEκ loop looks locally like an SLEκ curve, it is natural to expect
that the arm exponents for CLEκ coincide with those for SLEκ. Once we establish the estimates
for CLEκ, we will immediately deduce analogous results for SLEκ.
One can also consider the multiple SLE’s, which correspond to the multiple interfaces in a model
with alternating boundary conditions, see e.g. [9, 2, 20]. In [45, 46], Zhan has computed the Green’s
functions related to a system of 2-SLE, where both SLE curves in the 2-SLE go through a given
ball Bε(z), thus creating four arms. These estimates, recalled as Theorems 2.4 and 2.5 below, are
instrumental in our proofs. On the other hand, the four arms in [45, 46] are created by two distinct
SLE curves with four separate endpoints. In this paper, we work with the four-arm events for the
CLE (as well as single SLE curves), for which the separation is not incorporated in the definition.
In order to treat all possible topologies of arm crossings, the main technical difficulty of this
work is to devise and prove a well-suited separation lemma. Such separation properties have been
established in various models, and play an important role in their analysis.
It seems that the
earliest version was obtained in Kesten’s famous work [19] on two-dimensional percolation near
criticality.
Later, some versions for non-intersecting Brownian motions were shown by Lawler
[22, 23]. There were then a great deal of generalizations afterwards; see e.g. [32, 15, 8, 30, 27, 12]
for a non-exhaustive list of references. We postpone a more detailed discussion to Section 1.2.
3
