2
FIG. 1.
Cascading failures in interdependent networks conceptualized as a birth-death process.
Panel (a)
depicts two networks, A and B, interconnected by dependency links (green) alongside internal connectivity links (black). When
a node fails, it topples down (in the same network) all the nodes it disconnects from GCC. Additionally, each failed node also
causes the dependent node in the parallel network to fail, leading to a cascading effect. For instance, the failure of node 1A
(marked with red X) results in the detachment of 2A from the GCC, causing the failure of nodes 1B and 2B due to dependency.
Consequently, 3B becomes detached from the GCC of network B, which cascades back to topple 3A. Thus the failure of 1A leads
to the failure of 3A in the subsequent iteration. Panel (b): while single networks exhibit a continuous phase transition (red) in
which the likelihood of a node being part of the GCC (P∞) continuously diminishes to zero, interdependent networks undergo
an abrupt transition (blue) due to cascading failures. At p = ˜p (Panel (c)), the cascade of failures involves a long-lasting
plateau, where damage stays relatively constant over several iterations. Panel (d): The cascading failure dynamics mirrors a
birth-death process, wherein each failed node [like 1A in panel (a)] has a given number of offspring (like 3A) in the subsequent
iteration. When p > ˜p the mean offspring count, m, is less than one, resulting in an exponential decay of the demographic
process and network survival. Conversely, for p < ˜p, m > 1 leading to exponential damage growth and a swift collapse. At
p = ˜p, m = 1 during the plateau, and the dynamics is neutral
independent, and its time evolution is governed solely by
demographic noise. Because n ≪N, the GCC undergoes
a prolonged plateau, in which P∞is almost fixed (Figure
1(c)). This plateau phase may end in extinction, in which
case nt = 0 and the network survives. However, if the
process persists long enough, the GCC becomes thinner
and more fragile, m increases above one, the population
of failed nodes starts growing faster and the network col-
lapses.
Let us provide an approximate expression for the devi-
ation from neutrality as the process goes on. t is defined
as the number of iterations since the beginning of the
plateau, so at t = 0 the chance to be on the infinite
cluster is P∞(t = 0), the number of failed nodes is n0
and the mean number of offspring m(t = 0) = 1. The
number of nodes that fail in the t-th iteration is nt, and
Mt = Pt
k=0 nt is the total number of nodes that fail
until t.
Therefore, P∞(t) = P∞(0) −Mt/N.
As long
as Mt ≪N we can implement the linear approximation
and assume m(t) = 1 + CMt/N, where C ≡dm/dP∞
evaluated at P∞(t = 0).
To simulate such a demographic process, we start with
initial values n0 = M0. For each individual in n0, we
randomly draw a number mi of descendants for the ith
individual from a truncated power-law distribution with
mean 1+CM/N (see Appendix D for full details). In the
next iteration, the population is n1 ≡Pn0
i=1 mi. We then
update M0 to M1 = M0 + n1 and iterate the process un-
til it either terminates (i.e., when nt = 0) or the network
collapses, which can be approximated by the condition
Mt = (˜p −pc)N. Such simulations are significantly sim-
pler and faster than emulating dependent networks and
their dynamics.
Monitoring the giant component of a
random network is computationally costly, requiring the
tracking of all node and edge connections at each step.
In contrast, simulating the dynamics of a neutral popu-
lation only involves drawing n random deviates at each
step.
In order to demonstrate the effectiveness of our ap-
proach, we will use it to understand how the collapse
