Artificial Spin Ice: A Tutorial on Design and Control of Geometry,
Microstate, Magnon Dynamics & Neuromorphic Computing
Rawnak Sultana,1 Amrit Kumar Mondal,1 Vinayak Shantaram Bhat,1 Kilian Stenning,2, 3 Yue Li,4 Daan
M. Arroo,5, 3 Aastha Vasdev,4, 6 Margaret R. McCarter,7, 8 Lance E. De Long,7 J. Todd Hastings,7 Jack C.
Gartside,2, 3, 9 and M. Benjamin Jungfleisch1, a)
1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716,
USA
2)Blackett Laboratory, Imperial College London, London, UK
3)London Centre for Nanotechnology, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom
4)Materials Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, USA
5)Department of Materials, Imperial College London, Exhibition Road, London SW7 2AZ,
United Kingdom
6)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506,
USA
7)Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506,
USA
8)Advanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720,
USA
9)Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan
(Dated: 10 April 2025)
Artificial spin ice, arrays of strongly interacting nanomagnets, are complex magnetic systems with many emergent
properties, rich microstate spaces, intrinsic physical memory, high-frequency dynamics in the GHz range and compati-
bility with a broad range of measurement approaches. This tutorial article aims to provide the foundational knowledge
needed to understand, design, develop, and improve the dynamic properties of artificial spin ice (ASI). Special em-
phasis is placed on introducing the theory of micromagnetics, which describes the complex dynamics within these
systems, along with their design, fabrication methods, and standard measurement and control techniques. The article
begins with a review of the historical background, introducing the underlying physical phenomena and interactions
that govern artificial spin ice. We then explore standard experimental techniques used to prepare the microstate space
of the nanomagnetic array and to characterize magnetization dynamics, both in artificial spin ice and more broadly in
ferromagnetic materials. Finally, we introduce the basics of neuromorphic computing applied to the case of artificial
spin ice systems with goal to help researchers new to the field grasp these exciting new developments.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Artificial spin ice (ASI)1–5 systems are arrays of lithograph-
ically fabricated two- (2D) or three-dimensional (3D) nano-
magnets arranged in periodic or aperiodic lattices, providing
a unique platform to study exotic magnetic states not found
in natural materials. Initially conceived as a mesoscopic ana-
log to magnetically frustrated rare-earth pyrochlores6,7 - crys-
talline counterparts to water ice8 – ASI has since evolved
into a rich and independent field of study. These arrays are
typically modeled as interacting binary Ising-like macrospins
within nanoislands, or vortex states. ASI enables the explo-
ration of phenomena such as geometrical frustration, emer-
gent magnetic monopoles and antimonopoles connected by
Dirac strings, and phase transitions.
These systems also
show immense promise as reprogrammable magnonic crys-
tals, where the coherent and collective excitation of spin
waves (SWs) serves as information carriers9–12.
Unlike electromagnetic (EM) waves, SWs exhibit much
slower propagation velocities and significantly shorter wave-
lengths (on the micro- to nanometer scale) at the same fre-
quency, making them an ideal fit for nanotechnology. This
a)Electronic mail: mbj@udel.edu
compatibility opens pathways for on-chip data transfer and
GHz frequency information processing while reducing power
dissipation. Given these advantages, the study of magnetiza-
tion dynamics in various 2D- and 2.5D- (multilayer 2D sys-
tems, defined as 2.5D in this tutorial) ASI geometries – such
as square, kagome, shakti, Tetris, Santa Fe, brickwork lat-
tices and so on – as well as in 3D ASI systems, have gained
increasing attention (Fig. 1)13–27. These dynamics are influ-
enced by factors like thermal fluctuations, external magnetic
fields, and the material properties of the spin-ice lattice. These
studies offer insights into both exotic fundamental physics and
applied functionality, positioning ASI systems as promising
candidates for reconfigurable magnonic circuits and neuro-
morphic computing platforms due to their non-linearity and
fading memory characteristics28.
In this tutorial article, we explicitly discuss the magnetiza-
tion dynamics in ASI and how their rich magnetization states
make them a promising candidate for realizing functional
magnonic devices. Figure 2 illustrates the various branches of
ASI research based on magnetization dynamics, focusing on
both fundamental physics and potential applications. This tu-
torial article is organized into nine sections. Sections I, II, and
III introduce the concept of ASI, its theoretical background,
and the micromagnetic approach used to study magnetization
dynamics in ASI. Sections IV and V cover key nanofabrica-
arXiv:2504.06548v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  9 Apr 2025
