66
Evidence for Intrinsic charm in the proton
quark, whose mass (mc = 1.51 GeV) is of the same order of magnitude as the mass of the proton.
This question has remained highly controversial, and indeed recent dedicated studies have
resulted in disparate claims, from excluding momentum fractions carried by intrinsic charm
larger than 0.5 % at the 4σ level [240] to allowing up to a 2 % charm momentum fraction [241].
A particularly delicate issue in this context is that of separating the radiative component: finding
that the charm PDF is nonzero at a low scale is not sufficient to argue that intrinsic charm has
been identified. In the following we present a resolution of this four-decades-long conundrum
by providing a first evidence for intrinsic charm in the proton.
We provide also a first quantitative indication that the proton wave functions contains unequal
distributions of charm quarks and antiquarks, i.e. a non-vanishing intrinsic valence charm. A
significant non-vanishing valence component cannot be perturbatively generated, hence our
results reinforce evidence that the proton contains an intrinsic (i.e., not radiatively generated)
charm quark component.
Outline.
This chapter is structured as follows: first we review how the charm PDF is deter-
mined in the NNPDF framework (Section 3.1), in particular discussing and comparing with
the case of perturbative charm only (Section 3.1.2) in the four-flavor-number scheme (4FNS).
Then, in Section 3.2, we show how it is possible to disentangle the perturbative component of
the charm PDF and isolate a possible intrinsic component by isolating the three-flavor-number
scheme (3FNS) charm. We discuss the stability of such procedure, and we validate the result
by comparing to some recent measurement of LHCb (Section 3.2.4). Finally, in Section 3.3 we
show how this method can be extended to probe a non-vanishing charm PDF asymmetry, and
we propose some dedicated observables, which can be measured at future colliders such as
HL-LHC or EIC and can further constrain a proton intrinsic charm component (Section 3.3.3).
3.1. Fitting charm PDF
In this section, by using the methodology described in Section 2.2, we discuss some feature of
the charm NNPDF4.0 PDF [109].
This fitted charm PDF will be the boundary condition of the studies presented then in Sections 3.2
and 3.3, its determination is performed at NNLO in an expansion in powers of the strong
coupling, αs, which represents the precision frontier for collider phenomenology.
The charm PDF determined in this manner includes a radiative component, and indeed it
depends on the resolution scale: it is given in a four-flavor-number scheme (4FNS), in which
up, down, strange and charm quarks are subject to perturbative radiative corrections and mix
with each other and the gluon as the resolution is increased. In the following, we review the
parametrization of the fitted charm PDF (Section 3.1.1), we compare it with the alternative
scenario of the perturbative charm only in Section 3.1.2: discussing its stability at PDF level
(Section 3.1.3).
