of magnetic fields where the measured resistance of the TBG and sample stage temperature
(from the sensor) show a peak with the magnetic field sweeps, i.e., Bpeak.
Figure.
4e
shows how the |Bpeak| values increase with increasing ramp-rate for both the TBG and the
Ruthenium oxide sensor. Surprisingly, |Bpeak| values are similar for the TBG and sensor. We
have checked the same with an independently calibrated ‘Cernox’ sensor, and the Bpeak for
it at two different ramp rates are the same as that of the Ruthenium oxide sensor (SI- 18).
This can re-enforce that the observed hysteresis in Rxx might appear due to the mismatch
between the temperature profile induced in the forward and backward magnetic field sweep
at the sample stage, raising a question on the origin of the hysteresis observed around the
SC phase in TBG could be an extrinsic effect rather than an intrinsic one. Similarly, if
we perform the time-series experiment for measured TRox (see Figure. 5a,b), we observe
the transient change in the measured temperature matching qualitatively with the transient
behavior of Rxx, giving us a glimpse of the change in profile of the local temperature at the
sample stage. Such rise and fall of the local sample stage temperature with the magnetic
field sweep could arise with a possibility that the ‘sample puck’ (see SI-1) is intrinsically
susceptible to hysteresis loss or magnetocaloric effect.
Figure. 5c shows Rxx vs. ν around the SC region with increasing T at B = 0. From
the ν −T 2−d colormap of dRxx
dT
(Figure. 5e), we can see that at low temperature,
dRxx
dT
is high around ν ∼2 and ν ∼3, compared to ν closer to νop of the SC phase.
As a
result, Rxx around ν ∼2 and ν ∼3 is highly sensitive to the local temperature change
of the sample stage compared to the SC region, and Rxx follows suit to the change in the
temperature profile of the sample stage induced by magnetic sweep resulting in a hysteresis of
the magnetoresistance. Quantitatively, for Rxx hysteresis observed at ν = 2.1 , ∆Rmax
xx
≈0.55
13
