A Practical Cross-Platform,
Multi-Algorithm Study of
Quantum Optimisation for Configurational Analysis of
Materials
Kieran McDowall, Theodoros Kapourniotis, Christopher Oliver, Phalgun Lolur†, and
Konstantinos Georgopoulos
National Quantum Computing Centre, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Harwell Campus, Didcot, Oxfordshire, OX11 0QX
Quantum computers show potential for
achieving computational advantage over
classical computers, with many candidate
applications in the domains of chemistry
and materials science.
We consider the
well-studied
problem
of
configurational
analysis of materials and, more specifically,
finding the lowest energy configuration of
defective graphene structures. This prob-
lem acts as a test-case which allows us to
study various algorithms that are appli-
cable to Quadratic Unconstrained Binary
Optimisation (QUBO) problems,
which
are
generally
classically
intractable
ex-
actly. To solve this problem, we implement
two methods, the Variational Quantum
Eigensolver (VQE) and Quantum Anneal-
ing (QA), on commercially-available gate-
based and quantum annealing devices that
are accessible via Quantum-Computing-as-
a-Service (QCaaS) models. To analyse the
performance of these algorithms, we use a
toolbox of relevant metrics and compare
performance against three classical algo-
rithms. We employ quantum methods to
solve fully-connected QUBOs of up to 72
variables, and find that algorithm perfor-
mance beyond this is restricted by device
connectivity, noise and classical compu-
tation time overheads.
The applicability
of our approach goes beyond the selected
configurational analysis test-case, and we
anticipate that our approach will be of use
for optimisation problems in general.
Kieran McDowall: kieran.mcdowall@stfc.ac.uk
Theodoros Kapourniotis: theodoros.kapourniotis@stfc.ac.uk
†Current affilation: Capgemini UK PLC, 95 Queen Victo-
ria Street, London, United Kingdom, EC4V 4HN.
1
Introduction
Quantum mechanics provides the framework for
understanding chemistry as we know it.
The
foundations that let us predict the behaviour and
properties of any chemical species have been es-
tablished for almost a hundred years. That the
problem size grows exponentially with the num-
ber of particles led Dirac to note, ‘The exact ap-
plication of these laws leads to equations much
too complicated to be soluble’, in 1929 [1]. Hence,
despite having a framework, it is difficult for clas-
sical computers to simulate chemistry efficiently.
Quantum computers offer an alternative platform
for solving such problems, building from Feyn-
man’s proposal in 1982 of constructing a com-
puter based on quantum hardware [2].
There are several types of chemistry prob-
lems that could be considered as candidates to
be solved using quantum algorithms, including
fermionic simulation [3] and combinatorial opti-
misation problems. Combinatorial optimisation
problems in particular are ubiquitous across sci-
ence and industry, motivating quantum optimi-
sation as a highly active field of research and de-
velopment, and a candidate for near-term quan-
tum advantage [4, 5].
In this study we explore
the problem of finding the lowest-energy config-
uration of defective graphene structures, based
on the formulation found in Ref. [6].
Suppose
we are tasked with removing a specific number
of atoms from a graphene sheet of N sites. The
goal is to find which atoms, when removed, will
result in a configuration with the lowest-energy.
The configuration of lowest energy will be the one
with the maximum number of remaining atom-
atom bonds. This is an instance of the densest
k-subgraph problem, with many applications be-
yond configurational analysis [7]. In this work,
1
arXiv:2504.06885v1  [quant-ph]  9 Apr 2025
