Figure 2: Overview of BDF/SHiP in ECN3.
4
SHiP detectors
The SHiP experiment is shown in Fig. 2. The particles of interest to SHiP are long-lived and can have
decay products with large transverse momenta, necessitating a detector which is both long in the beam
direction and large in the direction transverse to the beam.
The first component of the experimental setup just downstream of the target complex is the muon
shield, built to sweep out the ∼20 GHz of muons above 10 GeV produced every SPS spill, leaving only
a residual rate of less than 100 kHz of muons in the detector acceptance. The muon shield consists of the
magnetised hadron stopper and a series of free-standing magnets arranged along ∼25 m along the beam
axis, with transverse dimensions of 1 to 3 metres. An integral field of ∼30 Tm is required to sweep
the highest-momenta muons out of the detector acceptance. Mid-momentum muons deflected in the up-
stream part of the shield encounter the return field which bends such muons back towards the detector. To
solve this problem, the downstream magnets of the muon shield are energized with an opposite polarity.
This way, the downstream magnets’ return field deflects back towards the outside the mid-momentum
muons, while it continues to gradually bend out the high-momentum muons. Superconducting techno-
logy with a 5 T field is currently under investigation for the upstream section, as it would permit a shorter,
more compact muon shield.
The SHiP scattering and neutrino detector, SND, is positioned inside the last part of the muon
shield. As shown in Fig. 3, it consists of a sandwich of tungsten plates and silicon detectors, which
provide precise vertex reconstruction in tau neutrino events and reconstruction of the electromagnetic
showers in electron neutrino events, and a magnetised tracking calorimeter (MTC). Upstream of this
setup, an emulsion cloud chamber (ECC) made of tungsten plates interleaved with emulsion films will
complement the high-precision tracking device, if the muon rate will be tolerable. The MTC is made
of a magnetised iron absorbers, which uses the return field of the central yoke of the muon shield,
and active planes of the scintillating-fibres (SciFi) and scintillating tiles. The SciFi planes provide the
reconstruction of neutrino interaction vertices and can measure the momenta of charged tracks as well
as missing transverse momentum carried away by neutrinos from decays of tau leptons. The scintillating
tiles are used to measure the energy of hadron showers. The MTC is designed to reconstruct all neutrino
flavours, including tau neutrinos, using kinematical methods. The silicon/tungsten vertex detector can
reconstruct tau neutrino events on an event-by-event basis using the MTC for measuring the momenta
and energies of muons and hadrons.
A lightweight gas bag filled with helium at 1 atm pressure and held in place by a structure of
aluminum frames will be used as the experiments search volume for FIP decays. Residual backgrounds
8
