Different perturbative expansions. In the EFT of GR the kinetic term is of second or-
der in the derivatives, while the one in quadratic gravity contains both second and fourth-order
derivatives acting on hµν. This means that, in the path integral language, the perturbative ex-
pansions in the two theories are performed around two different Gaussians. While the propagator
in the EFT of GR falls off like 1/p2, the one in quadratic gravity is more suppressed and behaves
as 1/p4. These are the reasons why in quadratic gravity we can work with a dimension-zero field
and then prove perturbative renormalizability. It is also worth mentioning that, starting from
quadratic gravity, we can define an EFT expansion if we are interested in energy scales lower than
m0 and/or m2, by integrating out the massive spin-zero and/or spin-two degrees of freedom.
Different meanings of quadratic curvature coefficients. In a perturbative regime, a1
and a2 appearing in the EFT action (6) are expected to have renormalized values of order one
or smaller. On the contrary, the coefficients c0 and c2 in the quadratic gravity action (7) are
free parameters that can be renormalized to arbitrary values, even large ones, provided that the
perturbative expansion can be considered reliable.
Inessential vs essential couplings.
In the absence of matter, the quadratic curvature
terms in the EFT of GR can be removed perturbatively by performing a metric field redefinition
(the same is true for any other term that is proportional to the Einstein’s equations in vacuum).
If matter is present, their contributions can still be partially removed by shifting them into the
matter sector. On the other hand, in the renormalizable theory of quadratic gravity this is not
possible: R2 and CµνρσCµνρσ are part of the starting action, they lead to field equations different
from those of GR and therefore to a different dynamics for the metric field in high-curvature
regimes. In this case, the same field redefinition would have a different effect since it would map
the action of quadratic gravity to an equivalent action containing higher curvature operators that
cannot be neglected perturbatively. In other words, while the EFT coefficients a1 and a2 are
inessential couplings, the quadratic gravity coefficients c0 and c2 are essential.
Small vs large couplings. While in the EFT of GR the loop diagrams are proportional to
(1/M 2
p)L−1 and positive powers of ai, in quadratic gravity the UV behavior of the loop expansion
is controlled by (1/c0)L−1, (1/c2)L−1, and other dimensionless combinations (see also [5]). This
means that what is strongly (weakly) coupled from the point of view of quadratic gravity is weakly
(strongly) coupled from the point of the EFT of GR. Note that, large values of ai correspond
to a strong coupling regime for the EFT only if the corresponding energy scale is smaller than
the EFT cutoff. However, if the EFT cutoff is sufficiently low, for example much lower than
the Planck mass, then hitting high values of ai could simply be a sign of the presence of new
physics that has not been properly accounted for. A clear example of this latter scenario is in fact
given by quadratic gravity taken as perturbative completion of GR, according to which the EFT
cutoff corresponds to the smallest of the two masses m0 and m2. In this case, the gravitational
interaction would still be weakly coupled for energy scales E ∼mi, and even larger.
9
