CAMULATOR: FAST EMULATION OF THE COMMUNITY
ATMOSPHERE MODEL ∗
William E. Chapman‡, John S. Schreck†, Yingkai Sha†, David John Gagne II†, Dhamma Kimpara†,
Laure Zannaζ, Kirsten J. Mayer‡, Judith Berner‡
Climate and Global Dynamics (CGD) Laboratory‡
Computational and Information Systems (CISL) Laboratory†
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York Universityζ
NSF National Center for Atmospheric Research
Boulder, Colorado, USA
{wchapman, schreck, ksha}@ucar.edu
ABSTRACT
We introduce CAMulator version 1, an auto-regressive machine-learned (ML) emulator of the
Community Atmosphere Model version 6 (CAM6) that simulates the next atmospheric state given
prescribed sea surface temperatures and incoming solar radiation. CAMulator explicitly conserves
global dry air mass, moisture, and total atmospheric energy while remaining numerically stable
over indefinite climate integrations. It successfully reproduces the annual CAM6 climatology and
key modes of climate variability, including the El Niño–Southern Oscillation, the North Atlantic
Oscillation, and the Pacific-North American pattern, with slightly muted variability. When forced
with sea surface temperature (SST) beyond the training distribution, CAMulator exhibits a systematic
cold bias in high-latitude regions, particularly in boreal winter, likely due to the absence of interactive
land and sea ice. Nonetheless, CAMulator achieves these results with a 350 times speedup over
CAM6, making it an efficient alternative for generating large ensembles. CAMulator represents a
step toward fast, physically realistic ML-driven climate modeling.
1
Introduction
Earth system models are essential for understanding Earth system dynamics, characterizing extreme events, and
projecting future climate scenarios. However, their high computational cost limits their practical applications. One
major computational bottleneck of these models is the atmosphere component [Worley et al., 2011]. Recent advances
in machine learning (ML) emulators offer a promising path forward, with the potential to accelerate simulations
and improve physical representation. Demonstrating the fidelity of ML-driven emulation is crucial; success in Earth
system model component emulation could enhance and enable key modeling activities such as rapid hypothesis testing,
large-ensemble generation [Kay et al., 2015, Maher et al., 2021], and comprehensive uncertainty quantification [e.g.,
Deser et al., 2017, Touma et al., 2022], ultimately broadening the scope and efficiency of climate research.
Progress in ML-based climate emulation has been rapid, particularly in emulating component models [Dheeshjith
et al., 2024, Watt-Meyer et al., 2023, 2024] and, more recently, in coupled systems [Cresswell-Clay et al., 2024].
The community is beginning to demonstrate that ML-based Earth system component models have the potential to
emulate key features that are important for climate research, such as emergent variability and response to external
forcing. However, the extent to which this has been achieved remains an active area of investigation [Watt-Meyer
et al., 2024]. However, differences in the state variables, reduced dimensionality, and lower physical resolution—both
horizontally and vertically—pose challenges for combining these ML-based atmospheric emulators with other Earth
∗Citation: Chapman W. et al. fully resolved, fast emulation of the Community Atmosphere Model
arXiv:2504.06007v1  [physics.ao-ph]  8 Apr 2025
