2
FIG. 1.
Averaged cuts along [H 0 0] and equivalent directions of the elastic scattering pattern – ℏω = [-0.1, 0.1] meV – for
data processed with various shielding factors using Equation 1 applied to T=1.7 K data. Red dotted line shows this same cut
for measured [CYTOP + He] data. The signature of the CYTOP is clear in the elastic data and a shielding factor choice of
0.71 appears optimal.
FIG. 2.
Figure 3 from the main text recreated with T=150 K data cut showing errors reflecting shielding factor uncertainties.
persist with subtractions of Helium and CYTOP backgrounds (regardless of shielding factor) as shown in panel (b).
Panel (c) shows that this artifact disappears with the detail-balance background subtraction outlined in Equation 5 in
the Methods section of the main text. Here we show the origins of this artifact, model how it evolves with scattering
energy, and explain how our background subtraction removes it. Because the sample is made from a collection of
crystals, any intrinsic chiral scattering feature would appear with D6 symmetry. Hence, the streaks cannot be intrinsic,
since there is no corresponding steak with the opposite chirality. As we derive below, they ultimately arise from the
finite energy width of the incident neutron beam. Though the width of the incident energy distribution is ∼0.1 meV,
the weakness of the diffuse magnetic scattering relative to that of elastic scattering means the artifact persists well
into the inelastic signal for our data.
To track this effect, we consider the time-of-flight scattering geometry of the CNCS instrument and the effects of
the energy width of the incident beam. For a normal inelastic scattering event from an incoming beam of energy Ei,
the detected q in units [˚A
−1] is
q = kf −ki = k(Ei)
" r
1 −∆E
Ei
cos ϕ −1
!
ˆi +
 r
1 −∆E
Ei
sin ϕ −1
!
ˆj
#
,
(2)
where ∆E is the detected loss in energy from the time of flight, k(E) is the incident beam wavenumber, and ϕ is the
angle between initial and final wave vectors (and equal to twice the Bragg angle, ϕ = 2θB). We now suppose the
