10
Figure 4: Coherence factor curves for the superposition
of eigenstates illustrated in the legend. The value of the
∆parameter is also shown.
The arbitrary unit is the
time requested for the superposition |ψ⟩9,14 to reach the
value of 0.001 of the coherence factor.
tion, the difference in total spin ⟨β|Sz|β⟩−⟨α|Sz|α⟩does
not explain the obtained coherence factor times. Con-
sider, for example, the eigenstates |9⟩, |21⟩, |26⟩. They
have the same expectation value for the operator Sz, as
seen in the legend of figure 3. Still, |ψ⟩9,26 show com-
pletely different coherence factor time compared to the
states |ψ⟩9,21 and |ψ⟩21,26, thus this set of eigenstates
cannot be considered to design a 3-levels qudit. These
results can be completely explained only by comparing
the expectation values of the local spin operators for the
states |α⟩and |β⟩, involved in each superposition |ψ⟩α,β.
To this purpose, the considered ∆parameter estimates
how far we are from the ideal condition where the coher-
ence factor does not decrease.
Finally, note that the curves in figure 4 are not all or-
dered according the corresponding ∆. This result does
not contrast with the theory developed above. Indeed,
the ∆parameter defined in equation 39 serves as a gen-
eral measure associated with each pair of eigenstates and
does not capture fine details.
For example, the curve
corresponding to the state |ψ⟩9,14, with ∆= 2.37, decays
slightly more slowly than the ones associated ∆= 2.2. If
the system contains more than one spin this measure is
no longer a fine descriptor of the rate of decoherence, as
happened for the one-spin system described in V A, and
the curves do not strictly follow the order established
by the parameter. Anyway, it statistically well describes
the observed coherence factor decay, confirming that the
smaller the value of ∆, the longer the coherence time, in
agreement with the theoretical results of section II.
C.
Qudit proposal
Equipped with the concepts learned through the ex-
amples in subsections V A and V B, we started looking
for a potential qudit candidate. Note that, to realize a
qubit, it is enough to find two eigenstates of a system that
maximize the coherence factor time of the superposition.
Instead, for a d-levels qudit, there are d(d −1)/2 pairs
of eigenstates, each one prepared in a superposition with
a specific coherence factor time. It follows that a qudit
can be designed only if all the coherence factor curves are
similar in their temporal decay. As already demonstrated
in the cases of the single giant spin and of the five spins
system with competing interactions, long coherence fac-
tor times can be obtained by choosing eigenstates with
the appropriate expectation value of the local spin oper-
ators.
It must be emphasized that the search for a real
molecular qudit candidate with the appropriate eigen-
state structure is constrained not only by the requirement
of minimal decoherence, but also by the practical limi-
tations of implementation and manipulation. For these
reasons, we carefully selected eigenstates with the follow-
ing features: the perturbative Schrieffer-Wolff transfor-
mation described in section II A must be valid, implying
that the corresponding eigenvalues must not be nearly
degenerate; these eigenvalues should fall within a range
that can be experimentally addressed by electromagnetic
pulses in the microwave spectrum to ensure full connec-
tivity between states; the magnetic matrix elements for
transitions between them should be sufficiently large to
enable qudit manipulation within a reasonable timescale;
and finally, the selected states should not be too far from
the ground state to minimize relaxation due to phonon
emission.
To increase the number of states satisfying the con-
straints described above, we propose a system composed
of six S = 1/2 spins (see figure 2b), obtained by adding a
spin to the center of the triangular basis of the structure
illustrated in figure 2a. The corresponding Hamiltonian
is shown in equation 41. Optimal qudits are obtained
when the Zeeman term and the AFM exchange couplings
are set to comparable values ranging from 0.1 meV to
1 meV, with the DMI approximately one tenth of these
values. For instance, a possible choice is to apply a mag-
netic field slightly tilted away from the z-axis to enhance
the connectivity between eigenstates. Specifically, we set
B = 1.0 T, tilted by π/18 rad around the y-axis. More-
over, we supposed values of the exchange parameters to
vary approximately from 0.5 meV to 0.1 meV, as detailed
in supplementary information VI C. Highly symmetric
molecular structures are usually imperfect and often ex-
hibit distortions. To avoid results that depend strictly
on perfect symmetry, we introduce slight variations in
the parameters to break it. The same random variation
