1
2
3
6
5
4
¯x1 = 0
¯x2 = 0
¯x3 = 0
¯x4 = 1
¯x5 = 1
¯x6 = 1
(a) original FJ
1
2
3
6
5
4
¯x1 ≃0.31
¯x2 ≃0.31
¯x3 = 0
¯x4 = 1
¯x5 ≃0.69
¯x6 ≃0.69
(b) FJ-MM
Figure 3: Example 1: Comparison between the nodes’ equilibrium opinions ¯xi in case of the original FJ and the FJ-MM models.
Figure 4: Example 2: Polarization Index for a Barbell Graph with 10 nodes.
Along with polarization, the higher-order neighbors visibly affect the average network’s opinion.
Example 3. Consider a Barbell graph with 16 nodes, using the same polarized initial condition as in Examples
1 and 2. We set [β] = 0.8I, and assign λii = 0 to the two nodes at the endpoints of the central edge as well
as to two randomly selected nodes (one from each clique). The remaining agents are assigned λii = 1. Fig. 5a
compares the average opinion dynamics for the FJ-MM, the comparison FJ model, and the original FJ model with
matrix W. It is evident that the FJ-MM model converges more slowly than both the original FJ and the comparison
models. We present preliminary results on the convergence rate in the next section. Fig. 5b displays the final opinion
distributions of individual nodes.
4
Convergence Rate
In the previous section, we have established conditions for the existence of a unique equilibrium for the system
introduced in (5) and for convergence to it. Now, we focus on the analysis of the corresponding convergence rate.
Specifically, we analyze the convergence rate for the FJ-MM model (9) (determined by the spectral radius ρ( ¯Ad))
and compare it with the convergence rates of the comparison FJ model (7). In the scenarios of Use Cases 1,3,4,
where the FJ-MM is determined by a single stochastic matrix W, it is also interesting to compare these convergence
rates with the one of the original FJ model (2).
To simplify the notation, also in this case, we will refer to the FJ-MM model defined in (5) using the formulation
introduced in (9), i.e.
y(t) = ¯Ady(t −1) + ¯c .
Similarly, we will refer to comparison model using (7).
First, we will focus on the relation among the convergence rates for the FJ-MM and for the comparison model,
showing that the introduced FJ-MM system converges slower to the steady state with respect to the other one.
Proposition 2. Under Assumption 1, the convergence rate of the FJ-MM system in (5) does not exceed the one
of FJ comparison model in (7): ρ( ¯Ad) ≥ρ( ¯A).
