CAMulator
The goal of this work is to represent CAM6 with as much fidelity as possible, thus, we primarily analyze the emulation
of CAM6 by CAMulator. In some cases, we incorporate reanalysis products to provide qualitative context for the
differences between CAM6, CAMulator, and the assimilated observational datasets. For precipitation, we use NOAA’s
Global Precipitation Climatology Project (GPCP) product [Adler et al., 2003], while all other variables are compared
against the global ECMWF Reanalysis version 5 (ERA5) [Hersbach et al., 2020].
Following best practices, we divide the available data period into three subsets: a training data set (1979 - 2010), a
validation subset (2011) and a testing data set (2012–2014).
2
Methods
2.1
Model Architecture
CAMulator is based on WXFormer, a transformer-based architecture developed at NSF NCAR and described in Schreck
et al. [2024]. Figure 1 shows the CAMulator architecture and workflow. WXFormer utilizes a CrossFormer backbone
[Wang et al., 2023] for multi-scale feature processing and long-range dependency modeling, combined with hierarchical
transpose convolutional layers for upsampling in the decoding stages. Standard skip connections, similar to those in a
U-Net Ronneberger et al. [2015], are incorporated to efficiently transfer feature information and preserve spatial details
from the encoder to the decoder.
WXFormer has demonstrated state-of-the-art performance among leading AI-based weather prediction (AIWP) models
[Schreck et al., 2024], making it an ideal base-model for climate modeling. To adapt WXFormer for our use case, we
introduce several architectural modifications tailored to climate-scale forecasting.
First, we increase the feature embedding size by doubling the dimensionality of the cross embedding layers (CEL) while
maintaining computational efficiency (Fig. 1b). The CEL employs a multi-kernel approach, applying four convolutional
kernels (4×4, 8×8, 16×16, and 32×32) in parallel, each with a 2×2 stride during the initial processing stage [Wang et al.,
2023]. This multi-scale strategy enhances the model’s ability to capture spatial patterns across a range of atmospheric
scales.
Additionally, we reduce both the global and local window sizes of the Long Short Distance Attention mechanism (LSDA;
Fig. 1c) to align with the lower-resolution of CAM6 compared to WXFormer’s original ∼0.28° ERA5 application
(see [Schreck et al., 2024] for further details). This adaptation ensures more effective regional feature extraction while
maintaining performance consistency.
With these modifications, CAMulator is comprised of ~751 million trainable parameters, making it a high-capacity
climate emulator optimized for long-term simulations. CAMulator takes as input the state of the atmosphere at time
step i and predicts the state at i + 1 with a 6-hour forecast horizon. The model operates autoregressively, generating
multi-step forecasts, allowing it to function as a standalone climate model capable of running indefinitely.
2.2
Conservation Blocks
Following [Sha et al., 2025a] and Watt-Meyer et al. [2024], conservation schemes are applied after the CAMulator
output layer to ensure physically consistent model roll-outs (Fig. 1e). The order of application is critical, as each
scheme depends on the corrections applied in previous steps. Below, we describe the purpose and implementation of
each scheme, with the adjusted variables emphasized. For the direct calculation of these corrections see Appendix
section B.
1. Nonnegative correction: AI models can produce negative values, which are unphysical for certain variables.
For all nonnegative variables (specific total water, total precipitation, 10-meter windspeed, and [Total, High,
Low, Medium] Cloud Cover), any negative raw outputs are set to zero. While this approach ensures physical
consistency, alternative correction methods, such as redistribution, may be beneficial in some cases.
2. Global dry air mass conservation scheme: At each forecast step, surface pressure is corrected to ensure
that global dry air mass remains constant, maintaining consistency with the initial condition. The correction
is applied at each grid cell using a multiplicative factor, computed by first determining the residual mass
imbalance and then adjusting accordingly.
3. Global moisture budget conservation scheme: At each forecast step, total precipitation is adjusted to balance
the global sum of the total precipitable water tendency (derived from specific total water) and the accumulated
net flux of precipitation and evaporation over the previous 6-hour period. The correction is applied at each
grid cell using a multiplicative factor, computed by first determining the residual water imbalance and then
adjusting accordingly.
4
