arXiv:2504.06524v1  [cond-mat.supr-con]  9 Apr 2025
Exceptionally large winding number of a ﬁnite-size topological superconductor
Satoshi Ikegaya,1,2 Shingo Kobayashi,3 and Yasuhiro Asano4
1Institute for Advanced Research, Nagoya University, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan
2Department of Applied Physics, Nagoya University, Nagoya 464-8603, Japan
3RIKEN Center for Emergent Matter Science, Wako, Saitama, 351-0198, Japan
4Department of Applied Physics, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-8628, Japan
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
We study ﬁnite-size-induced topological phenomena in unconventional superconductors. Speciﬁ-
cally, we focus on a thin ﬁlm with a persistent spin texture, fabricated on a high-Tc cuprate dxy-wave
superconductors. In two-dimensional dxy-wave superconductors, ﬂat-band Andreev bound states ap-
pear at the edges. As the system narrows, these bound states acquire an energy gap due to ﬁnite-size
hybridization and spin-orbit coupling of the persistent spin texture. This induced gap gives rise to
the emergence of a topological phase, characterized by an exceptionally large one-dimensional wind-
ing number that scales with the ﬁlm width. We demonstrate the appearance of highly degenerate
zero-energy states, leading to anomalous perfect charge transport in dirty superconducting junctions.
These ﬁndings provide a promising platform for exploring fascinating topological superconducting
phases driven by gapped Andreev bound states.
Introduction and outline. Topological phases of mat-
ter, characterized by nontrivial topological invariants as-
sociated with gapped band structures, have been a cen-
tral focus of condensed matter physics. A hallmark of
these phases, as dictated by the bulk-boundary corre-
spondence, is the emergence of exotic boundary states.
The intrinsic stability of these states holds promise for
future applications in quantum technologies [1–5]. The
topological invariant of gapped band structures is deter-
mined primarily by two factors: the dimensionality and
the symmetry of the systems [6]. The relationship be-
tween topological properties and dimensionality is of par-
ticular importance in quasi-(d −1)-dimensional systems,
where the size of a d-dimensional system is reduced along
one direction. In such systems, topological properties can
undergo marked changes as the system approaches the
dimensional crossover regime [7, 8].
A representative example is found in quasi-two-
dimensional thin ﬁlms of topological insulators. In three-
dimensional topological insulators, Dirac surface states
appear as a consequence of a Z2 topological invariant.
In quasi-two-dimensional systems, ﬁnite-size eﬀects in-
duce hybridization between the Dirac surface states on
the top and bottom surfaces, leading to two-dimensional
(2D) topological insulators [7, 9–11], depending on the
parity of the number of stacked 2D layers [12, 13]. These
coupled Dirac surface states can be further engineered
by additional perturbations. For instance, applying an
exchange potential opens a gap in the Dirac spectrum
and stabilizes a topological phase characterized by the
Chern number [14], while an extended s-wave pairing
potential can induce a Z2 topological superconducting
phase [15, 16].
Despite the extensive study of topological phases orig-
inating from Dirac surface states [14, 16–28], topological
phases driven by Andreev bound states (ABSs) of super-
conductors (SCs) remain poorly understood. A known
case involves Caroli-de Gennes-Matricon bound states in
vortex cores [29–39], which result from the phase winding
around a vortex rather than a ﬁnite-size eﬀect. There-
fore, superconducting analogs of topological phases in-
duced by ﬁnite-size eﬀects remain largely unexplored.
The main purpose of this Letter is to uncover ﬁnite-
size-induced topological phenomena of superconducting
systems.
We consider a thin ﬁlm exhibiting a persis-
tent spin texture (PST) [40], fabricated on a high-Tc
cuprate dxy-wave SC [see Fig. 1(a)]. Speciﬁcally, we as-
sume that a unidirectional spin-orbit coupling (SOC),
which induces the PST, and a proximity-induced dxy-
wave pair potential coexist in the thin-ﬁlm. A 2D dxy-
wave SC is a prototypical nodal topological SC, hosting
ﬂat-band ABSs at its edges [41–45] [see Fig. 1(b)]. Re-
ducing the system size in one direction induces ﬁnite-
size eﬀects, resulting in a characteristic energy disper-
sion in the ABS spectrum, where multiple band cross-
ings occur at zero energy [see Fig. 1(c)]. Furthermore,
introducing the unidirectional SOC of the PST opens
a full energy gap in the ABS spectrum [see Fig. 1(d)].
The resulting gapped quasi-one-dimensional (Q1D) sys-
tem falls into the chiral symmetry class (class AIII) of
the Altland-Zirnbauer (AZ) classiﬁcation [6]. This class
allows a Z topological invariant in one dimension, namely
a one-dimensional (1D) winding number. This winding
number can take unusually large values, which almost
coincides with the number of the propagating channels
in the Q1D system [see Fig. 2(a)]. The appearance of
highly degenerate zero-energy edge states (ZESs), asso-
ciated with this exceptionally large winding number, is
conﬁrmed [see Fig. 2(b)].
We demonstrate that these
ZESs lead to prominent zero-bias conductance quantiza-
tion in dirty normal-metal–SC (NM–SC) junctions (see
Fig. 5). This disorder-independent perfect charge trans-
port is analogous to the anomalous proximity eﬀects of
2D spin-triplet px-wave SCs that host ﬂat-band Majo-
rana bound states [46–56].
High-Tc cuprates are employed as the parent SC due
to their large superconducting gap [70, 71], which im-
plies that the induced energy gap in ABSs will be suf-
