 
 
The potential flare-triggering region, or region of 
interest (ROI), is marked with red rectangles based on 
visual approximation, corresponding to the highlighted 
area in Figure 4.  
For a more detailed view, Figure 6 presents the 
zoomed-in ROI images indicated by red squares in 
Figure 5 (first and second columns), along with 
continuum images and contrast-enhanced magnetogram 
images from the Hinode/SP maps (third and fourth 
columns). These images enable a visual comparison 
with the SDO/HMI magnetograms. The red crosses on 
the Hinode/SP images correspond to the same h-RMSEV 
pixels highlighted in Figure 3, indicating that the 
anomalous spectra detected by the model are located 
within the ROI. Additionally, upon closely examining 
the locations of the red crosses on the Hinode/SP images 
and their corresponding positions on the SDO/AIA 1600 
images, the latter exhibit varying levels of brightness, 
with the first and third images showing weaker 
brightness and with the others displaying stronger 
brightness. 
3.4. Anomalous focus areas in detail 
To investigate the h-RMSEV points further, we 
analyzed the profiles of their neighboring pixels by 
zooming in on both the RMSEV heatmaps and the 
magnetograms, focusing on a 10×10-pixel area. Figure 
7 presents the Stokes V spectral profiles of the 
surrounding pixels of the h-RMSEV points for a more 
detailed examination. Panels (a) to (c) show focused 
views of the h-RMSEV points from the pre-flare SP 
maps. In these heatmaps, the h-RMSEV points are 
distinctly localized, exhibiting notable differences in 
spectral shape and reconstruction errors compared with 
the surrounding pixels. In contrast, this trend is less 
pronounced in panel (d), the during-flare SP map, where 
the spectral profiles appear more generalized. This 
indicates that the change in pre-flare spectra diminishes 
and stabilizes after the flare onset. 
 
4. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
The spectra detected by the model exhibited atypical 
profiles, revealing interesting characteristics in the 
observations. The spectral shapes of the h-RMSEV 
pixels in the pre-flare SP maps from 20240504_143042, 
20240505_020424, and 20240505_021351 showed 
asymmetries in the lobes, including double-peaked 
structures, unusual broadening of profiles, three-lobed 
shapes, and greater intensity imbalances among the 
lobes. These features indicate a complex magnetic field 
region, potentially influenced by a mix of supersonic 
downflows and upflows. The coexistence of these 
conditions, along with spatial proximity to PILs and 
their gradual appearance over time, creates a scenario 
conductive to magnetic reconnection or strong twists 
and shears in the magnetic fields. This suggests a clear 
signature of magnetic energy storage, which is a 
precursor to flare initiation [13,14].  
The h-RMSEV pixels, particularly localized in the 
RMSEV heatmaps (Figure 7), exhibit significantly 
higher error values compared with their surrounding 
pixels. Identifying these pixels in magnetograms using 
current manual methods would present significant 
challenges, highlighting the effectiveness of deep 
learning for their detection. Additionally, the h-RMSEV 
Figure 6. Zoomed-in regions of interest in SDO and 
Hinode/SP maps. Red crosses indicate the h-RMSEV 
points on the SP maps. 
