6
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
No linked rings
Two or more linked rings
FIG. 2. Equilibrium linking probability of melts of self-assembled rings as a function of the reduced bending
rigidity βκb. (a) Linking probability Plink for a canonically-equilibrated ring melt filling a 5 × 5 × 4 cubic lattice. The data
points represent the average Plink computed from 4 reconstructions and the shaded bands indicate the standard error of the
mean. The considered range of βκb spans from -8 to +8, i.e. from strongly favoured to strongly suppressed corner turns. Across
this range, the linking probability is non-monotonic, peaking at βκb ∼2. Panels (b-h) show typical configurations at the values
of βκb indicated by the callouts. The configurations were randomly picked among those with nc equal to the average curvature
at the corresponding value βκb.
were restricted to the microcanonical constant-curvature
ensemble, preventing to draw any conclusion for the con-
jugate canonical ones as a function of βκb.
Accordingly, we computed the βκb dependence of the
linking probability, Plink, defined as the probability that
self-assembled states contain at least one linked pair of
rings. To this end, we used eq. 13 after identifying ⟨O⟩nc
in with Plink(nc).
The resulting Plink(βκb) is shown in Fig. 2a.
The
shaded band denotes the estimated statistical error on
the average. Notice that βκb is varied continuously and
that positive and negative values of the bending rigid-
ity can be seamlessly considered. The negative bending
rigidity case, corresponding to situations where bending
is energetically favored, is addressed rarely in conven-
tional simulations.
The data in Fig. 2b establishes a remarkable novel re-
sult, namely that the linking probability has a unimodal
dependence on βκb.
The non-monotonic dependence of the linking proba-
bility on bending rigidity is best discussed considering
the limiting cases where β κb takes on large negative and
positive values.
For βκb < −4, nc is maximum, corresponding to a
π/2 turn at each lattice site.
The resulting rings are
so tightly wound that they do not leave openings that
can be threaded by the other rings thereby preventing
linking. In the opposite case, βκb > 4, typical config-
urations correspond to nested stacked rings – similar to
the columnar structures observed in concentrated solu-
tions of semiflexible ring polymers [89] – as illustrated
Fig. 2e. The rings in these columnar structures are pla-
nar and, hence, free of intra-chain entanglement (knot-
ting). However, their inter-chain entanglement (linking)
remains possible in the form of interlocked ring stacks,
as shown in Fig. 2f.
Consequently, Plink attains a fi-
nite value for βκb ≫0. Remarkably, the two limits are
bridged non-monotonically, with the maximum linking
probability occurring at βκb ∼2.
We conclude that a finite bending rigidity is required
to balance two opposite effects: on the one hand, rings
must not be too flexible or meandering because some de-
