Mitigating decoherence in molecular spin qudits
Leonardo Ratini,1, 2, ∗Giacomo Sansone,1, 2, ∗Elena Garlatti,1, 2, 3
Francesco Petiziol,4 Stefano Carretta,1, 2, 3, † and Paolo Santini1, 2, 3, ‡
1Universit`a di Parma, Dipartimento di Scienze Matematiche, Fisiche e Informatiche, I-43124 Parma, Italy
2INFN–Sezione di Milano-Bicocca, gruppo collegato di Parma, 43124 Parma, Italy
3Consorzio Interuniversitario Nazionale per la Scienza e Tecnologia dei Materiali (INSTM), I-50121 Firenze, Italy
4Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, Technische Universit¨at Berlin, Hardenbergstrasse 36, 10623 Berlin, Germany
Molecular nanomagnets are quantum spin systems potentially serving as qudits for future quan-
tum technologies thanks to their many accessible low-energy states.
At low temperatures, the
primary source of error in these systems is pure dephasing, caused by their interactions with the
bath of surrounding nuclear spins degrees of freedom. Most importantly, as the system’s dimen-
sionality grows going from qubits to qudits, the control and mitigation of decoherence becomes
more challenging. Here we analyze the characteristics of pure dephasing in molecular qudits under
spin-echo sequences. We use a realistic description of their interaction with the bath, whose non-
Markovian dynamics is accurately computed by the cluster correlation expansion technique. First,
we demonstrate a necessary and sufficient condition to prevent the decay of coherence with time,
also introducing a parameter to quantify the deviation from such ideal condition. We illustrate this
with two paradigmatic systems: a single giant spin and a composite antiferromagnetic spin system.
We then advance a proposal for optimized nanomagnets, identifying key ingredients for engineering
robust qudits for quantum technologies.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Quantum computation is a milestone with the poten-
tial to revolutionize various fields, from materials design
to the optimization of complex processes. The hardest
challenge in achieving practical quantum advantage lies
in mitigating noise-induced errors. Even the most mature
platforms, such as those based on superconducting trans-
mon qubits or trapped ions, belong to the category of
noisy intermediate scale quantum (NISQ) devices. These
systems are constrained by limited relaxation (T1) and
dephasing (T2) times, which restrict the number of quan-
tum gates that can be reliably executed due to error accu-
mulation. Consequently, minimizing the depth of quan-
tum circuits is critical for implementing algorithms effec-
tively on NISQ devices. For example, in quantum compu-
tation, different algorithms [1–3], such as the Variational
Quantum Eingensolver (VQE) [4, 5], have been proposed
to address electronic structure problems. Despite signif-
icant efforts to minimize the resource requirements for
implementing this algorithm [6–9], simulating challeng-
ing prototypical systems remains out of reach. To over-
come noise-related limitations and achieve fault-tolerant
quantum computation, the implementation of quantum
error correction (QEC) is necessary. The core principle
of QEC is expanding the Hilbert space beyond the con-
ventional two-dimensional space of a single qubit. This
is achieved by replacing two-level qubits with more com-
plex logical units composed of multiple physical qubits
[10]. However, this approach is significantly limited by
∗These authors contributed equally to this work.
† stefano.carretta@unipr.it
‡ paolo.santini@unipr.it
the large resource demands of multi-qubit codes, partic-
ularly due to the necessity of non-local gates operating
on distinct physical units, which makes QEC highly chal-
lenging [11]. This difficulty motivates the exploration of
alternative paradigms for implementing QEC. One such
approach involves expanding the Hilbert space by en-
coding the logical qubit into a multi-level physical sys-
tem (qudit) [12–15]. Whether applied to QEC, quantum
computation, or quantum simulation, one of the primary
advantages of qudits over traditional qubits lies in their
ability to reduce the number of distinct physical units
and two-body gates required for operations. This is be-
cause certain quantum operations that necessitate mul-
tiple gates in qubit-based systems can often be executed
with just a single gate in qudit-based systems [16, 17].
As a result, qudits not only lower the overall gate count
but also enhance computational efficiency, making them
a promising alternative for scalable quantum information
processing.
In this regard, molecular spin systems and more specif-
ically molecular nanomagnets (MNMs), represent an at-
tractive platform due to the presence of many low-energy
spin states, both nuclear and electronic ones, which can
be exploited to encode and process quantum information.
Additionally, they can be efficiently controlled using elec-
tromagnetic pulses in the microwave or radio frequency
range [18, 19]. The availability of these additional degrees
of freedom has recently led to the suggestion of encoding
qubits with embedded QEC within single molecules [20–
22]. From a chemical point of view, the easiest way to
implement this concept is provided by a spin-S ion, char-
acterized by 2S+1 states. Similarly, giant-spin nanomag-
nets offer an analogous configuration, as their low-energy
spectrum effectively maps onto an effective spin-S sys-
tem. Increasing the value of S expands the number of
energy levels that can be exploited.
arXiv:2504.06057v1  [quant-ph]  8 Apr 2025
