5
fitting ellipsoidal beam profiles to the observed images,
with 4σ spot sizes reported in this paper. The beam spot
size results are presented in Figure 2 (lower left) and are
compared to expected spot sizes computed with Equa-
tion 2.
We expected that the beam spot size would be limited
by our fiber diamater. Instead, we initially found that
our spot sizes were systematically 30-50% larger than
the design values (see the lower right panel of Figure 2).
Figure 2 illustrates that, due to a slight angular misalign-
ment, this focuser has a pronounced astigmatism, with
the optimal focus in the tangential and saggital planes
located at different focal lengths. By measuring the two-
dimensional spot shape as a function of position relative
to the nominal focus, we were able to confirm that the
minimum width at the true focus in each plane matched
the design value.
In Appendix C, we discuss results with a newer focuser
design in which this astigmatism is substantially reduced
thanks to a unibody design. We found that most of the
focusers of this design had a similar astigmatism, suggest-
ing a design defect leading to a consistent misalignment
of the OAP and collimator by a few tenths of a degree.
The beam size was also measured as a function of photon
wavelength, using a set of nine fiber-coupled LED diodes
spanning 365 nm - 970 nm. In these experiments, the
camera was placed at the optimal focal point found for
625 nm photons. The results are shown in Figure 2 (bot-
tom right) and Table I. This trend is a reflection of the
departure from Gaussian optics in our system. When we
tested the new focusing unit described in Appendix C, we
found that the mode density in the fiber increases rapidly
with decreasing wavelength, with M 2 approaching 1 at
970 nm. As a result, the effect of astigmatism produces a
more pronounced increase in spot size for shorter wave-
lengths. When only considering focus in one plane, we
can see that a similar reduction in spot size can be seen
at longer wavelength, but the effect is much smaller, in
line with the change being driven by simply a reduced
mode field diameter as the fiber modes decrease. The
spot size of the new focuser at nominal focus lines up
well with the optimal focus measurements in the colli-
mator used for this cryogenic test; both agree with the
modeled expectation based on a fixed mode field diame-
ter and uncertainties in fiber properties. Future work will
confirm that for single-mode waveguides, we see the ex-
pected increase in spot size with wavelength above 1µm.
B.
APD Measurements
The beam spot size was also characterized using the
output fiber plate and an avalanche photodiode detec-
tor (APD). For these measurements, the scanner was
mounted inside the cryostat and coupled to in situ input
and output fibers, as discucsed in detail in Appendix A.
With the MEMS mirror in stationary mode, 625 nm pho-
tons were sent through the system, and the relative in-
100
0
100
 x′ ( m)
150
100
50
0
50
100
150
 y′ ( m)
625nm warm
100 0
100
 x′ ( m)
0
1000
2000
APD voltage (mV)
100 0
100
 y′ ( m)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
APD voltage (mV)
105 m fiber
x′ fit
4
1 = 117.7 m
y′ fit
4
2 = 113.6 m
1/
2 = 1.04
FIG. 3. Top: Room temperature image of beam coupled to
105 µm diameter output fiber. Intensity through the output
fiber was measured using voltage out of an APD. The con-
version from 2-axis MEMS tilt controller settings to physical
units (µm) assumes the intensity profile along each principle
component of the spot is equivalent to a Gaussian convolved
with a 105 µm square pulse. Bottom Left: The intensity
along one principal component fit to a Gaussian convolved
with a 105 µm square pulse.
Bottom Center: Same as
Bottom Left for the second principle component. Bottom
Right: The relevant legend, including 4σ widths of the rele-
vant Gaussian fits.
tensity of the output beam was measured using the mean
value of the measured APD signal (voltage). The 2-axis
MEMS mirror was then tilted using DC voltage control
to a new (stationary) orientation, and the averaged APD
signal was recorded again. The process was repeated at
a number of mirror positions to obtain a full image of the
beam spot intensity over two dimensions.
Images were then converted from dimensionless MEMS
tilt-control units to distances using the known diameter
of the output fiber (105 µm) as a calibration feature, and
assuming each measured image was a convolution of the
circular fiber geometry with a bivariate Gaussian beam
profile. An example beam spot image taken on the bench
with this method can be seen in Figure 3. In this exam-
ple, the predicted fiber-removed spot size is ∼30% larger
than that observed with the CCD. We attribute the dif-
ference to larger systematic uncertainties associated with
the MEMS-tilt method. Despite these uncertainties, the
tilt-based measurement scheme is useful because it en-
ables in situ beam spot measurements over a broad tem-
perature range.
It was found that spot size results did not change
appreciably between warm and cold scanning measure-
ments, so the majority of in situ characterization data
were obtained at 660 nm, as the LED source at this wave-
