6
C.
Hexatic order
This section examines the change in the hexatic order
parameter to capture hexatic melting. Each particle in
the system can be associated with a hexatic bond ori-
entational order. For the k-th particle, it is defined as
ψk
6 = (1/n) Pn
i=1 ei6θkj, where θkj is the bond angle be-
tween particle k and its topological neighbor j relative to
the x-axis, and n is the number of such neighbors [81].
In Fig. 3(c), we plot the mean amplitude of the hexatic
order parameter of the system
⟨ψ6⟩=
*
1
N
N
X
k=1
ψk
6

2+
,
(12)
as a function of Λ. The hexatic order diminishes with Λ,
but remains significant beyond Λ = 10, suggesting the
system stays in the hexatic phase past the solid melt-
ing point.
At the hexatic melting point Λ = 15, the
hexatic order variance ⟨(∆ψ6)2⟩peaks sharply (inset of
Fig. 3(c) ).
The local amplitudes |ψk
6|2 and arguments arg(ψk
6) of
hexatic order for typical configurations across the tran-
sition are shown in Fig. 6 as the active solid softens and
melts with increasing Λ. The drops in local hexatic am-
plitude, linked to hexatic orientation shifts, signal topo-
logical defect formation, as detailed in the following sec-
tion.
D.
Topological defects
We use Voronoi tessellations to identify each particle’s
topological neighbors [81]. In a perfect lattice, each par-
ticle has 6 neighbors, with 5- or 7-fold deviations indi-
cating topological defects. Minimal fluctuations in solid
accommodate bound 5757 dislocation pairs. The quilib-
rium BKTHNY theory links solid-hexatic melting to the
unbinding of these pairs, creating dislocations, with hex-
atic melting driven by dislocation-unbinding to free 5- or
7-fold disclinations.
In Fig. 7(a),(b) we identify such defects in typical con-
figurations across activated solid melting.
We identify
clusters of such defects, including five, seven, and eight
fold defects. We use fraction of particles with ν neigh-
bors, nν = ⟨Nν⟩/N to analyze the defect formation.
Here Nν indicates the number of particle with ν = 5, 6, 7
neighbors and ⟨. . .⟩denotes the steady state average. Al-
though larger departures from ν = 6 are present, their
fraction is significantly low.
As activity Λ exceeds Λ = 10.0, the solid melting point,
⟨n6⟩decreases, while the defect fraction, ⟨n5,7⟩, increases
(see Fig. 7(c),(d)). The mean of total fraction of parti-
cles with non-six neighbors, δd =
1
N
P
ν̸=6 Nν, becomes
non-zero at the solid melting point and increases with
higher activity (Fig. 3(d)). The fluctuation in δd peaks
twice: first at Λ = 10.2, near the solid melting point,
Figure 7. (a) Voronoi tessellations for selected regions (see
Fig. 6) at Λ = 4.0, 10.5, and 15.0.
Particles are colored
by their coordination number: green for five-fold, blue for
seven-fold, and red for eight-fold, while sixfold-coordinated
particles remain uncolored for clarity. (b) Regions containing
defects are highlighted: (i) an isolated 5–7 defect; (ii) a pair
of adjacent 5–7 defects; (iii) a cluster of three 5–7 defects
surrounding a void; and (iv) a more complex defect cluster.
(c) The fraction of sixfold-coordinated particles is plotted as
a function of Λ. (d) The fractions of particles with five- and
seven-fold coordination are shown as functions of Λ.
and again at Λ = 15.0, at the hexatic melting point, re-
flecting enhanced defect fluctuations during both melting
transitions (see inset of Fig. 3(d)).
V.
LOCAL CONTROL OF NON-AFFINITY AND
DEFECT
Controlling local mechanical properties in solids has
long been a challenge in physics and material science [82].
This can be achieved by manipulating non-affinity and
defects, especially in colloidal crystals [83].
Previous
studies in equilibrium solids used complex local laser
fields [84] to drive non-affine parameters [39, 85]. Build-
ing on our study of non-affinity in activated melting, we
propose a simpler method for local mechanical control:
applying laser power to self-thermophoretic Janus col-
loids [64], inducing non-affinity and/or defects in an oth-
erwise equilibrium solid. Localized activity control can
also be achieved in other active colloidal or robotic sys-
