18
FIG. 10. (a) Thermal magnon spectrum probed by microfocused BLS. Adapted from Ref. [24]. (b) Representative wavevector-resolved BLS
spectra measured at an external field of 3 kOe. Adapted from Ref. [194] (c) Demonstration of microstate-specific thermal magnon spectral
fingerprinting in square ASI by BLS. Adapted from Ref. [23] (d) Spatially resolved BLS intensity maps at 25 mT for fixed frequencies in
different configurations (see top panel). In the color-coded images, red (blue) indicates the maximum (minimum) BLS intensity. Corresponding
X-ray photoemission electron microscopy images taken at remanence, both before and after applying a microwave signal at 9.3 GHz, along
with their difference, are shown on the right side of panel (d). Adapted from Ref. [74] (e) Driving microwave frequency-dependent magnon
spectra in the nonlinear regime reveal nonlinear multi-magnon scattering. Adapted from Ref. [24].
crowave spectroscopy where a microwave antenna must be
used to interrogate the dynamic response; hence, the exci-
tation/detection of specific modes is affected by the excita-
tion efficiency and subsequently the microwave magnetic field
torque on the magnetic moments in the magnetic material (see
also Sec. VI B 2). Lendinez et al. demonstrated that the ther-
mal magnon spectrum of a square ASI measured by micro-
focused BLS is much richer than the corresponding spectrum
obtained by microwave spectroscopy199. Even more impor-
tantly, they showed that the BLS spectrum closely resembles
the eigenmode spectrum obtained by micromagnetics. A typ-
ical thermal magnon spectrum for a permalloy square ice lat-
tice, where the biasing field is applied along one of the prin-
cipal axes, is shown in Fig. 10(a). The intense red lines in
the color-coded image show maximum BLS intensity, which
is directly proportional to magnon population and, hence, rep-
resent the eigenmodes of the square ASI lattice system24.
Furthermore, thermal spectra are typically acquired in
wavevector-resolved BLS measurements200,201. Figure 10(b)
shows the typical intensity curve displaying both the Stokes
and anti-Stokes peaks of the BLS spectrum when the exter-
nal field is applied along the direction of the horizontal ele-
ments of the Ni81Fe19 square ASI islands. Four nearly flat
spin-wave modes for different incident angles appear corre-
sponding to the horizontal and vertical islands of the ASI194.
Due to the change of the incident angle of the laser beam
and conservation of momentum, the inelastically scattered
light carries information about the wavevector of the probed
magnons195. Moreover, recent experiments by Mondal et al.
using thermal BLS on ASI have demonstrated the potential for
spectral fingerprinting specific microstates in the spin-wave
spectrum, as illustrated in Fig. 10(c)23.
Most importantly,
this study demonstrates precise control over mode frequency
shifts, microstate-specific crossings, and the number of domi-
nant spin-wave modes. It presents a method for characterizing
specific magnetic microstates in ASI by detecting BLS spin-
wave peaks, similar to approaches used in X-ray diffraction.
As previously mentioned, BLS is highly versatile as it can
be combined with other measurement modalities, including
microwave excitation (see also next section). For example,
using spatially-resolved BLS, Bhat et al. showed 2D magnon
mode profiles and microwave-induced avalanches in disor-
dered Kagome artificial spin ice [Fig. 10(d)]74, while Kaffash
et al. demonstrated angular-dependent spin dynamics in ar-
rays of ferromagnetic nanodisks arranged on a honeycomb lat-
tice using microfocused BLS and found that different subsec-
tions of the lattice contribute differently to the high-frequency
response of the array203. Furthermore, BLS offers the possi-
bility to detect a wide range of frequencies independent of the
applied driving microwave frequency, unlike most microwave
