by a Si (111) double-crystal monochromator. The beam was focused using compound refractive
lenses (CRLs), achieving a beam size of h × v = 0.9 µm × 0.4 µm. The sample was mounted on
a six-axis goniometer, which allowed precise alignment and positioning during measurements (see
Fig. 2(b)).
The XRD signal was recorded using a detector with a 55 µm pixel size, positioned
approximately 1.0 m downstream of the sample and horizontally inclined at 25◦relative to the
incident beam.
Simultaneously, XRF data was collected using a silicon drift detector (Hitachi
High-Tech), positioned slightly offset from 90◦relative to the incident beam for effective fluorescence
detection. Two scans were performed for each sample: one overview scan, covering the entire crack
with a step size of 10 µm and an exposure time of 0.2 s per point, and another focused on the crack
tip with a step size of 1 µm and the same exposure time of 0.2 s.
Figure 2: (a) Schematic of the experimental setup. (b) Goniometer configuration used for sample
positioning.
3
Data Analysis
In this section, we focus on processing XRD and XRF data through key steps: collecting diffraction
patterns, fitting peaks, locating cracks, analyzing effects of crystal recovery, quantifying strain, and
mapping the strain field at the crack-tip in martensitic steel samples.
The experimental geometry was calibrated using the pyFAI calibration routine (Ashiotis et al.,
2015) with Lanthanum hexaboride (LaB6) as a diffraction standard. For automatic peak detection
diffraction patterns from all scan points (see Fig. 3(a)) were summed (see Fig. 3(b)). Individual
diffraction patterns were transformed from cartesian coordinates (u, v) to polar coordinates (2θ, χ)
via a caking process (Kieffer & Karkoulis, 2013), with an example shown in Fig. 3(c). Subsequent
azimuthal integration yielded the diffraction signal as a function of 2θ. As shown in Fig. 3(d), the
first 10 martensitic diffraction peaks, ranging from 200 to 332 were identified.
For the determination of the peak height H, the angular peak position µ, the angular peak width σ,
and the background C of all occurring diffraction peaks, the azimuthal integrated intensities were
4
