critical exponent ω defined by the slope of the beta function:
ω (ϵ) ≡∂∆(α, ϵ)
∂α

α∗= −ϵ + β′(α∗) .
(2)
Combining Eq.(1) and Eq.(2) we arrive at1:
ω

β(α)
α

= −β(α)
α
+ β′(α)
so that applying the chain rule leads to a first-order nonlinear differential equation, which
we refer to as the Self-Consistency Relation (SCR):
dY (α)
dα
= ω

Y (α)

α
(3)
where we defined Y (α) ≡β(α)/α.
2.1
General Features
We point out that SCR is non-perturbative, as no assumptions on the specific form of β(α)
have been made beyond the single-coupling renormalizability, and scheme-independent
since critical exponents are universal physically measurable quantities.
In order to capture the overall behavior of its solutions we first recall two important
points about the class of differential equations to which SCR belongs:
• Any solution is characterized by an initial condition.
• All the solutions Y are monotonic; moreover, depending on the sign of ω, they are
either attracted or repelled by the closest zero of ω.
We display these features in Fig. 1 demonstrating that one can sketch the asymptotics
of the solutions just by listing the zeros zi of ω and specifying an initial condition. We are
assuming ω is Lipschitz continuous to make sure that at α = 0 and α = ∞the solutions
Y flow asymptotically to zi. Thus the resulting β-function behave asymptotically as a
straight line : lim
α→0 β(α) = zi α and lim
α→∞β(α) = zj α with the only exceptions for the
solutions in regions II and III which behave quadratically β(α) ∼β0 α2 close to α = 0
since the linear term vanishes (z2 = 0).
This quadratic behavior is familiar from the perturbative expansion in QFT around
α = 0 with β(α) ∼β0 α2 which implies Y (0) = 0. Combined with the monotonicity of
Y it means that Y (α) cannot vanish at nonzero α and thus additional interacting fixed
point(s) in d-dimensions cannot exist which is manifest in Fig.1.
Demanding such an interacting FP(s) to exist requires to relax the implicit assumption
that ω(0) is a single-valued function. In fact, if equation β(αi) = 0 has i non-trivial solu-
tion(s) means that the criticality condition ϵ =
β(αi)
αi , in addition to the trivial Gaussian
FP solution (ϵ, α) = (0, 0), has another solution(s) (0, αi) and since ω for these solutions
is, in general, different means that ω(0) is multi-valued. To illustrate the multi-valuedness
of ω(ϵ) in d −ϵ dimensions, in the next subsection, we exploit the graphical approach
where we study the branch of the beta function connected to the Gaussian FP.
2.2
Non-Lipschitz Behavior and Interactive Fixed Point
We focus on a β-function featuring an interacting FP schematically shown in Fig.2a.
