Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Misner-Sharp equations and approach for type-II fluctuations
3
3
Initial conditions, compaction function and trapping horizons
6
4
Numerical methodology
10
5
Numerical results
12
5.1
Time-evolution of the gravitational collapse
12
5.2
Thresholds for type A/B PBH
15
5.3
PBH mass
18
6
Conclusions
19
A Sketch of the derivation of Eq.(2.23)
21
B Sketch of the derivation of Eq.(3.18)
22
1
Introduction
Primordial Black Holes (PBHs) are black holes that could have formed in the early Uni-
verse through various mechanisms [1–4] (see [5] for a comprehensive review covering vari-
ous perspectives and a detailed list of different PBH formation mechanisms). These PBHs
could constitute a significant fraction of dark matter, particularly in the so-called asteroid
mass range [6]. Additionally, they may help resolve certain cosmic mysteries [7, 8]. Recent
advancements and future prospects in gravitational wave studies, along with observational
efforts [9, 10], are crucial in this context, as they provide opportunities to test both the direct
and indirect detection of PBHs and a quantification of their role in the dark matter.
One of the standard mechanisms for PBH production is the collapse of super-horizon
curvature fluctuations generated during inflation. These fluctuations may collapse, forming
black holes during the radiation epoch after re-entering the cosmological horizon. From now
on, we will restrict ourselves to this scenario for PBH production. For this scenario, signif-
icant efforts have been made to explore it using numerical relativity [11–22]. The reason is
straightforward: the statistical estimation of PBH production is highly sensitive (in partic-
ular, exponentially sensitive [4]) to the initial conditions. Therefore, accurately determining
the initial conditions that lead to black hole formation is essential for precisely predicting
the abundance of PBHs and their implications in our Universe. In general, only numerical
relativity studies can provide an answer to this (see [23] for a review of numerical relativity in
the broader context of cosmology). Typically, the assumption of spherical symmetry has been
employed in numerical simulations (see [24] for a review), based on the consideration that
large peaks (which are necessary for PBHs to constitute a significant fraction of dark matter)
are roughly spherical [25]. Therefore, the gravitational collapse can be considered spherical
(see [26] for a recent study that tests this assumption using non-spherical simulations, specif-
ically in the case of a monochromatic power spectrum with Gaussian statistics). However,
– 1 –
