6
B3
B2
B1
B4
Figure 4. (a) DART 447 MHz images at 02:57 UT. The cyan contour outlines the radio depression. B1 and B2 are two boxes
at the radio depression. B3 and B4 are boxes in the coronal hole (CH) and quiescent region (QR), respectively. (b) Normalized
brightness temperature (Tb) as a function of frequency for B1-B4. (c) Variation of the normalized brightness temperature over
time at different frequencies.
3.2. Modeling the Radio Depression
To determine the nature of the radio depression, we synthesize the radio images, taking advantage of MHD simulation
data of an MFR eruption involving a filament (Xing et al. 2025). The simulation, an updated version of Xing et al.
(2024), is performed by the code MPI-AMRVAC (Xia et al. 2018). It solves the full-MHD equations and takes the
resistivity, viscosity, gravity, thermal conduction, radiative cooling, and background heating into account. The highest
spatial resolution is about 300 km in the horizontal direction and 150 km in the vertical direction, being comparable
to that of the AIA images. The simulation starts with a potential bipolar field and a hydrostatic atmosphere ranging
from the chromosphere to the corona. After a thermal relaxation process, the initial field is firstly driven to a highly
sheared state with imposed line-tied bidirectional shearing flows at the two sides of the polarity inversion line (PIL).
Later, driven by the converging flows towards the PIL, a pre-eruptive MFR is formed by magnetic reconnection. A
filament is also naturally formed during the MFR build-up phase. Please refer to Xing et al. (2025) for more details
on the formation of the MFR and associated filament.
Figure 5 (a)-(f) show synthetic images of the modeled flux-rope-filament system at the frequency of 300 MHz and at
the AIA 171 ˚A passband, which are calculated by the Radiation Synthesis Tools. The EUV filament was comparable to
the radio depression at the beginning of the eruption (t = 96) but became fragmented and much smaller than the radio
depression during the eruption (e.g., t = 100). Furthermore, the radio depression became darker and longer at 300 MHz
during the eruption, which are attributed to the foreground reduction and expansion, respectively. Such characteristics
in the visibility of the erupting filament between the EUV and metric-decimetric bands somehow resemble what are
disclosed in observations.
Note that the modeled radio depression also shows some different characteristics from
observations. The modeled one is relatively slender and does not display a remarkable expansion in width. This could
be attributed to two factors. On the one hand, part of the modeled filament is heated by magnetic reconnection, which
is much stronger than that for the case we observed, and thus does not appear as dark structures at the radio band.
On the other hand, due to the limitation of the simulation in box size, only the early stage of the filament eruption
is derived (t = 100 corresponds to approximately 10 mins after the onset of the eruption), the following expansion
hence could be missed. We further compare the spatial relationship between the MFR and radio depression as shown
in Figure 5 (h). It is found that the radio depression is roughly co-spatial with the lower part of the MFR below the
main axis, not occupying the entire MFR structure.
4. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION
In this paper, we present a detailed study on the metric-decimetric imaging observations of a quiescent filament
eruption. The radio depression was extremely faint during the initiation phase of the eruption but rapidly became
darker and more distinct after the eruption of the Hα filament, manifesting as a continuous loop-like structure. A
comparison of multi-passband images shows that the radio depression seems to be larger than the EUV and Hα
filament in space. In particular, the former always kept a coherence while the latter presented a fragmentation during
the eruption. Moreover, the radio depression also exhibited stronger darkening at higher frequencies, with normalized
