5
than the latter. Meanwhile, the EUV filament also experienced a similar expansion. After 03:30 UT, the middle part
of the radio depression gradually became invisible, while the remaining portion was approximately co-spatial with the
EUV filament (indicated by the white boxes in Figure 1 (c) and (f)). Moreover, the front of the EUV filament is found
to be aligned with that of the radio depression along Slit 1 but slightly lagged behind that along Slit 2. To further
address the relevance between the radio depression and the EUV filament, we calculate the normalized intensity with
DART and AIA 304 ˚A data for four boxes along the radio depression (Figure 3 (c)). A consistent variation tendency
can be clearly observed, the normalized DART intensity is smaller for the boxes that include obviously visible EUV
filament materials (B1 and B4). It indicates that they are closely related to each other but may be distinct in formation.
Figure 3. (a)-(b) DART 447 MHz and AIA 304 ˚A images at 02:57 UT, respectively. (c) Normalized intensity in Box 1-4 (white
boxes in panel (a) and (b)) at 02:57 UT. (d) and (e) Distance-time plots along Slit 1 and Slit 2 (white dotted-dashed line in
panel (a) and (b)) representing the evolution of the radio depression during the eruption. (f)-(g) same as panels (d)-(e) but for
the AIA 304 ˚A passband. The white dashed line shows the EUV filament front.
A comparison of normalized brightness temperature for the radio depression and nearby undepressed regions is
shown in Figure 4 (b). It is noted that the normalized brightness temperature slightly decreases with frequency for
both the depressions (B1 and B2) and the coronal hole (B3), while it almost keeps a constant around one for the
quiescent region (B4). This is consistent with the results from the NRH and MWA, where coronal holes appear as
darker structures at higher frequencies (Mercier & Chambe 2012; Rahman et al. 2019). As the filament erupted, the
normalized brightness temperature further decreased at all frequencies between 02:30 UT and 03:00 UT (Figure 3 (d)
and (e)). It could be a consequence of the decrease of the foreground radiation as the filament rose (see Appendix A
for more details).
