18
spheres in Section V A, which was also implicitly used in Section V B by using only 10 spinors (60). (It eliminates
{ξba}a<b using (22).)
For a general 4-complex dual to a colorable spinfoam graph, the above geometry reconstruction can be directly ap-
plied as the phase space coordinates describing the critical points are simply the linear combinations of the coordinates
for one single 4-simplex as described above. We refer to [1] for more details on this point.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
In this paper, we have demonstrated how to use geometrical data to reconstruct the critical points of the 4D
Lorentzian spinfoam model with a nonzero Λ constructed in [1]. The spinfoam model is built from the SL(2, C)
Chern-Simons theory with a complex coupling constant on the graph-complement S3\Γ5, which is closely related to a
4-simplex. The real part of the coupling constant k is taken to be 8 times a positive integer. By mapping the geometry
of a constantly curved 4-simplex to moduli space of SL(2, C) flat connection on S3\Γ5, which is the solution space to
the Chern-Simons theory, we rebuild the Chern-Simons phase space coordinates using the geometry information of the
4-simplex. These coordinates contribute to the critical points of the vertex amplitude. The geometrical reconstruction
is performed on 4-complices whose spinfoam graphs are colorable that are used in the colored tensor models, as defined
in [1].
It gives an algorithm to calculate the critical points of the spinfoam amplitude with Λ ̸= 0. As minimum input,
consider 5 distinct and independent points v1, · · · , v5 on a S3 (when Λ > 0) or on a H3 (when Λ < 0), which identically
define a non-degenerate constantly curved 4-simplex. Given the coordinates of all these points, one can calculate the
areas and normals of all the triangles of the 4-simplex, yeilding an over-complete set of geometrical data. These data
allow us to construct the FG and FN coordinates using the geometrical reconstruction as described in Section V,
which form the critical points of the spinfoam amplitude, leading to the zeroth-order spinfoam amplitude.
Starting from the zeroth-order amplitude, one can perform perturbations on the critical points, systematically
generating next-to-leading order and higher-order quantum gravity corrections in the spinfoam framework.
This
algorithm is applicable to any 4-complex covered by the study of colored tensor model, and can be implemented
numerically, as has been done in EPRL model [12]. A key advantage of the spinfoam model with Λ ̸= 0 over the
case with Λ = 0 is its finiteness property. Since the model remains finite for any 4-complex, numerical computations
can be performed with higher accuracy and efficiency, without requiring artificial truncations. This feature makes
it particularly promising for obtaining reliable quantum corrections in spinfoam models. We leave the numerical
realization of this program for future investigation.
It is interesting to investigate how this algorithm applies to physical systems such as cosmology and black holes.
Attempts have been made using the EPRL model [27, 28]. In particular, the spinfoam model with a nonzero Λ is
naturally suited for studying quantum corrections to classical cosmology, which aligns with observational data from
the current universe. To apply our approach in a cosmological setting, the spinfoam model should be coupled to
a scalar field and adapted to a triangulation that respects the homogeneity and isotropy of spacetime. Using the
geometrical construction of critical points and perturbative expansion, we expect to derive an effective Friedmann
equation with a bare Λ in the semiclassical regime. This would provide a consistency check for the covariant approach
to loop quantum gravity by comparing the result with predictions from loop quantum cosmology with a nonzero Λ
[29].
Acknowledgments
The author thanks Muxin Han for insightful discussions. This work receives support from the Blaumann Foundation
and the Jumpstart Postdoctoral Program at Florida Atlantic University.
Appendix A: Symplectic coordinates on ∂(S3\Γ5)
In this appendix, we give detailed expressions on the FN coordinates in terms of the coordinates ( ⃗Q, ⃗P) on the ideal
octahedra before the symplectic transformations.
The FG coordinates {χ(a)
bc }b,c and coordinates {{Lab}b, Ma, Pa} are related by linear combination with integer
