NNLO polarized PDFs with MHOU
153
the desired accuracy, including in the case in which unpolarized and polarized PDFs ought
to be used simultaneously. This amounted to the following. We implemented in Yadism the
FONLL general-mass variable-flavor-number scheme up to NNLO [12, 5], which combines the
massless computation [89] with the recent massive one [73] and its asymptotic limit [105].
We implemented in EKO the polarized splitting functions, including the known corrections up
to NNLO [57, 58, 56, 59] and their matching conditions [105]. We have extended PINEAPPL
and PINEKO to deal with polarized observables, including in the case in which unpolarized and
polarized PDFs ought to be used simultaneously, such as in the computation of spin asymmetries.
The second goal is achieved following the methodology developed by the NNPDF collaboration
in [152, 151, 6]. Specifically, we supplement the experimental covariance matrix, reconstructed
from knowledge of experimental uncertainties, with a MHOU covariance matrix, constructed
from renormalization and factorization scale variations
cov(tot)
ij
= cov(exp)
ij
+ cov(MHOU)
ij
i, j = 1 . . . Ndat.
(5.1)
To properly correlate renormalization scale variations, we therefore define four process cate-
gories: neutral current DIS (NC DIS), corresponding to measurements of g1; charged current
Drell-Yan (CC DY), corresponding to measurements of AW ±
L
; single-inclusive jet production
(JETS), corresponding to measurements of A1-jet
LL ; and dijet production (DIJET), corresponding
to measurements of A2-jet
LL . We thus assume four independent renormalization scales µr,i and one
common factorization scale µf. For each scale we define the ratio ρk = µk/Q, where Q denotes
the typical scale of the process. The computation of cov(MHOU)
ij
then follows the scheme B
prescription detailed in [151]. Using an approach similar to that developed in Section 4.2.3, we
can distinguish two different scale variation procedures, depending on which MHOU component
we want to estimate.
(a) We adopt a 3-point renormalization scale variation prescription to estimate missing NNLO
corrections in the matrix elements of those processes for which they are unknown, that is,
single-inclusive jet and dijet production in polarized proton-proton collisions. We therefore
vary the ratios ρr,i of the JETS and DIJET processes in the range ρr,i ∈{0.5, 1.0, 2.0}.
(b) We adopt a 7-point renormalization and factorization scale variation prescription to
estimate the MHOU for the complete dataset. This prescription can be applied both at
NLO and at NNLO. We therefore consider simultaneous variations of the factorization and
renormalization scales in the range ρk = {0.5, 1.0, 2.0}, and discard the two outermost
combinations (ρr,i = 0.5, ρf = 2.0), (ρr,i = 2.0, ρf = 0.5). The associated correlation
matrix is displayed in Fig. 5.2, both at NLO (left) and at NNLO (right).
The two prescriptions are exclusive. Prescription (a) will be adopted only in the NNLO fits that
we will call without MHOUs in Section 5.3. This nomenclature puts the emphasis on the fact
that MHOUs are included only partially, and specifically only to account for unknown NNLO
corrections. All the other fits called without MHOUs, either LO or NLO, will not use either
