We can obtain α by a linear ﬁt to S(t) on a log-log scale. Practically, we take t′ and the
ﬁtting parameters that ﬁt the data best, and obtain the unbiased MFPT by substituting
⟨τ|τ > T ∗⟩in Equation 12.
5.2
Short-time infrequent MetaD
Sharp resetting is more suitable for kinetics inference from MetaD simulations with resetting.
As in the case of sharp resetting of standard MD trajectories, we treat each segment between
restarts as an independent simulation. We then analyze them using short-time infrequent
MetaD42 (ST-iMetaD), as we next explain. For clarity, we ﬁrst discuss how ST-iMetaD is
applied to MetaD simulations without resetting.
When inferring kinetics from MetaD simulations, several assumptions are usually made.
Mainly, we assume that the underlying FPT distribution is exponential and that the external
bias does not aﬀect the transition state.4,42,86–88 When the assumptions are valid, the ratio
of the unbiased MFPT to the eﬀective MFPT with MetaD, ⟨τ⟩M, is4,23,86
⟨τ⟩
⟨τ⟩M
≈Z
ZM
= ⟨eβV ⟩,
(15)
where Z and ZM are the partition functions conﬁned to the initial state, with and without
the external bias V , respectively, and β is the inverse temperature. Practically, the FPT τi
of each MetaD trajectory is rescaled to give ˜τi = αiτi, with4,23
αi = 1
ni
ni
X
j=1
eβVi(j).
(16)
Here, Vi(j) is the bias experienced in trajectory i at timestep j. The total nuber of steps
in trajectory i is ni. If the assumptions hold, the rescaled FPT distribution f (˜τ) should
be exponential. As a result, in standard infrequent MetaD (iMetaD), an exponential ﬁt is
performed, and its mean is taken as the estimation for the unbiased MFPT.4,89
However, in many cases, the assumptions break and f (˜τ) is far from exponential. The
main causes for error are bias over-deposition and hysteresis, which may arise due to subop-
timal choice of CV and too frequent bias deposition.4,42,87–89 Interestingly, we obsreved that
f (˜τ) often follows the true f (τ) at short times, even when it dramatically deviates from it at
long times.39,42 The reason is that trajectories with short ˜τ experience relatively little bias,
and are less vulnerable to the errors of bias over-deposition. Figure 3(c) illustrates it through
the logarithm of the survival function, which is linear for the exponential distribution (gray
line). The rescaled survival function (orange dashed line) shows the correct linear decay at
rate k up to some time t′, where it deviates.
In ST-iMetaD,42 we limit the analysis to short timescales.
We ﬁnd a linear ﬁt to
log (S (˜τ)) only at times < t′ to obtain k, and estimate the unbiased MFPT as −k−1. This
ﬁt is illustrated with a blue dash-dotted line in Figure 5(c), showing good agreement with
the unbiased survival. Practically, we take t′ and k best matching the data. ST-iMetaD
showed improved accuracy in comparison to standard iMetaD for predicting the unfolding
rate of chignolin42 and several protein-ligand residence times90 with enough samples. Be-
16
