(a)
(b)
Figure 4: Total energy density of SIGWs (IGW ) for (a) kpeak = 10−2kend and (b) kpeak = 10−1kend as a
function of the fractional energy density of PBH (ΩPBH) at formation and the decay rate of the field (Γϕ).
The dashed blue line corresponds to the bound from [62], given in eqn. (4.9), which does not consider the
effects of the decay rate. It corresponds to the maximum initial fractional energy density of PBHs that
does not overproduce GWs and reaches the BBN bound. By considering the effect of the decay rate, we
extend this bound to higher values of ΩPBH.
As it can be seen, by considering an initial matter-dominated universe together with a
decay rate of the scalar field into radiation, one can relax the constraints on the initial
abundance of PBH at production time. This means that high initial values of ΩPBH are
allowed if the PBH dominate for a short period, which is possible if Γϕ is small. On the
contrary, a small initial abundance of PBH needs more time to reach the BBN bound and
overproduce GWs, that is, small ΩPBH and high Γϕ.
Finally, in Fig. 5, we show the mean mass of the PBH distribution as a function of the
fractional density of PBH and the frequency of the peak of the SIGWs produced in each
case. To compare, we also show the frequency ranges of some planned GW detectors, such
as the Levitated Sensor Detector (LSD) [91], the Einstein Telescope (ET) [92], and the
Large Interferometer Space Antena (LISA) [93]. This reveals that, for some regions of the
parameter space, the frequency of the GWs falls into the detectable range of the LSD and
ET detectors. However, their sensitivity is insufficient to detect these GWs, which further
motivates their refinement. In addition, we show also the effect of changing the decay
rate. A larger decay rate (left plot) implies that PBH have more time to dominate, as
the scalar field decays sooner. As a consequence, GWs are produced more abundantly and
on a wider span of frequencies. On the contrary, a smaller decay rate (right plot) implies
a reduced production of GWs. To produce this plot, we have considered the PBH that
have enough time to dominate (tPBH < teva), and excluded the scenarios where GWs are
overproduced (IPBH
Ω
< IBBN). This plot is aimed to be compared with Plot. 3 of [62], where
the authors study the production of GWs from a PBH-dominated phase without focusing
on the production mechanism or the inflationary details. In this work, in addition, we
– 16 –
