expected to dominate in some high-energy regime [151–153]. Classical black-hole solutions
can be found in quadratic gravity [154–156] and so they could form via a scattering process
(see [157, 54] for a different point of view). Indeed, the growth of the tree-level graviton-
graviton amplitude might simply suggest that at high energies the non-perturbative phe-
nomenon of black-hole formation occurs and we must somehow take this into account to get
suppressed amplitudes. This would mean that renormalizability has to be supplemented by
a built-in classicalization mechanism [152], according to which the amplitude gets entropi-
cally suppressed as e−E2
cm/M2
p for energies above the threshold for black-hole formation.
These three options may not be mutually exclusive.
Indeed, we may have a high-energy
regime where the impact parameter is still large enough not to trigger black-hole formation, so
that the role played by totally inclusive cross sections may be important. On the other hand,
if we are in a high-energy regime where the impact parameter is small enough, then black-hole
formation is triggered and prevails over all other possible processes.
Furthermore, the non-
perturbative resummation discussed in the first item may also share common features with the
non-perturbative phenomenon of black-hole dominance.
If black-hole states are part of the high-energy spectrum in quadratic gravity, then we might
expect some “non-localizable” effects to play a key role in the deep UV. Indeed, exponentially
suppressed amplitudes cannot be described in a fully local QFT, but tools of non-localizable
QFT (in Jaffe’s language [158, 159]) might be needed [160–162].
This idea is also supported
by the fact that spectral densities in local QFT are polynomially bounded, while for black-hole
states we would expect an exponentially growing behavior [160]. As a future goal, it would be
interesting to rigorously analyse black-hole formation via high-energy scattering and gain a deeper
understanding of the bridge between perturbative and non-perturbative sectors and, at the same
time, between local and non-localizable dynamics in quantum gravity.
Our discussion of the (super-)Planckian regime of quadratic gravity is still speculative and
certainly requires future investigation. However, the main point we wish to emphasize again is
that, regardless of what happens at the Planck scale, quadratic gravity describes and predicts
new physics beyond GR in the sub-Planckian regime. The question of determining the class of
consistent EFTs, which is typically posed in other quantum gravity approaches [163–165,111],8
does not arise at all if we work in the QFT framework and adopt the strict renormalizability
paradigm. As explained in the previous sections, if we remain as conservative as possible we have
a unique strictly renormalizable and falsifiable gravitational QFT: quadratic gravity!
8It is worth pointing out that quadratic gravity falls into the so-called swampland [163, 166], due to the large
values of the quadratic curvature coefficients and the presence of the spin-two ghost. This is good news because
we can discriminate between quadratic gravity and other quantum gravity approaches such as string theory. In
particular, Starobinsky inflation (driven by R2) cannot be consistently realized in string theory [166,167]. Even if
the QFT framework and the strict renormalizability paradigm become inadequate at some high-energy scale, we
would certainly be able to claim that string theory cannot be a UV completion of quadratic gravity. In such a case,
the UVland of quadratic gravity could contain theories and even frameworks yet unknown to us.
18
