blueshift of the optical bandgap caused by contributions from both OS and BS shifts (Fig. 1).
To achieve this, we conducted wavelength- and polarization-dependent NLO experiments
(Fig. 2a; see Methods for details on the experimental setup) across the A:1s exciton resonance
of the WSe2 monolayer sample, focusing in particular on SHG, third harmonic generation
(THG) and TP-PL.
First, we characterized the sample by photoluminescence (PL) (Fig. 2b) and Raman
spectroscopy (Fig. 2c) to confirm the monolayer nature of the exfoliated flake (see Methods
for details).
Polarization optics were then calibrated to enable selective excitation and
detection along either the armchair (AC) or zig-zag (ZZ) directions of the monolayer crystal.
Furthermore, we characterized the sample with polarization-resolved SHG measurements
[37] at a FB wavelength of 1500 nm (Fig. 2d). The observed symmetric pattern indicates
that the sample is not affected by strain, which could otherwise influence the efficiency of
nonlinear processes along different crystal directions [18].
B.
Exploiting crystal symmetry for signal filtering
The aforementioned relaxed phase-matching conditions, resulting from the deep sub-
wavelength thickness, are a blessing and a curse at the same time. Whereas TMDs and
related heterostructures allow for several NLO process to occur simultaneously [38, 39], the
detailed study of a single process becomes tedious once emission spectra are overlapping.
A prominent example for this case is two-photon resonant SHG and TP-PL, which overlap
spectrally and thus make any detailed analysis of the SH signal impossible. Since power-
dependent SHG at the exciton resonance is the key ingredient for the findings of this work,
we isolate the SH signal from the TP-PL using the crystal symmetry of TMD monolayers.
When time-reversal symmetry is preserved [9], the NLO response of TMD monolayers is
defined by the D3h point group, where the second-order susceptibility tensor has only one
independent non-vanishing element [12]:
χ(2)
yyy = −χ(2)
yxx = −χ(2)
xxy = −χ(2)
xyx,
(2)
where x(y) refers to the zig-zag(armchair) axis of the crystal, respectively. This produces
a well-defined polarization dependence of the SH intensity, which in turn can be used for
efficient filtering of the TP-PL. In particular, the excitation of a TMD with a pulse polarized
5
