Figure 3: Left: Layout of the PIONEER rare pion decay experiment. The intense positive pion
beam enters from the left and is brought to rest in a highly segmented active target (ATAR). Decay
positron trajectories are measured from the ATAR to an outer electromagnetic calorimeter (CALO)
through a tracker. The CALO records the positron energy, time and location. Right: The positron
energy spectra from muon decays (blue) and from π →eν decays (dark red). The (shaded) low-
energy tail of the π →eνshower lies below the Michel events in the Low-Energy Event bin, and also
below decay-in-flight processes.
high resolution, 19 X0 calorimeter with 1.7% resolution at 70 MeV. The unavoidable tail fraction
below 53 MeV must be determined accurately in order to obtain the branching ratio. That challenge
was critical to previous generations of experiments and was responsible for the leading systematic
uncertainty in the PIENU experiment at TRIUMF. PIONEER will minimize the intrinsic tail frac-
tion through the use of a high-resolution calorimeter having a uniform and large absorption fraction
vs. polar angle, as illustrated in Fig. 3. Two technologies are presently being investigated. One
involves a continuous volume of Liquid Xenon, viewed by VUV photomultiplier and SiPM sensors
on both the inside and outside surfaces. This concept is based on the considerable experience of the
MEG II calorimeter, as documented in Ref.[21]. A second technology would employ 311 tapered
LYSO crystals that form a closed array. Each crystal will be read out by an individual PMT. A
test with full-scale, tapered crystals is in progress.
The branching ratio Re/µ will be obtained by first separating the events into high- and low-
energy regions using an energy cut value (Ecut) as was done by the PIENU experiment. The time
spectra will be fit in each region with the π+ →e+ν and π+ →µ+ →e+ timing distribution
shapes, along with backgrounds originating from different sources including event pile-up effects,
pion decays in flight, and effects from old muon decays.
Beyond the use of a calorimeter that has better energy containment, the stopping target must
provide information to distinguish the event types shown in Figure 4. Tracking, energy, and timing
information will be used to distinguish π →e events from π →µ →e events, to identify pion and
muon decays in flight, and to aid in identify pileup from long-lived muons that remain in the target
from earlier pion stops. Triggers will be developed to enhance the collection of various event types.
To distinguish event types, we will use an active target that can provide 4D tracking (at the
level of 150 µm in space and <1 ns in time) and energy measurements from the O(30) keV signals
for positrons to the 4000 keV Bragg peaks of stopping pions and muons. As discussed in Sec. 3, our
collaboration is focusing on the new low gain avalanche diode (LGAD) sensors as a centerpiece of
the experiment. Simulations using optimized LGAD parameters provide confidence that triggers
4
