 
8 
detrimental for energy consumption and miniaturization considerations. Tremendous 
efforts have been devoted to eliminate the in-plane magnetic field by introducing mirror-
symmetry breaking via spin symmetry engineering35-38. Yet, the field-free 180° switching 
of the Néel vector in an antiferromagnet remains challenging in the experiment.  
To break the mirror symmetry, we construct a vdW stack with the noncollinear spin 
texture by transferring the FCGT flake on the CrSBr flake that is an A-type vdW 
antiferromagnetic semiconductor (Figs. 5a, 5b and S16)39. Particularly, the easy axis of 
CrSBr is along the b-axis, exhibiting a strong in-plane magnetic anisotropy (Fig. S14). The 
exchange coupling between out-of-plane FCGT and in-plane CrSBr produces an effective 
in-plane magnetic field on FCGT, causing the tilt of magnetic moments at the FCGT/CrSBr 
interface along the b-axis of CrSBr (Fig. S17). Consequently, we observe a deterministic 
switching of Hall resistance when the current is applied along the b-axis of CrSBr even in 
the absence of an in-plane magnetic field (Fig. 5c). We further confirm the field-free 
switching performance by measuring the half loop with current sweeping from zero (Fig. 
5d). The device is fully saturated under a preset magnetic field of ±10 kOe. The current-
induced Hall resistance switching is ~70%, which is agreed with the switching ratio of as-
grown devices shown in Fig. 5c. The partial magnetization switching can be ascribed to 
the formation of multidomain state in the CrSBr flake40, and can be improved by reducing 
the lateral size and thickness of CrSBr flake to facilitate the single-domain state. 
To verify the mechanism of field-free switching, we alter the current direction from 
the b-axis to a-axis, i.e. the hard axis of CrSBr. Then exchange coupling-induced effective 
in-plane magnetic field is perpendicular to the current, which dissatisfies the deterministic 
switching scheme. In this case, we do not observe the performance of current-induced Hall 
resistance switching (Fig. 5e). In addition, we elevate the device temperature to be between 
the Néel temperatures of CrSBr and FCGT. In this case, the exchange coupling from CrSBr 
vanishes and current-induced switching of Néel vector is prohibited even when the current 
is applied along the b-axis of CrSBr (Fig. 5f). Moreover, we apply an in-plane magnetic 
field along the direction of currents. As shown in Fig. 5g, the polarity of current-induced 
Hall resistance switching is preserved at small magnetic fields of ±100 Oe. Interestingly, 
with large magnetic fields, the performance of current-induced switching disappears for 
both positive and negative direction of magnetic fields, due to the occurrence of spin-flop 
