CAMulator
Figure 3: Time series of conservation diagnostics and budget residuals for CAMulator with and without physics
conservation blocks. (a) Total dry mass (kg) for CAMulator-phys (teal), CAMulator-nophys (black), with the initialized
mass shown as a reference (red dashed line). (b) Moisture budget residual (kg) comparing CAMulator-phys and
CAMulator-nophys. (c) Global energy budget residual (W) for CAMulator-phys and CAMulator-nophys. (d) Total
energy tendency (W), representing the time derivative of total atmospheric energy, comparing CAMulator-phys and
CAMulator-nophys.
Figure 3 shows the conservation properties for global mass, water, and energy of the CAMulator system with the
conservative layers activated (Figure 3; CAMulator-phys teal line) and inactive (Figure 3; CAMulator-nophys black
line). CAMulator-nophys immediately deviates from the desired conservation properties and quickly settles into it’s
own errant climatology halfway through the first month of the climate simulation. The residuals are calculated as the
previous time-step minus the current [t−1 −t0], meaning an observed positive residual indicates that CAMulator-nophys
sheds mass, water, and energy prior to settling into a steady state. We note that we can still achieve stable simulation
runs and indefinite roll-outs with CAMulator-nophys.
Interestingly, enforcing total energy tendency conservation balances the tendency such that it is centered around zero
and regularly oscillates with the diurnal cycle (Fig. 3e), whereas sporadic behavior is observed in CAMulator-nophys.
3.2
Annual Mean Biases
We next evaluate the time-averaged annual climatology of the CAMulator simulation over the period 1979–2014. Figure
4a–c shows the zonal mean precipitation, 2m temperature, and zonal wind at the lowest model level for CAM6 and
CAMulator, shown in purple and teal, respectively. The zonal mean for two reanalysis products is also shown in dashed
gray.
Overall, CAMulator simulates the annual mean state well. Figure 4d–f presents the difference between the annual
means (CAMulator - CAM). The largest precipitation errors occur in the tropics, with a wet bias over Central America
and a dry bias over the Maritime Continent (Fig. 4d). For 2m temperature, a persistent warm bias is evident over
Greenland, particularly in winter, likely due to the lack of ice representation in the CAMulator state (Fig. 4e). The
largest discrepancies in zonal winds appear in the storm track regions, where slight shifts in the locations of peak wind
magnitudes are observed (Fig. 4f). For every field, the spatial annual climatological RMSE is computed and displayed
in the supplemental material (Figs. 2S-16S), we additionally compute the annual RMSE values which are in appendix
table A.1.
3.3
Modes of Variability
Evaluating a climate model’s performance requires not only assessing its accuracy in representing climatological
averages but also its ability to capture lower-frequency climate modes [e.g., Phillips et al., 2014]. Given the vast number
of modes of variability identified in the literature, a comprehensive analysis is impractical. Instead, we focus on three
principal and well-documented modes used in major climate model evaluations: the Pacific North American Pattern
(PNA), the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO), and the El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO) precipitation response. As
these modes typically peak in boreal winter (defined here as December–February (DJF)), our analysis will center on
their wintertime behavior. This section focuses on the representation of the PNA and NAO, while the following section
will examine ENSO.
Figure 5 shows the regression of the 500 hPa geopotential height (Z500) anomaly onto the leading principal component
for the PNA and NAO regions in DJF, comparing CAMulator and CAM. Panels (a) and (b) illustrate the PNA-associated
Z500 anomalies for CAMulator and CAM, respectively, while panels (c) and (d) display the NAO-related anomalies.
Both patterns exhibit a close match to the CAM6 variability in terms of explained variance, indicating that these modes
are well represented. Although the CAMulator patterns appear slightly muted in amplitude, they qualitatively capture
8
