8
networks. It is sufficient to follow an attack on a single network, where Pm is the probability that the removal of a
single node detaches m other nodes from the giant connected component (GCC). Figure 5 shows the distribution of
the number of offspring, Pm vs. m, on a double logarithmic scale, for a few values of the mean number of offspring,
m. As expected, this pdf is a truncated power law whose exponent is close to 1.3, and different values of m differ only
by the truncation point.
Hence, in the simulations of the demographic process (e.g., those shown in Figure 2 of the main text), we picked
the number of offspring per individual from a truncated power law with a hard cutoff, i.e., Pm = Am−1.3 dor m < m∗
and Pm = 0 for m > m∗, where the truncation point m∗and the normalization factor A were determined such that
m = 1 + CM/N. The factor C depends on the slope of m vs. M/N near the point where m = 1, a slope that was
very difficult to measure numerically. Therefore, we took the value C = 2.5 (which lies within the range of values we
obtained) as representative, since it provided a better fit to the results.
FIG. 5. The probability distribution function Pm for different values of m, plotted on a double logarithmic scale. Pm
appears to follow a truncated power-law distribution, with an exponent of approximately −1.3 (dashed line). To simulate the
demographic process, the number of offspring per individual was drawn from this distribution, with the truncation point m∗
(vertical dashed lines) and normalization determined by the constraint on m.
Appendix E: Additional details for Figure 2
The results presented in Figure 2 of the main text were obtained as follows.
For every network size N, 104
interdependent networks were generated. In each attack, n0 sites were removed, and the resulting dynamics was
monitored to determine TA and TF . Six independent attacks with n0 removed sites were performed for each of the
104 realizations. The circles represent the mean, calculated over all these attacks.
The spread of the results is shown in Figure 6, where the shaded areas mark the regions containing 67% of the
numerical experiment outcomes. Importantly, the demographic process accurately reproduces both the mean and the
variance of the interdependent network dynamics.
