EVAC
Resonant excitation
ℏ𝜔
Ar 4s
Ar 2p
Spectator decay
Normal Auger-Meitner decay
delocalised
localised
a
b
Fig. 1 Core-hole clock spectroscopy of an endofullerene. (a) 3D-rendered image of the ground
state geometry of Ar@C60 predicted by density functional theory (see Methods.) (b) The core-hole
clock technique. Following resonant excitation via X-ray absorption, the photo-excited Ar 2p54s1
state can decay either via a spectator Auger-Meitner process, where the 4s electron remains localized
on the time scale of the core hole decay, or a normal Auger-Meitner process, for which the 4s electron
has tunnelled away (into the surrounding molecular matrix and/or substrate) before the core hole
decays. The relative intensity of electron emission via these channels enables the delocalization rate
of the 4s state to be determined.
decay of the core excitation, and (ii) “traditional” Auger-Meitner electron emission,
where the photoexcited electron has tunnelled away from the original excitation site
before core-hole decay. (Note that, as demonstrated by Fig. 2(c), the participator (or
resonant photoemission) decay channel plays a negligible role in the case of Ar@C60.)
A key assumption here is that the core hole decay and electron delocalization rates
are independent of each other. Moreover, both are assumed to follow a first order rate
equation[19, 26] and therefore decay with an exponential dependence.
We focus on X-ray absorption across the Ar 2p3/2 →4s spectral peak. This is
not only the initial excitation step in the CHC process (Fig. 1(b)), but the X-ray
absorption spectrum by itself (Fig. 2(a)) already provides a great deal of insight
into the degree of electronic coupling of the encapsulated Ar with the surrounding
environment. The Ar 2p3/2 →4s absorption spectrum shown in Fig. 2(a) (for a bulk
film of Ar@C60) is best fitted with a pure Lorentzian function, whose linewidth (full
width at half-maximum (FWHM)) of 280 (±10) meV should be compared with the
∼120 meV linewidth of gas phase argon[32, 33]. Fig. 2(a) is a line-by-line integral of
the resonant Auger-Meitner map of Fig. 2(b), i.e. it is a partial electron yield X-ray
absorption measurement. (A fit to a total electron yield XAS spectrum (SI Fig. S2)
results in a linewidth that agrees within experimental uncertainty, 260 ± 10 meV,
with that of the partial yield spectrum.)
In the solid state, the extensive X-ray absorption, CHC, and photoemission measure-
ments of argon on variously adsorbed graphene (Gr) monolayers reported by Lizzit
et al.[34] arguably represent the most appropriate dataset with which to compare our
Ar@C60 XAS and CHC results. As described below, the Ar@C60 system surprisingly
exhibits behaviour at odds with that for the weakly coupled Gr/O/Ru, Gr/SiO2, and
Gr/SiC systems (i.e. unlike that expected for an isolated argon atom). [34].
4
