Accepted Version 
Accetped date: 7 April 2025 
20 
This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-4.0 license 
 
Distribution analysis, concerning isolated 2-Amp(1+) cation and the results of the correlation 
analysis involving hydrogen phosphite, hydrogen sulfate and sulfate anions. Recorded spectra 
of polycrystalline samples do not exhibit the expected level of factor group splitting, on the 
other hand, the comparison of the spectra of two 2-AmpHSO4 polymorphs confirmed the 
unique sensitivity of vibrational spectroscopy in distinguishing closely related crystalline 
phases. The assignment of the spectra of polar 2-AmpH2PO3 crystals has been extended by the 
utilization of solid-state DFT computations, leading to the conclusion that of the trio of 
computational approaches considered, the “PBESOL0” method provides the best agreement 
with the experimental data. 
For 2-AmpH2PO3, the only non-centrosymmetric material among the salts studied, large 
single crystals were successfully grown, and the quality and size of the crystals achieved 
allowed precise measurements of linear optical properties. In addition, a study of SHG was 
performed using the Maker fringes method. The crystals show an interesting case of anomalous 
dispersion of the refractive indices, resulting in a point of uniaxiality. Furthermore, the 
refractive indices and their dispersion allow phase-matching for collinear SHG processes of 
both, type I and type II in a broad wavelength range. 
Powder measurements confirmed significant SHG efficiency of 2-AmpH2PO3 (d(2-AmpH2PO3) 
= 1.18 d(KDP) for 800 nm laser irradiation) and excellent resistance to optical damage (resisting 
at least 220 TWm-2 and 70 TWm-2 for 800 nm and 1000 nm irradiation, respectively). 
Last but not least, the potential of the 2-AmpH2PO3 crystals as a nonlinear optical material 
for combined χ(2) + χ(3) processes should be mentioned. The sharp, intense bands recorded in 
the Raman spectrum at 876 and 2412 cm-1 (representing manifestations of symmetric 
vibrational modes of the cation and stretching P-H modes of the anion, respectively) could also 
be active in stimulated Raman scattering (SRS) processes, including cascaded χ(2)↔χ(3) 
processes, similar to that observed in the case of guanylurea(1+) hydrogen phosphite (GUHP) 
[27, 28]. 
 
 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
 
Irena Matulková: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Conceptualization, 
Investigation, Visualization, Validation. Ladislav Bohatý: Writing – review & editing, Writing 
– original draft, Investigation, Methodology, Conceptualization, Visualization. Petra Becker: 
Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Investigation, Methodology, 
