arXiv:2504.06730v1  [cs.LG]  9 Apr 2025
PETNet– Coincident Particle Event Detection using
Spiking Neural Networks
Jan Debus∗, Charlotte Debus†, G¨unther Dissertori∗, and Markus G¨otz†‡
∗Institute for Particle Physics and Astrophysics, ETH Z¨urich, Switzerland
†Scientiﬁc Computing Center, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany
‡Helmholtz AI
Abstract—Spiking neural networks (SNN) hold the promise
of being a more biologically plausible, low-energy alternative to
conventional artiﬁcial neural networks. Their time-variant nature
makes them particularly suitable for processing time-resolved,
sparse binary data. In this paper, we investigate the potential
of leveraging SNNs for the detection of photon coincidences in
positron emission tomography (PET) data. PET is a medical
imaging technique based on injecting a patient with a radioactive
tracer and detecting the emitted photons. One central post-
processing task for inferring an image of the tracer distribution
is the ﬁltering of invalid hits occurring due to e.g. absorption or
scattering processes. Our approach, coined PETNet, interprets
the detector hits as a binary-valued spike train and learns to
identify photon coincidence pairs in a supervised manner. We
introduce a dedicated multi-objective loss function and demon-
strate the effects of explicitly modeling the detector geometry on
simulation data for two use-cases. Our results show that PETNet
can outperform the state-of-the-art classical algorithm with a
maximal coincidence detection F1 of 95.2%. At the same time,
PETNet is able to predict photon coincidences up to 36 times
faster than the classical approach, highlighting the great potential
of SNNs in particle physics applications.
Index Terms—Spiking neural networks, positron emission
tomography, particle coincidence detection, supervised denoising
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years spiking neural networks (SNN) have received
increasing research interest, given their potential as a low-
energy and computationally efﬁcient alternative to classical
artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs). Spiking neurons model their
activations as time-dependent membrane potentials, thereby
mimicking brain functionality more closely. Information is
propagated via binary spike trains, naturally capturing the
sparsity and temporal dynamics found in their biological
analogue [1]. The intrinsic concept of sparsity and temporal
dynamics enables SNNs to model sparse, time-resolved data,
which can be found in a wide variety of scientiﬁc applications.
Especially for high-frequency data, conventional ANNs strug-
gle with the additional computational complexity introduced
This work was performed on the HoreKa supercomputer funded by the
Ministry of Science, Research and the Arts Baden-W¨urttemberg and by the
Federal Ministry of Education and Research. The authors would like to thank
the Federal Ministry of Education and Research and the state governments
(www.nhr-verein.de/unsere-partner) for supporting this work/project as part
of the joint funding of National High Performance Computing (NHR). This
work is supported by the Helmholtz Association Initiative and Networking
Fund under the Helmholtz AI platform grant and by the German Federal
Ministry of Education and Research under the 01IS22068 - EQUIPE grant.
by the temporal dimension. Recurrent ANN architectures, such
as LSTMs, are not able to capture long range dependencies,
while Transformer-based approaches face the challenge of
excessive memory consumption for long sequences. For such
cases, SNNs provide a promising alternative with the potential
of surpassing conventional ANN prediction accuracy while
requiring substantially less computational resources [2].
One such potential application is the task of detecting
photon coincidence pairs from raw detector data in positron
emission tomography (PET). PET is a medical imaging tech-
nique based on injecting a radioactive positron-emitter into
a patient and measuring the emitted photons of the result-
ing electron-positron-annihilation using a scintillating ring
detector. In theory coincidence pairing can be performed by
simply matching two measured signals within a predeﬁned
temporal window. In practice, however, not all annihilation
photons can be detected due to absorption processes in the
body or physical constraints of the detector elements, thus
impeding the matching process. At high signal rates and
temporal resolutions, existing classical algorithms prevalent in
the PET-community reach their limits as computation times
can require several hours. We demonstrate that SNNs can
speed up this task and even improve detection accuracy by
learning coincidence patterns. The photons detected by the
scanner inherently comprise a time-variant series of binary
events in discrete locations, and thus can be easily translated
into spike-trains interpretable by an SNN.
Our contributions are as follows:
• A multi-objective loss function for SNNs that is both
sensitive to spike counts and timing critical in particle
detection applications.
• An approach to model the a-priori known detector geom-
etry with window functions.
• Large-scale data-parallel SNN training on a multi-node
GPU systems for extremely high-rate PET scanners.
• Prediction of photon coincidence pairs in PET using
SNNs, on-par or even surpassing the classical approach
in prediction accuracy while reducing inference time by
more than an order of magnitude.
We evaluate our approach on two sets of simulations, one
based on a high-rate preclinical system and one based on
a low-rate monolithic clinical design, which will be made
publicly available to serve as benchmark datasets. Our work
