1
Introduction
Recent works [1–3] have revived a supersymmetric mass deformation [4] of the IKKT matrix
model [5], and demonstrated that it constitutes a viable model of holographic duality and emer-
gent spacetime. The IKKT model is the worldpoint theory of N D-instantons in type IIB string
theory, and the mass deformation captures the polarisation of the D-instantons into higher di-
mensional Euclidean branes by background fluxes, in the spirit of the Myers effect [6].
The
model has the form of a statistical physics partition function, with neither time nor space. The
absence of a quantum mechanical time is the source of some conceptual challenges, but means
that the model is highly tractable. In particular, supersymmetric localisation can be used to
express the partition function exactly as a sum over ‘fuzzy sphere’ matrix configurations, labeled
by N dimensional representations R of su(2), such that [3]
Z =
X
R
ZR ,
ZR = CRe−S0
R
ˆ
d⃗mR e−Seff
R (⃗mR) .
(1)
We will shortly give formulae for all quantities appearing here. For each representation there are
integrals over moduli ⃗mR, one modulus for each irreducible representation appearing in R. In
a localisation calculation, fluctuation effects about the supersymmetric fuzzy sphere minima are
packaged exactly into the normalisation factors CR and moduli space measure e−Seff
R .
The expression (1) is the starting point of this paper. We will not write down the polarised
IKKT matrix action explicitly, see [1–3]. Our objective is to understand the statistical physics of
(1), and its connection to emergent spacetime physics. The ‘energetics’ of the partition function
is determined by the action S0
R of the fuzzy sphere configurations
S0
R = −9Ω4
215
X
M
nMM(M2 −1) .
(2)
Here Ωis the mass deformation parameter. The partition function Z is a function of Ωand
N only. We may think of the polarised IKKT model as a canonical partition function with Ω4
being the inverse temperature. In (2) the irreducible representation of dimension M appears
with degeneracy nM in the decomposition of R. That is, the sum over representations in (1) is
equivalent to a sum over partitions {nM} such that
X
M
nMM = N .
(3)
In (2) we see that the supersymmetric fuzzy spheres do not all have the same action. This
is distinct from, for example, the mass-deformed BMN matrix quantum mechanics in which all
representations have the same energy [7]. In particular, in the large Ω→∞limit the partition
function is dominated by the maximally irreducible fuzzy sphere. This has nN = 1 and hence the
lowest action (2). This is the ‘low temperature’ limit of the partition function, in which energy
strongly dominates over entropy. The matrix partition function can be evaluated by saddle point
2
