F. Rigamonti et al.: The perturbed BLR of PG 1302-102
redshift, we estimated a distance of ≃70 gravitational radii to get
a redshift of ≃4000 km/s (i.e., the peak of the very broad com-
ponent). It is not clear if, at such small distances from the BH,
there are the physical conditions to efficiently produce Balmer
emission lines. It is also unclear whether this feature should be
expected in all Balmer lines, as our analysis indicates the lack of
any very redshifted component in the Hγ. As was already antici-
pated in Sec. 3.2, the disk-like BLR model with the spiral pertur-
bation can capture and explain the asymmetric emission of the
Hβ and Hγ close to the bulk of the line (i.e., ∆µB ≃450 km/s)
and the excess (or the lack of it in the case of the Hγ) at much
longer wavelengths. This provides not only a self-consistent and
physically motivated explanation for the complex nature of the
BLR of PG 1302-102 but also a viable explanation for the whole
class of quasar showing the same very redshifted component,
which, until now, has only been investigated empirically.
Finally, the origin of the BLR disturbance might be con-
nected to outflows. Our analysis has revealed the presence of ion-
ized outflows on NLR scales in PG 1302-102. Few works have
reported evidence for a connection between outflows in broad
and narrow line regions as the two may be connected and part
of the same feedback mechanism (Vietri et al. 2020). Therefore,
it might be possible that the redshifted components of the BLR
are partially tracing the radial motion of the gas or that the dis-
turbance in the disk originates from feedback from the central
AGN. In this case, due to dust absorption and obscuration, it is
generally expected to preferentially observe outflows instead of
inflows. If AGN winds are really the cause of the observed emis-
sion profile, the fact that we detect only a redshifted component
without any blueshifted counterpart at least implies quite a pe-
culiar configuration and dynamics of the gas and the dust in the
BLR of PG 1302-102. Only precise and long monitoring rever-
beration mapping campaigns will shed light on the real nature
of PG 1302-102 either by characterizing its BLR transfer func-
tion or by testing the binary hypothesis against newly proposed
models (Dotti et al. 2022, 2023, Bertassi et al. in prep.).
5. Summary and conclusions
In this work, we conducted the first fully Bayesian analysis on
the high-resolution ESPRESSO spectrum of the binary black
hole candidate PG 1302-102. Our Bayesian approach, based on
the nested sampling algorithm, measures the posterior probabil-
ity distribution of all the model parameters and the evidence of
the model, which we use to assess if an emission component is
statistically required. Our methodology coupled with the high
quality of the data (R ≃138, 000) allowed us to confirm (for the
Hβ) and detect (for the Hγ) the presence of a redshifted broad
emission component (∆µ ≃450km/s, FWHMB = 3981km/s)
for which we provided accurate measurements of its properties.
We also detected an additional Gaussian component that, if as-
sociated with the Hβ, implies high redshift (∆µVB ≃4000km/s)
and a large broadening (FWHMVB = 12600km/s); notably the
same component is not detected in the Hγ. Finally, we discov-
ered and characterized the presence of blueshifted broad compo-
nent (∆µ ≃−350km/s, FWHMO = 991km/s) in all the analyzed
narrow lines (Hβ, Hγ, and [OIII]) that we explained as a gas
outflow. From the width of the BELs we estimated a dynamical
mass of MBH ≃108.8 M⊙for PG 1302-102.
We discussed two scenarios as viable explanations for the
complex emission of the Balmer lines. A possibility is the pres-
ence of a black hole binary carrying around the BLR during the
orbital motion. In this case, assuming a period of the binary
of ≃5.5yr (Zhu & Thrane 2020) and the typical luminosity-
radius relations with their uncertainties for the average BLR size
(Bentz et al. 2009; Shen et al. 2024; Wang & Woo 2024), we
conclude that the BLRs of the individual black holes should
be either already settled in a single BLR or in the process of
merging and, therefore highly disturbed and truncated. The al-
ternative explanation assumed the BLR to be a disk orbiting in
Keplerian circular motion around a single SMBH with a non-
axisymmetric emissivity distribution modeled as a spiral over-
density. We showed that accounting for a perturbation in the
BLR, a disk-BLR model well-fitted the data. This approach si-
multaneously explains the asymmetric emission of the Hβ and
Hγ close to the bulk of the line and the flux excess (or the lack
of it in the case of the Hγ) at much longer wavelengths. A com-
parison of the Bayesian evidence of the spiral perturbation model
with a simpler multi-Gaussian model showed a clear statistical
preference for the former. This strongly suggests that the BLR of
PG 1302-102 is a complex system, demonstrating that, when fea-
sible, geometrical and dynamical modeling of the BLR should
always be preferred over an empirical superposition of unphysi-
cal components. Our approach could indeed be extended to other
sources, possibly explaining all those objects showing emission
line features similar to that of PG 1302-102.
Still, the physical origins of the perturbation are unclear and
a connection with the possible presence of a black hole binary
cannot be ruled out. However, given the growing evidence from
theoretical (Wang et al. 2022) and observational (Zastrocky et al.
2024) works demonstrating the common presence of disturbed
BLRs, we argue that an origin related to self-gravitating insta-
bilities may be more plausible. Future spectroscopic monitoring
of PG 1302-102 is surely needed to better characterize the nature
of this source and the structure of its BLR.
Acknowledgements
We thank the anonymous referee for their comments and sugges-
tions that helped us to improve the quality of the paper.
FR acknowledges the support from the Next Generation
EU funds within the National Recovery and Resilience Plan
(PNRR), Mission 4 - Education and Research, Component 2
- From Research to Business (M4C2), Investment Line 3.1 -
Strengthening and creation of Research Infrastructures, Project
IR0000012 – “CTA+ - Cherenkov Telescope Array Plus.
MD acknowledge funding from MIUR under the grant
PRIN 2017-MB8AEZ, financial support from ICSC – Centro
Nazionale di Ricerca in High Performance Computing, Big
Data and Quantum Computing, funded by European Union –
NextGenerationEU, and support by the Italian Ministry for Re-
search and University (MUR) under Grant ’Progetto Diparti-
menti di Eccellenza 2023-2027’ (BiCoQ). We acknowledge a
financial contribution from the Bando Ricerca Fondamentale
INAF 2022 Large Grant, Dual and binary supermassive black
holes in the multi-messenger era: from galaxy mergers to gravi-
tational waves. This work is based on public data released from
the ESPRESSO commissioning observations under Programme
ID 60.A-9128 The data underlying this article will be shared on
reasonable request to the corresponding author.
References
Ackermann, M., Ajello, M., Albert, A., et al. 2015, ApJ, 813, L41
Agazie, G., Antoniadis, J., Anumarlapudi, A., et al. 2024, ApJ, 966, 105
Amaro-Seoane, P., Andrews, J., Arca Sedda, M., et al. 2023, Living Reviews in
Relativity, 26, 2
Amaro-Seoane, P., Audley, H., Babak, S., et al. 2017, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1702.00786
Article number, page 11 of 13
