Physical processes in the IRDC hosting N59-North
7
nario presented in Maity et al. (2024) using magneto-
hydrodynamic (MHD) simulation data from Inoue et al.
(2018). The V-shaped PV structure was first analyzed
using the same data by Arzoumanian et al. (2018) (see
Figure 16 in their work).
The CCC model of Inoue
et al. (2018) involves the collision of a turbulent molec-
ular cloud (radius of 1.5 pc) and a dense sea of gas,
moving at a relative velocity of 10 km s−1, as shown in
Figure 7a.
This CCC model represents a case where
a larger cloud collides with a smaller one or a cloud
is subjected to compression by a plane-parallel shock
wave. More details about the numerical simulation can
be found in Inoue et al. (2018) and Maity et al. (2024).
The collision resulted in a cone-shaped compressed layer
as presented in Figure 7b at 0.4 Myr. Since molecular
clouds are not ideal spheres in reality, the resulting cones
can be imperfect or distorted, influenced by the molec-
ular cloud’s initial structure. Figures 7c and 7d show
the PV diagrams at 0.4 Myr along the x and y axes for
the line of observation toward z-direction, respectively.
The area covered by the black lines highlights the com-
pressed layer in the PV diagrams. The opposite signs
of the velocity gradients in the left and right part of
the PV diagrams indicate converging gas flow toward
the vertex of the cone. The similarity of the observed
PV diagram for the filament hosting N59-North and the
PV diagrams for a converging gas flow in a cone suggests
that the filament must have a cone-like shape. This indi-
cates that the gas is converging toward the center of the
filament, where C-HFS is situated. Figure 7e presents
a schematic diagram that illustrates the cone-like shape
of the filament and the variation in velocity along its
length before the emergence of the N59-North bubble.
The converging gas flows toward the center of the fila-
ment give rise to C-HFS. The emergence and expansion
of bubble N59-North, along with its effect on the PV
diagram, is illustrated in Figure 7f.
As mentioned earlier, the model proposed by Inoue
et al. (2018) is also applicable in the case of a molecular
cloud interacting with a plane-parallel shock front aris-
ing from the expansion of an H ii region. We examined
MeerKAT 1.3 GHz radio continuum data and MIPS-
GAL 24 µm data for an extended region to investigate
this possibility. An extended H ii region is evident in
both the MeerKAT and MIPSGAL data, as shown in
Figures 8a and 8b, respectively. This H ii region is clas-
sified as a candidate H ii region in Anderson et al. (2014)
and is highlighted with a dotted circle in Figure 8. How-
ever, our target filament extends beyond the boundaries
of the H ii region, and molecular gas is not traced at
the edge of this H ii region in the velocity range of the
filament. Therefore, the H ii region is possibly not asso-
ciated with the filament.
4.3. The review of CCC scenario toward N59-North
As mentioned in Section 1, a CCC event was reported
toward this target site by Chen et al. (2024).
They
proposed a collision of two cloud components with ve-
locities of [65, 79] and [95, 108] km s−1, having a rel-
ative velocity of about 24 km s−1. We found different
distances for the ATLASGAL clumps with the velocity
ranges of [72, 83] and [98, 109] km s−1. The distribution
of the ATLASGAL clumps according to their velocities
and distances is shown using different symbols in Fig-
ure 8b. It is important to note that, the histogram of the
Galactic CCC events based on their collision velocities
shows that the number of CCC events decreases above 5
km s−1 and collision with a relative velocity of 24 km s−1
is extremely rare (Fukui et al. 2021a). In addition, the
origin of the entire filament hosting N59-North is not es-
tablished based on the collision of the above-mentioned
velocity components.
Therefore, considering all these
points, it is unlikely that the collision of velocity com-
ponents [65, 79] and [95, 108] km s−1 is responsible for
the formation of the filament hosting N59-North and its
massive star-forming activity.
We can enhance the understanding of the possible
CCC event at this target site based on the study of
Maity et al. (2024). No clear signature of two velocity
components is observed in the range [95, 108] km s−1
(see Figure 4) for the entire filament.
As detailed in
Maity et al. (2024), the absence of two velocity compo-
nents in CCC sites is very much possible as the signature
of the two velocity components, and their connection
(known as bridge feature; Torii et al. 2011; Fukui et al.
2014, 2015; Dewangan et al. 2017; Sano et al. 2018; Fu-
jita et al. 2021) remains for a very short period. From
the beginning of the collision, the timescale is limited by
the size of the cloud components and their relative ve-
locity. Beyond that timescale, it becomes impossible to
separate the individual velocity components. Therefore,
the possibility of CCC toward this target site remains;
however, the exact determination of the colliding cloud
components within the velocity range of [95, 108] km s−1
is not feasible with our current understanding of CCC.
Such analysis would require new methods.
Several studies based on MHD simulations (e.g., In-
oue & Fukui 2013; Inoue et al. 2018; Fukui et al. 2021b),
have demonstrated that the formation of high-density
filaments is efficient perpendicular to the magnetic field.
While in the case of CCC, the filaments can form parallel
to the magnetic field, however, they disperse over time
Maity et al. (2024). Therefore, high-resolution dust po-
