Accurate Ab-initio Neural-network Solutions to
Large-Scale Electronic Structure Problems
Michael Scherbela1*, Nicholas Gao2*, Philipp Grohs1,3, and Stephan G¨unnemann2
1Faculty of Mathematics, University of Vienna, Oskar-Morgenstern-Platz 1, A-1090 Vienna, Austria
2Department of Computer Science & Munich Data Science Institute, Technical University of Munich
3Johann Radon Institute for Computational and Applied Mathematics, Austrian Academy of Sciences,
Altenbergerstrasse 69, 4040 Linz, Austria
*Equal contribution, order determined by coin flip
Abstract
We present finite-range embeddings (FiRE), a novel wave function ansatz for accurate large-scale ab-initio
electronic structure calculations. Compared to contemporary neural-network wave functions, FiRE reduces
the asymptotic complexity of neural-network variational Monte Carlo (NN-VMC) by ∼nel, the number of
electrons. By restricting electron-electron interactions within the neural network, FiRE accelerates all key
operations – sampling, pseudopotentials, and Laplacian computations – resulting in a real-world 10× accel-
eration in now-feasible 180-electron calculations. We validate our method’s accuracy on various challenging
systems, including biochemical compounds, conjugated hydrocarbons, and organometallic compounds. On
these systems, FiRE’s energies are consistently within chemical accuracy of the most reliable data, includ-
ing experiments, even in cases where high-accuracy methods such as CCSD(T), AFQMC, or contemporary
NN-VMC fall short.
With these improvements in both runtime and accuracy, FiRE represents a new
‘gold-standard’ method for fast and accurate large-scale ab-initio calculations, potentially enabling new
computational studies in fields like quantum chemistry, solid-state physics, and material design.
1
Introduction
Solving the electronic Schr¨odinger equation unlocks
the computational analysis of molecular and mate-
rial properties and structures. Unfortunately, its so-
lution, the ground-state electronic wave function, is
only known analytically for the simplest of systems.
Consequently, approximations trade off computational
efficiency and accuracy on various scales depending
on the problem, its properties, and the computational
budget.
Some methods, such as Density Functional
Theory (DFT), scale favorably with system size but
fail to predict experiments for strongly correlated sys-
tems.
Other methods, such as Coupled Cluster, of-
ten correctly predict experiments, but their computa-
tional cost increases dramatically with the number of
electrons nel, e.g., O(nel7) for CCSD(T). Furthermore,
applying these highly accurate methods frequently re-
quires expert knowledge in choosing basis sets, initial-
ization, active spaces, and optimization parameters,
even for small systems.
In theory, Variational Monte Carlo (VMC) promises
both a favorable runtime by scaling only O(nel3) per
step in the number of electrons nel, and being easy to
apply, as it directly parametrizes the real-space elec-
tron wave function Ψ : Rnel×3 →R [1].
However,
conventional VMC has long been touted in practice
as a low-accuracy method that may only be used as
initial guesses for accurate simulations like diffusion
Monte Carlo [2].
This fundamentally changed with
the recent advent of neural-network VMC (NN-VMC),
which use a neural-network ansatz for the wave func-
tion. Due to the superior expressive power of neural
networks compared to classical ansatze, NN-VMC fre-
quently achieves the to-date most accurate energies for
small molecules. However, this gain in accuracy comes
at the price of an increased cost of O(nel4) per step,
which severely limits the system sizes for which the
method is computationally tractable [3].
The slow-
down arises because contemporary neural wave func-
tions do not support two critical operations that are
needed in VMC: (1) efficient Laplacian calculations,
which are necessary for energy evaluation, and (2) wave
function updates if few electrons are moved, which are
crucial for sampling and pseudopotentials. Thus, there
exists a clear gap between both flavors as conventional
VMC is scalable but inaccurate, and NN-VMC is slow
but accurate. The purpose of this paper is to signifi-
cantly narrow this gap, as we will now describe.
In conventional VMC, one typically chooses a Slater-
Jastrow wave function
Ψ(r) = J (r) det [Φ(r)]
(1)
where a symmetric Jastrow factor J : Rnel×3 →R is
multiplied with a Slater determinant det[Φ(r)], which
enforces fermionic antisymmetry. For readability, we
have omitted spin and limited the model to a single
determinant. In the absence of a backflow [4, 5], the
orbital matrix Φ(r) = [Φil(r)]nel
i,l=1 ∈Rnel×nel consists
1
arXiv:2504.06087v1  [physics.comp-ph]  8 Apr 2025
