4
Tan ET AL.
SNRLi−Ma below 3, and high-significance blocks (HSBs)
with SNRLi−Ma above 3.
This classification analysis
aims to identify candidates with proper precursor and
quiescent period between the precursor and main burst.
3.1. Precursor and quiescent period
First, we determine the precursor and quiescent period
candidates. To identify precursor and quiescent period
candidates, We find the first HSB that appears in time
order and recognize it as the possible precursor; then we
find consecutive LSBs preceding most HSBs and recog-
nize these blocks as possible quiescent period. We pro-
pose three conditions to confirm quiescent period candi-
dates:
(1) The quiescent period candidates should be LSBs,
with the first low-significance block appearing after
the first HSBs.
This condition indicates that the
quiescent period follows the precursor;
(2) There have to be several consecutive LSBs to deter-
mine the complete duration of quiescent period. If
there are no more than one consecutive block, the
first LSBs is taken;
(3) For LSBs, indexes greater than 10 are excluded, indi-
cating a short precursor and short quiescent period.
After applying the three conditions and identifying the
corresponding blocks, we sum these consecutive LSBs
to determine the quiescent period candidate, while the
period between the first HSB and the first LSB of the
quiescent period is considered the precursor candidate.
It is worth noting that the blocks identified above are
preliminary candidates. To satisfy the standard of burst
pattern of Type IL GRB, we establish a standard crite-
rion of 2 s for both precursor and quiescent period candi-
dates. Specifically, if the duration of both the precursor
and quiescent period candidates is less than 2 s and the
SNRLi−Ma of the precursor candidate is not the highest
among all blocks (indicating that the precursor is weaker
than the main emission peak), then the precursor and
quiescent period candidates are considered to satisfy the
burst pattern (Fig. 2). Otherwise, these candidates are
excluded.
3.2. Extended emission and dip
After identifying the precursor and quiescent period,
we establish the criterion for extended emission and
dip.
Extended emission typically exhibits weaker in-
tensity and longer duration compared to the main emis-
sion.
Therefore, we designate the highest SNRLi−Ma
of HSBs as representing the peak signal in the light
curve and consider all HSBs that appear after the high-
est SNRLi−Ma block, as well as having SNRLi−Ma less
than 1/3 of the highest SNRLi−Ma.
In fact, the criterion of “less than 1/3 of the highest
SNRLi−Ma block” is relatively loose. It aims to capture
potential extended emission signals. Because, in the case
of GRB 211211A, there are quite a few blocks whose
SNRLi−Ma is less than 1/3 of the highest SNRLi−Ma
block, although the extended emission of GRB 211211A
is relatively strong. This operation yields three possible
outcomes: the absence of such blocks, the discontinuous
occurrence of such blocks, and at least two consecutive
appearance of such blocks, which is referred to as con-
secutive significance blocks (CSBs).
The first two results are disregarded. Specifically, if
no such block is found, it suggests the absence of any
extended emission, and if the blocks occur discontinu-
ously, it indicates the presence of blocks with significance
greater than 1/3 of the highest significance block, im-
plying the continuation of main emission signals during
those intervals. Only in the case of consecutive occur-
rence of such blocks (CSBs) is the extended emission
candidate confirmed.
The extended emission candidate may consist of mul-
tiple segments (Fig. 2), potentially separated by blocks
of higher significance or LSBs. Similarly to the identifi-
cation precursor and quiescent period, these consecutive
significant blocks are initially considered as candidates
for extended emission because they may appear imme-
diately after the highest significance block, representing
signals at the end of the peak rather than true extended
emission (Fig. 2).
In line with the light curve pattern of Type IL GRBs,
a dip-like structure is essential to distinguish the main
emission from the extended emission.
Therefore, for
each segment of the extended emission candidates, the
blocks between the most significant block and the can-
didate of that segment are examined. If a block between
the highest significant block and the candidate of the ex-
tended emission segment is less significant than the first
block of this segment, a dip is deemed to have occurred.
In this situation, candidates for extended emission are
considered as genuine. Consequently, both the extended
emission and the dip are found in the analysis (Fig. 2).
Due to the complexity of GRB light curves, particu-
larly the diverse profiles of extended emission, our cri-
terion for detecting extended emission and dip is not as
stringent as those for precursor and quiescent period.
The process used for extended emission and dip iden-
tification aims to capture a few key blocks that clearly
pertain to the extended emission. Although this crite-
rion may not encompass all signals of extended emission,
