Alice
Quantum State
Source (A)
Charlie/Eve
Quantum
Measurement
Device
(in Bell basis)
Bob
Quantum State
Source (B)
A/ B
H
V
D
A
H
Π0
Π±
X
X
V
Π±
Π0
X
X
D
X
X
Π+, Π0
Π−, Π0
A
X
X
Π−, Π0
Π+, Π0
Figure 16: Basic set-up of an MDI-QKD protocol. Alice and Bob each send a single photon to Charlie, who implements a
linear-optical Bell-state measurement, which can be described by measurement operators Π+, Π−, Π0. The tables includes
expected detection results at BSM station in MDI-QKD. “X” refers to discarded results in which Alice and Bob chose
different bases. H, V , D, A are horizontal, vertical, diagonal and anti-diagonal linear polarization states, respectively.
needs to consider the imperfection of signal resources, such as the basis-dependent flaw that results in a
decrease in achievable distance. Therefore, a generalization of [96] is essential for practical purposes.
Published back to back with Ref.
[96], Braunstein et al.
(2012) adopted a similar approach by
devising a side-channel-free protocol to account for all potential side channels that might arise during a
QKD implementation [38]. In its simplest form, this protocol corresponds to an entanglement-swapping
experiment, where the dual teleportation channels serve as ideal Hilbert space filters to eliminate the
possibility of side-channel attacks. To prevent any attempts at probing side channels within Alice’s and
Bob’s laboratories, they implemente state-generation via partial measurement of a bipartite entangled
state. This strategic move effectively isolates any external probes from the state-generation device. This
approach ensures the complete protection of both Alice and Bob’s private spaces against any potential
side-channel attacks.
In this protocol, the secret key rate can be lower bounded through the use of
quantum memory and by calculating the entanglement distillation rate over the distributed state as
follows:
r ≥I(A⟩B|L′) + ∆.
(165)
Here, I(A⟩B|L′) represents the coherent information conditioned on Eve’s fake variable L′ which Eve sends
to both parties to mislead them, instead of the true variable L (I(A⟩B) = S(ρB) −S(ρAB) = −S(A|B))
and ∆denotes the amount of classical cheating.
Practical loopholes in MDI-QKD. Practical loopholes in MDI-QKD shift the focus from measurement
device imperfections to state preparation or source flaws, as these can be exploited to compromise security.
Liu et al. [307] demonstrated a hacking strategy leveraging modulation errors to obtain all key bits. One
significant imperfection is the basis-dependent flaw arising from discrepancies in density matrices in BB84
states, while the birefringence effect in optical fibers highlights the practicality of phase encoding over
polarization encoding. Tamaki et al. [308] addressed these issues with two MDI-QKD schemes: one
using phase locking of separate lasers and a double BB84 protocol to control basis-dependent flaws, and
another employing phase encoding for longer distances. Primaatmaja et al. [309] introduced a numerical
technique using semidefinite programming to analyze phase-error rates, showing phase-encoding MDI-
QKD’s potential to outperform decoy-state MDI-QKD at short distances. Zhu et al. [310] improved
analysis by modulating different intensities in key and test bases.
Bourassa et al.
[311] identified a
time-dependent side channel in sources employing Faraday mirrors, showing divergences between three-
state and BB84 protocols. Alternative schemes [312] simplified encoding and decoding with minimal
performance compromise.
Xu et al.
[313] analyzed error sources like polarization misalignment and
mode mismatch, showing that MDI-QKD tolerates up to 6.7% polarization misalignment at 0 km and
5% at 120 km, while mode mismatch tolerance decreases from 80% to 50% over the same range. Wang
et al. [314] estimated gains, error rates, and key rates under arbitrary photon mixtures, while Li et
al. [90] proposed a polarization-alignment method using fewer devices to reduce photon loss. Phase-
randomized weakly coherent pulses (PR-WCPs), commonly used due to a lack of mature single-photon
sources, introduce errors in the X basis. Li et al. [315] incorporated these errors into security analysis,
showing equivalence between PR-WCPs and Poisson-distributed photon states, with a tighter key rate
60
