80
Evidence for Intrinsic charm in the proton
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
xmin
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Truncated Charm Momentum Fraction (%)
3FNS
PDF uncertainties
PDF + MHOU uncertainties
Figure 3.10: The value of the truncated charm momentum integral, Eq. (3.4), as a function of the
lower integration limit xmin for our baseline determination of the 3FNS intrinsic charm PDF. We display
separately the PDF and the total (PDF+MHOU) uncertainties.
PYTHIA8 with the Monash 2013 tune for showering, hadronization, and underlying event [256].
Acceptance requirements and event selection follow the LHCb analysis, where in particular
charm jets are defined as those anti-kT R = 0.5 jets containing a reconstructed charmed hadron.
The details of the calculation are reported below in a dedicated paragraph. The ratio between
c-tagged and untagged Z+jet events can then be compared with the LHCb measurements of
Rc
j(yZ) = N(c tagged jets; yZ)
N(jets; yZ)
= σ(pp →Z + charm jet; yZ)
σ(pp →Z + jet; yZ)
.
(3.5)
Here N(c tagged jets; yZ) and N(jets; yZ) are, respectively, the number of charm-tagged and
untagged jets, for a Z boson rapidity interval that satisfies the selection and acceptance criteria.
The more forward the rapidity yZ, the higher the values of the charm momentum x being
probed.
In Fig. 3.11 (left) we compare the LHCb measurements of Rc
j, provided in three bins of the
Z-boson rapidity yZ, with the theoretical predictions based on both our default PDFs and the
PDF set in which we impose the vanishing of intrinsic charm. In Fig. 3.11 (right) we also display
the correlation coefficient between the charm PDF at Q = 100 GeV and the observable Rc
j,
demonstrating how this observable is highly correlated to charm in a localized x region that
depends on the rapidity bin. It is clear that our prediction is in excellent agreement with the
LHCb measurements, while in the highest rapidity bin, which is highly correlated to the charm
PDF in the region of the observed valence peak x ≃0.45, the prediction obtained by imposing
the vanishing of intrinsic charm undershoots the data at the 3σ level. Hence, this measurement
provides independent direct evidence in support of our result.
We have also determined the impact of these LHCb Z+charm measurements on the charm PDF
by means of the Bayesian reweighting.
We first compare the quality of the description of the LHCb data before their inclusion. In
Table 3.2 we show the values of χ2/Ndat for the LHCb Z+charm data both with default and
