2
them. We will consider four different cases, namely HH,
BS (N=1), A-RR, BS (N=−3) [32]. There have been pre-
vious attempts to distinguish these candidate states via
upstream noise. However, this completely neglects the
fact that it is extremely hard and needs different geom-
etry to check equilibration length [33–36]. In this work
we focus on shot noise and one specific geometry with an
algorithmic approach where we provide a flow chart for
the experiment to follow to clearly identify the details.
This geometry and these ideas of measuring shot noise
were shown for both abelian cases and non-abelian cases
as well.
B.
Shot Noise
Shot-noise measurements happen to be one of the most
unique and strongest methods of measurement that gave
us one of the two most important pieces of information
about the system[21, 22].
Shot-noise is one of the di-
rect methods to measure the charge of the carrier, and
it can be used to make one of the best, if not the best,
electron thermometers. In the case of the conventional
quantum point contact (QPC), the shot noise is gener-
ated by the discrete transition of the carrier [37]. How-
ever, the Johnson-Nyquist noise plays a very important
role in our case. Specifically, one needs to measure the
scaling of the noise with the source potential, giving us
the Fano factor, which we will compare.
The method
we will use needs Johnson-Nyquist noise, which was first
discussed in this context to understand shot-noise in a
QPC plateau []. After the charge and thermal equilibra-
tion, if heat propagates parallel to the current (ballistic),
no extra Johnson-Nyquist noise will be created. On the
contrary, if the heat can propagate anti-parallel to the
current (anti-ballistic), then that can create extra noise.
With this information, we can calculate different Fano
Factors and compare them for their qualitative behavior
to narrow down the phase of the quantum Hall states.
C.
Device and results
We propose the design of a heterostructure device
as shown in Fig. 1 [13, 38], which contains two differ-
ent filling fractions in an arrangement that creates in-
terfaces (filter-geometry) where edges of different FQH
states interact by a virtue of the geometry of the setup.
The protocol we present to distinguish between candi-
date states of the 12/5 FQH state systematically involves
performing the experiment with three different combi-
nations of the pair {ν, νi}. ν is the background filling
near the source/drain and νi is the filling in the mid-
dle region under the gate.
The pairs we consider are
{12/5, 2}, {12/5, 7/3}, {3, 12/5} to conclusively deter-
mine the candidate state in any thermal equilibration
regime (partial vs full). There has not been any exten-
sive study about understanding different internal length
scales (e.g., charge equilibration length leq, thermal equi-
libration length lQ
eq) and their order of magnitude for 12/5
specifically. However, there have been studies that indi-
cate that fractional states take longer to equilibrate than
integers [22, 33, 34, 39].
leq ≪lQ
eq: Previous works on ν = 2/3 and ν = 5/2
suggest that these lengths are different by order of mag-
nitude, suggesting that setups are almost always charge-
equilibrated as the required geometric length for that is
orders of magnitude smaller than the scale of the setup
[22, 33, 34].
Thus, we make the realistic assumption
that this behavior holds even for the ν = 12/5 states
and thus exploit it by assuming that all geometric edge
lengths in our setup are charge-equilibrated by default.
Thermal equilibration length is a different matter still,
as the ranges of lQ
eq vary to such a non-trivial degree that
shot-noise experiments can distinguish between no, par-
tial, and complete thermal equilibration. As such, the
methodology we propose in this work (Section III) as-
sumes no knowledge of thermal equilibration (we ignore
no thermal equilibration in this discussion) while provid-
ing a robust and systematic elimination-based approach
to determine the state.
D.
Plan of the paper
In Section II we discuss the main calculations and as-
sumptions of the problem. We explain the location and
the consequences of hotspots and noise spots as measured
correlations in the current. In Section III, We describe
the protocol for the experimentalists to distinguish dif-
ferent possible phases with a given flowchart. In the final
Section IV, we discuss the outlook and experimental fea-
sibility.
II.
DISCUSSIONS ON CALCULATIONS
A.
Hotspots and noise-spots
We begin with an overview of the model used, which
describes regions that have an elevated localized temper-
ature due to power dissipation or the “hotspots” and re-
gions that generate a random fluctuation in charge carri-
ers called the “noise spots” [40–42]. Each hydrodynamic
mode is labeled by two quantities ν and c, which are
the Filling Fraction (FF) and Central Charge (CC), re-
spectively. The filling fraction determines the quantized
electrical current carried by the edge mode and central
charge, the quantized thermal current [43], given by
I = ν e2
h V,
J = cπ2k2
B
6h T 2 ,
(1)
where V is the edge voltage, h is the Planck’s constant,
kB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature of
the hotspot. A candidate state can have multiple modes
