 
2 
Introduction 
Owing to the internally compensated spin sublattices, antiferromagnetic materials 
produce negligible stray fields and are immune to disturbing magnetic fields, promising 
for building ultra-dense and reliable magnetic memory devices1-3. Besides, the THz spin 
dynamics resulting from antiparallel exchange-coupled spin sublattices, allows 
antiferromagnetic devices operating at an ultra-fast speed beyond its ferromagnetic 
counterpart4-6. One of the key capabilities for antiferromagnetic spintronics is to 
manipulate the antiferromagnetic order via electrical means. Pioneering works have 
demonstrated the capability of electrical 90° and 120° switching of Néel vectors in various 
thin-film antiferromagnets (e.g., CuMnAs5,7,8, Mn2Au9,10, NiO6,11,12, 𝛼𝛼-Fe2O313 and PtMn14) 
via staggering spin-orbit torques (SOTs) and spin Hall effect-induced SOTs that have 
emerged as an efficient means of manipulating the magnetic state. The 90° and 120° 
switching of Néel vector usually requires altering current directions between multiple 
writing channels, leading to the complexity of writing signal control and difficulties in 
device integration. By contrast, the 180° switching of antiferromagnetic order can be 
achieved by reversing the current polarity in a single writing channel15-18, analogous to the 
SOT switching of a ferromagnet, which thus is compatible with readily ferromagnet-based 
SOT-magnetic random-access memory (MRAM) architecture.  
In this switching scheme, the presence of a small net magnetic moment δm that breaks 
the time-reversal symmetry, is crucial to realise the deterministic switching and its 
orientation relationship with the Néel vector decides the switching polarity. Despite several 
attempts at electrical 180° switching in thin-film collinear antiferromagnet15 as well as 
unconventional altermagnet16,17, the origin of the net magnetic moment in thin-film 
antiferromagnets is usually elusive, possibly due to Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction 
(DMI)-induced spin canting16-21 or uncompensated magnetic moments at defects and 
interfaces due to surface reconstruction15,16,22. DMI-induced net magnetic moments usually 
give the orthogonal relation with the Néel vector, i.e. δm⊥n (Fig. 1a), while interface-
induced net magnetic moments are parallel (antiparallel) to the Néel vector, i.e. δm//n (Fig. 
1b). The ambiguous origin of the net magnetic moment and its orientation relation with the 
Néel vector will cause the reliability issue of SOT switching in antiferromagnets. Moreover, 
the 180° switching of Néel vector encounters a similar challenge to the SOT switching in 
