Tools and methodology
59
this effect into account, we supplement the experimental uncertainties with a covariance matrix,
computed as in Section 2.2.2, now starting from the shifts between predictions evaluated on a
proton and on a nuclear PDF from the nNNPDF2.0 set [227].
The NNPDF4.0 analysis comprehends a vast number of new datapoints from LHC measurements
with respect to previous PDF analysis. This is visible in Fig. 2.11, where we display the
kinematic coverage in the (x, Q2) plane. While the majority of datapoints still belongs to the
DIS data (roughly 50 %), the hadronic processes are essential to constrain specific PDFs flavor
combinations or kinematic regions. Drell-Yan data provide a handle on the quark-antiquark
flavor separation and allow the determination of the valence distributions, especially in the
peak region at x ≥0.05. In particular, LHC forward measurements are sensitive both to high Q2
small-x and large-x regions, providing an independent constrain with respect to the information
carried by small-x, low-Q2 HERA data and the fixed target DY data. Jets data are crucial to
shape the gluon PDF, with dijet being more constraining also on the small-x region. Top data
are found to have a mild impact of the up and down PDFs, while being potentially sensitive also
to a bottom quark PDF. Finally, the direct photon measurements can affect the mid-x gluon PDF.
2.3.3. NNLO baseline and MHOU set
We now turn to the description of the NNPDF4.0 PDFs set. For simplicity, we focus on the NNLO
PDF set with fitted charm, discussing quality of the fit and then the impact of the inclusion of
MHOU. The final NNPDF4.0 NNLO PDFs are shown in Fig. 2.12 both at a low (Q = 3.2 GeV)
and a high (Q = 100 GeV) scale. The relative uncertainty of almost all the NNLO baseline
PDFs is of the order of 1-2 % in the region probed by experimental data. This underscores
the importance of treating theoretical errors appropriately and studying the N3LO effects. The
NNPDF4.0 set is consistent with the previous NNPDF3.1 set, but it improves the PDF accuracy
by a factor of 30 −50 % in most of the kinematic regions probed by the data.
Fit quality.
In Table 2.1 we report the number of data points and the χ2 per data point in the
NLO and NNLO NNPDF4.0 PDF determinations before and after inclusion of MHOUs. When
MHOUs are included, the theory covariance matrix is computed with a 7-point prescription.
Note that the MHOU contribution is respectively excluded or included both in the definition
of the χ2 used by the NNPDF algorithm (i.e. for pseudodata generation and in training and
validation loss functions), and in the covariance matrix used to compute the values given in
Table 2.1. Datasets are aggregated according to the process categorization of Section 2.2.2:
correlations among different groups are lost when showing χ2 values for data subsets, thus, the
total χ2 shown in the last row is not the weighted average of individual values.
Fit quality is generally good, with the total χ2 being closer to the unity for the NNLO fits. One
can notice the clear improvement in the description of the data once NNLO corrections are
included. This is visible in particular for the NC DIS, DY and top pair which are high precision
measurements; on the other hand the low χ2 of single top and prompt photon data can be
