Addressing Relative Degree Issues in Control Barrier Function
Synthesis with Physics-Informed Neural Networks
Lukas Brunke1, Siqi Zhou1, Francesco D’Orazio2, and Angela P. Schoellig1
Abstract— In robotics, control barrier function (CBF)–based
safety filters are commonly used to enforce state constraints.
A critical challenge arises when the relative degree of the
CBF varies across the state space. This variability can create
regions within the safe set where the control input becomes
unconstrained. When implemented as a safety filter, this may
result in chattering near the safety boundary and ultimately
compromise system safety. To address this issue, we propose
a novel approach for CBF synthesis by formulating it as
solving a set of boundary value problems. The solutions to
the boundary value problems are determined using physics-
informed neural networks (PINNs). Our approach ensures that
the synthesized CBFs maintain a constant relative degree across
the set of admissible states, thereby preventing unconstrained
control scenarios. We illustrate the approach in simulation and
further verify it through real-world quadrotor experiments,
demonstrating its effectiveness in preserving desired system
safety properties.
I. INTRODUCTION
In robotics, safety filters are gaining increasing attention
as a means of providing safety guarantees to learning-
based control methods that are not inherently designed to be
safe [2]. A common approach to safety filter design involves
the use of control barrier functions (CBFs) [3]–[5]. When
augmenting a system with a CBF-based safety filter, the
objective is to certify or minimally adjust the control com-
mands computed by an otherwise unsafe policy. This idea
has been applied across a wide range of robotic problems,
including, but not limited to, manipulation, locomotion, as
well as autonomous driving and flight.
In the CBF safety filter literature, while both continuous-
time and discrete-time implementations have been proposed,
it is common to use a continuous-time formulation of
CBFs [4], [6]. This is due to the fact that, for control-affine
systems, a continuous-time formulation leads to a quadratic
program (QP) that can be solved efficiently online [3], [4].
However, a subtle but important issue often overlooked in
this setting is the problem of varying relative degrees. The
relative degree determines the number of times the barrier
function must be differentiated before the control input
appears explicitly. If this property is not properly checked,
the resulting safety filter may become inactive in the safe set.
When such points lie close to the safe set boundary, this can
lead to chattering or even constraint violations [1]. Notably,
1Learning Systems and Robotics Lab and the Munich Institute of
Robotics and Machine Intelligence, Technical University of Munich, 80333
Munich, Germany. Email: firstname.lastname@tum.de
2Department
of
Computer,
Control
and
Management
Engi-
neering,
Sapienza
University
of
Rome,
Rome,
Italy.
E-mail:
lastname@diag.uniroma1.it.








(a) Compact safe set.


(b) Level sets of two CBFs covering different segments of the safe set boundary.
Fig. 1: An illustration of our proposed approach where we leverage multiple
control barrier functions (CBFs) to mitigate the varying relative degree issue
in certifying compact safe sets [1]. In this work, we introduce an alternative
perspective by formulating CBF synthesis as boundary value problems,
which are solved using physics-informed neural networks (PINNs). This
approach allows us to mitigate the relative degree issue without conservative
safe set approximations. (a) As an example, a non-convex, compact safe set
is parameterized by multiple CBFs, each covering a segment of the safe
set boundary. (b) The level sets of two representative CBFs are shown. The
flexibility of PINNs allows us to closely approximate the original safe set
boundary for both convex segments and non-convex segments (highlighted
in red between two crosses in the top panel).
this issue can arise even in the simple case of linear systems
with quadratic CBFs.
In recent work, several approaches have been proposed
to address this issue. Some of the approaches include using
multiple CBFs with affine or quadratic forms [1], [7], [8],
reformulating the safety filter QP to relax the assumption on
uniform relative degree [9], introducing penalization terms
to numerically mitigate chattering [1], and reconstructing
CBFs such that the inactivity issue does not compromise
safety during task execution [1], [10]. While effective, these
approaches often rely on conservative approximations of
the safe set or only address the problem in an ad-hoc
manner (i.e., a CBF is first constructed and then verified
arXiv:2504.06242v1  [eess.SY]  8 Apr 2025
