4
in the MOT cloud (projected along the line of sight of
the camera).
The images i-iv in Fig.
3.b are representations of the
difference images taken with the MW field present mi-
nus the image taken without MW. Image v illustrates
the background noise (acquired without the MW field),
and image vi was acquired without the excitation of Ry-
dberg atoms to illustrate the cold-cloud atomic distribu-
tion and size. Dashed white lines in images i-v indicate
the approximate path of the IR and blue Rydberg excit-
ing lasers across the atomic cloud.
Figures 3.b.i-iii correspond to different exposure times
te of the cold cloud to Rydberg excitation and MW
radiation (if present).
For these images the MW was
tuned to 14.5 GHz, corresponding to the minimum
absorption in Fig.
2.b.
Image iv was taken with the
MW tuned to the position of the absorption peak near
the 55D3/2 →54F5/2 transition frequency (∼14.0 GHz).
A reduction of the number of atoms around the region
illuminated by the Rydberg exciting laser beams as a
result of the MW radiation is visible in images i-iii. We
interpret the reduction as removal of atom pairs by the
dipole - dipole force induced by the MW. The depleted
region grows in directions transverse to the exciting
laser beams as the irradiation time with MW radiation
increases. This growth is the result of diffusion between
the region illuminated by the Rydberg exciting beams
and the remaining of the cold cloud.
No significant
change (above noise level) in the atomic population with
and without MW can be seen in image iv.
Additional
information
on
the
cold-atom
loss-
mechanisms involved in the experiment can be obtained
from Fig.4. The figure shows the transient evolution of
the atomic cloud fluorescence for a MOT operating under
constant conditions (all trapping beams on) in the pres-
ence of the IR probe beam, whose effect on the MOT
operation is negligible.
At t = 0, after the MOT has
been loaded, the blue light is turned on under different
conditions. In trace iii the MW field is present with its
frequency tuned to 14.5 GHz, corresponding to the min-
imum absorption in Fig. 2.b.
In trace i the blue light frequency is not locked to the
Rydberg two-photon transition (detuning ∼0.2 GHz).
The observed loss of atoms presumably results from
ionization of atoms in the 5P3/2 level by blue photons.
The decay rate determined by an exponential fit is γB =
(357 ms)−1. In traces ii and iii the blue light has been
locked to the two-photon resonance to the 55D3/2 state.
The increased decay rate is now γRy = (173 ms)−1
indicating a significant role played by Rydberg atoms in
the cold cloud atomic losses. Several mechanisms may
be involved in such losses including: free flight and fall
under gravity of Rydberg atoms insensitive to the MOT
forces, inter-atomic forces between Rydberg atoms due
to the vdW interaction or black-body radiation mediated
DDI, cold atom collision and ionization [31, 32]. Trace
FIG. 4.
a) Time sequence (same notation as in Fig.2, FW:
fluorescence detection interval). b) Transient evolution of the
cloud fluorescence i) Blue light unlocked to the two-photon
transition. ii) Blue light locked to the Rydberg two-photon
excitation resonance. iii) Same as ii) in the presence of MW
radiation (14.5 GHz). The white solid lines are exponential
fits.
iii corresponds to a total decay rate γMW = (127 ms)−1
revealing the existence of an additional MW-induced
loss mechanism.
Figure 5 presents the change IR absorption and cloud
fluorescence, relative to their value in the absence of MW,
as a function of the MW frequency recorded sequentially
in each cold cloud realization.
The cloud fluorescence
was recorded 1 ms second after turning off the Rydberg
atom excitation by the blue light. This interval is long
enough to allow excited atoms to return to the ground
state. The fluorescence peak observed near 14 GHz is
due to a reduction of the Rydberg excitation probabil-
ity and consequently a reduction of the Rydberg-atoms-
depending atom-loss mechanism operating in Fig. 4.ii.
As will be further argued in the theoretical discussion, no
significant increase in the Rydberg atom excitation prob-
ability is expected for MW frequencies detuned from the
transition frequencies between individual-atom Rydberg
states. In consequence, the reduction of the fluorescence
for MW frequencies above 14 GHz appears as an indica-
tion of the reduction of the total number of atoms present
in the MOT. Similar patterns are observed in both the
absorption and fluorescence spectra in Fig. 5 strongly
suggesting a common origin for the corresponding struc-
tures.
