resetting rate and assess the optimal rate, providing the highest acceleration. It is worth
noting that sharp resetting is guaranteed to provide acceleration equal to or higher than any
other resetting protocol when performed using the optimal resetting timer T.74
We acknowledge that sampling ﬁrst-passage events without resetting for transitions be-
tween metastable states that are separated by high free energy barriers can be very challeng-
ing for standard MD simulations, due to the long timescales. When considering applying
resetting as a standalone method, we assume some trajectories are already available to esti-
mate the COV.
In addition, one can sample trajectories with an initial guess of resetting rate r∗. An
approach that we found useful5 is to start with a rate that is on the same order of magnitude,
but slighty larger, than a rough estimate of the reciprocal of the MFPT. It often provides
some acceleration, and we then optimize the resetting rate in the following way: In the
case of Poisson resetting, one ﬁrst evaluates the Laplace transform of the FPT distribution
fr∗(τ) under resetting rate r∗through Equation 3. Then, the MFPT under any resetting
rate r = r∗+ ∆r is given by a generalization of Equation 2,5
⟨τ⟩r = 1 −˜fr∗(∆r)
∆r ˜fr∗(∆r)
.
(6)
In the case of sharp resetting, we note that the segments between restarts exactly sample
the survival function without resetting up to the chosen time duration T ∗. As Equation 4
only requires the survival up to the resetting time, one can use the sampled trajectories to
assess the MFPT for any timer T < T ∗. Both approaches predict whether using higher rates
than the initial guess will lead to higher acceleration without additional sampling.
Finally, we stress that all the equations above hold for a general stochastic process,
and particularly simulations which employ enhanced sampling techniques.
In that case,
estimating the COV is easier. Given a few samples, even with suboptimal collective variables,
one can estimate the COV and use Equations 2 and 4 to ﬁnd a beneﬁcial resetting rate, with
zero computational cost. As we will explain in detail in Section 4.2, we believe a combined
approach is often the most useful approach.39 Detailed examples of all of these use cases will
be given in Setion 4.
3.2
Adaptive resetting
In standard resetting, the resetting times are independent of the progress of the stochastic
process. However, higher accelerations can be achieved by incorporating information on the
state of the system into the resetting rate, e.g., by measuring the distance from the target
state in CV space.41,75 We call such state- and, possibly, time-dependent resetting protocols
adaptive resetting. By employing an adaptive resetting rate r (X), one can avoid undesired
restarts when the system is close to the target, or encourage frequent restarts when getting
stuck in undesirable metastable states away from the target. Here and onward, X stands
for the coordinates of the system, either Cartesian or in a low-dimensional CV space.
The key diﬃculty in employing state-dependent resetting is that the general theory of
SR we just reviewed does not hold for state-dependent resetting. It stems from the fact
that, unlike in standard resetting, samples of the FPT distribution are insuﬃcient, and
7
