the PBH-dominated phase occurs due to the decay of the scalar field into radiation, which
modifies the actual constraints on the abundance of PBH. Then, we analyze the production
of induced GWs by the Poissonian fluctuations of the PBH fluid. To our knowledge, this
is the first time it has been studied in the literature.
This work is organized as follows: We begin in Sec. 2 by defining an analytical ex-
pression for our power spectrum and giving some details on the preheating period and the
parameters of the model. Then, in Sec. 3, we describe the dynamics of a PBH-dominated
phase, from the collapse of perturbations to the power spectrum of the PBH density fluc-
tuations. The results for the induced GWs are obtained in Sec. 4, as well as a comparison
with previous studies in the literature. Conclusions are given in Sec. 5, and appendices A,
B, and C show some analytical estimations of the mass fraction of PBH and the fractional
energy densities of PBH and GWs, respectively. Throughout the paper, we consider mostly
positive metric signature (−+ ++), set ℏ= c = 1 and consider the units of reduced Planck
mass M2
p =
1
8πG = 2.4 × 1018GeV.
2
Inflation and preheating
As stated in the introduction, we consider an inflationary power spectrum with a Gaussian
peak.
According to Planck’s 2018 results [67, 68], the inflationary power spectrum of
curvature perturbations Rk can be parametrized as follows
Pinf
R (k) = As
 k
k0
ns−1
,
(2.1)
where As = 2.1 × 10−9 is the amplitude of the power spectrum at the pivot scale k0 =
0.05Mpc−1, and ns ≃0.965 is the spectral index. Motivated by other works [29–48] (see
the introduction), we introduce a Gaussian peak in the power spectrum, and choose to
parametrize it as a log-normal-like distribution, given by
Ppeak
R
(k) = Apeak exp
"
−(log10(k/kpeak))2
σ2
#
,
(2.2)
where Apeak is the amplitude at the peak scale kpeak and the standard deviation of the
Gaussian is chosen to be σ = 0.2 to reduce the number of free parameters. Eqn. (2.2) is
useful for this work as it avoids the tails of the Gaussian peak (due to the log10 term), and
since it constitutes a two-parameter (Apeak and kpeak) model-independent parametrization
that can reflect the physics of the models described in [29–48]. The total power spectrum
is the sum of the contributions from (2.1) and (2.2), that is
PR(k) = Pinf
R (k) + Ppeak
R
(k).
(2.3)
In Fig. 1 we show some examples of the power spectrum (2.3) along with several current
(continuous) and forecasted (dashed) constraints on the power spectrum.
The dotted-
dashed constraints from PBH represent non-standard scenarios that depend on the detailed
nature of Dark Matter, which is currently unknown, as well as on the details of the Hawking
– 3 –
