length scale) to diffusion, and it therefore follows that the Rainy number is the more
useful parameter for describing the state of the moist system.
For the idealised climate change scenario (comparing the black solid line to the
dashed red line, for fixed RHsurf) we see an increase in Ryc in Figure 12. The critical
Rainy number increases as a result of increased moisture levels (associated with
warmer surface temperatures): both the parcel and (basic state) environment profiles
become warmer, increasing curvature of the moist pseudoadiabat, and result in an
increase in CIN (and the LFC - see Figure 4). With increased levels of inhibition,
pCAPE must be higher for the system to become unstable, and so Ryc increases under
climate change. The increased levels of inhibition and the higher levels of available
potential energy point to an intensified water cycle, characterised by stronger (w2/2 ∼
pCAPE) more intermittent (higher CIN) convection. It is worth noting that Ryc is
independent of bsurf and r in the saturated limit, however Rac varies significantly,
indicating that pCAPE ∼1/Rac as RHsurf →1 (since the LFC →0).
Figure 12.
Critical Rayleigh (top left), Rainy (top right) and wavenumber (bottom left), and the highest
frequency (bottom right) as functions of the surface relative humidity. The different line colours represent
different surface temperature increases, and the different line styles represent different radiative cooling rates.
The idealised climate change scenario involves going from the black solid line to the red dashed line, keeping
the surface relative humidity fixed.
The critical wavenumber provides information about the width of the linear
modes (i.e. updraft and subsiding regions). Note that the width of the updraft and
subsiding regions are necessarily equal in the linear analysis, however this is not
typically observed in non-linear simulations (Agasthya et al. 2025). The linear theory
does provide an initial indication of how we may expect convective plume widths to
scale with the climate parameters. Examining the bottom left panel of Figure 12,
we see that under the climate change scenario, if RHsurf > 0.6, kc decreases and the
updraft and subsiding regions get wider. However, if RHsurf < 0.6, we see the opposite
24
