the mean SWS as a function of frequency (data points), along with a power law fitting (black 
trendline) for ex vivo bovine liver. Here again, we have an excellent fit of the power law with 
the estimated SWS across different frequencies, which shows the viscoelastic behavior of liver 
tissue can be perfectly defined under the power law equation even in the high-frequency range. 
The power law fit of SWS for the bovine liver has the exponent of 0.51, indicating a high 
viscosity component.  
 
Fig. 13. The mean SWS estimated using multi-frequency OCE on an ex vivo bovine liver across different 
excitation frequencies, along with a power law fit (black trendline) 
 
6. Conclusion 
This study demonstrated the effectiveness of multi-frequency reverberant shear wave 
elastography in both simulated and experimental settings, highlighting its potential for precise 
SWS estimation in heterogeneous media. By generating a reverberant shear wave field and 
analyzing the wave fields using the AIA approach, we were able to accurately measure SWS 
across multiple frequencies in a simulated two-sided medium, homogeneous gelatin phantoms, 
ex vivo porcine corneas and an ex vivo bovine liver tissues. The results showed that the 
estimated SWS values closely aligned with the defined model parameters in simulations, with 
less than 4% error across all frequencies. In the phantom assessment, consistent SWS and power 
law exponent estimation were observed for both MFR-OCE and single-frequency OCE across 
three different frequencies. The estimated power law exponent of 0.13 in MFR-OCE, indicates 
the low dispersion, nearly elastic behavior of the gelatin phantom. Furthermore, there was close 
agreement between SWS estimates from single-frequency and multi-frequency excitations, 
with a less than 3% difference, demonstrating that the MFR-OCE approach effectively isolates 
individual frequency components and provides accurate SWS estimates. The MFR-OCE results 
for the porcine cornea and bovine liver samples indicated that MFR-OCE is an effective 
approach to evaluating the viscoelastic behavior of different tissues. The excellent fit of the 
power law model with the estimated results confirmed that the dispersion behavior of both the 
cornea and liver can be well-defined by the power law model, even in the high-frequency range. 
The power law exponent of 0.33 for the porcine cornea and 0.51 for the bovine liver indicated 
moderate viscoelastic behavior for the cornea and high viscoelastic behavior for the liver. These 
findings underscore the potential of MFR-OCE as a robust tool for tissue characterization, 
offering enhanced diagnostic capabilities, particularly in assessing complex viscoelastic 
materials. Further research is required to address the limitations on the bandwidth, and spatial-
temporal resolution of this approach.  We utilized a range of 500-2500 Hz shear wave 
excitations.  Lower frequencies have the disadvantage of longer wavelengths requiring larger 
estimation windows, degrading spatial resolution.  Higher frequencies have the disadvantage 
of higher attenuation and higher temporal sampling requirements. The optimal range may vary 
with the type of sample under study and will need to be determined experimentally. The method 
