Fractional chiral second-order topological insulator from a three-dimensional
array of coupled wires
Viktoriia Pinchenkova,1 Katharina Laubscher,2 and Jelena Klinovaja1
1Department of Physics, University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 82, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland
2Condensed Matter Theory Center and Joint Quantum Institute,
Department of Physics, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
(Dated: April 9, 2025)
We construct a model of a three-dimensional chiral second-order topological insulator (SOTI)
from an array of weakly coupled nanowires. We show that, in a suitable parameter regime, the
interplay between rotating magnetic fields and spatially modulated interwire tunnelings leads to the
opening of gaps in the bulk and surface spectrum of the system, while one or more chiral hinge states
propagating along a closed path of one-dimensional hinges are left gapless. The exact path of these
hinge states is determined by the hierarchy of interwire couplings and the boundary termination of
the sample. Depending on the ratio between the period of the rotating magnetic field and the Fermi
wavelength, our model can realize both integer and fractional chiral SOTIs. The fractional regime
emerges in the presence of strong electron-electron interactions and features hinge states carrying
only a fraction e/p of the electronic charge e for a positive odd integer p.
I.
INTRODUCTION
For conventional topological insulators (TIs) and su-
perconductors, the so-called bulk-boundary correspon-
dence predicts that a system with a topologically nontriv-
ial d-dimensional bulk hosts topologically protected gap-
less states at its (d−1)-dimensional boundaries. Recently,
however, the classification of topological systems has
been further extended to also include so-called higher-
order topological phases of matter [1–8].
In contrast
to conventional TIs, nth-order TIs host protected gap-
less states only at their (d −n)-dimensional boundaries,
while all higher-dimensional boundaries as well as the
bulk remain insulating.
For example, two-dimensional
(three-dimensional) second-order TIs have a gapped bulk
and gapped edges (gapped surfaces), but host topologi-
cally protected zero-energy corner states (gapless hinge
states).
While the original theory of higher-order TIs (HOTIs)
is based on single-particle band theory, it is also possible
to extend some of the underlying concepts to strongly
interacting systems [9–18]. This is particularly interest-
ing since interaction-driven first-order phases such as the
fractional quantum Hall (FQH) states are well-known to
exhibit various exotic properties that cannot be realized
in free-fermion systems. For example, quasiparticle ex-
citations in these systems can carry fractional quantum
numbers (e.g., fractional charge) and obey anyonic braid-
ing statistics, making them potentially useful for topo-
logical quantum computing.
It is therefore interesting
to study if and how similar exotic phases—potentially
in even richer variety—might emerge in the higher-order
case. However, while non-interacting HOTIs are fairly
well understood by now, the study of strongly interact-
ing HOTIs is still at an early stage.
One of the challenges in this context is to study
interaction-driven phases analytically at the micro-
scopic level since electron-electron interactions have
to be included nonperturbatively.
Among the few
approaches that allow one to construct analytically
tractable toy models for strongly interacting phases
is the so-called coupled-wires approach [19, 20], where
higher-dimensional systems are constructed from arrays
of weakly coupled one-dimensional (1D) wires. Within
each wire, the electron-electron interactions can then be
readily incorporated via standard 1D bosonization tech-
niques [21], while the coupling between neighboring wires
is taken into account as a small perturbation in a sec-
ond step. This approach has turned out to be extremely
useful in studies of various exotic interacting first-order
topological phases of matter in two and three dimen-
sions, including, for example, FQH states [19, 20, 22–25],
fractional quantum anomalous Hall (QAH) states [26],
fractional TIs [27–32], and fractional topological super-
conductors [32–34].
Furthermore, it has been demon-
strated that the coupled-wires approach can be applied
to second-order topological phases, but only a very lim-
ited number of examples of such constructions exist to
date [11–15].
In this work, we extend the family of known coupled-
wires systems by constructing a three-dimensional (3D)
model that is capable of realizing various chiral second-
order TI (SOTI) phases. This model captures both in-
teger SOTI phases with l chiral hinge states (here l is a
positive integer) and fractional SOTI phases that emerge
in the presence of strong electron-electron interactions.
The latter feature hinge states that carry a fractional
charge e/p, where e is the elementary electron charge and
p is a positive odd integer. Furthermore, the topological
phases constructed here can be seen as second-order QAH
phases since the total magnetization in the model is set
to zero.
The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we intro-
duce the 3D coupled-wires model that we study in this
work. In Sec. III, we demonstrate that, for a suitable
choice of system parameters, this model hosts gapless
arXiv:2504.06101v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  8 Apr 2025
