2
FIG. 1. Left: Optical chopping setup (without its copper enclosure “lid”), shown on the test bench. The reflective focusing
unit brings monochromatic photons entering the package via fiber optic onto a stationary mirror that directs the beam onto a
tilt-able MEMS mirror of diameter dr = 4.6 mm. The voltage-controlled MEMS mirror is then used to scan the photon beam
over an exit “slit” or fiber with a diameter of 105 um. The result is a focused, chopped beam of light on a device-under-test
(not shown). Right: Simplified diagram (not to scale) of the optical path inside the MEMS scanner unit. The focusing unit
includes a reflective collimator unit of focal length fc = 33 mm and a separate off-axis parabolic mirror (OAP) of focal length
f0 = 203 mm. The center of the MEMS mirror is located a distance la = 84 mm away from the exit port.
wavelength-independent pulse width below 5 µs. We con-
clude by discussing next steps for this system, including
extension to longer wavelengths for future implementa-
tions and continued reduction in focal point spot size.
II.
MEMS SCANNER DESIGN
The cryogenic, MEMS-based photon scanning system
used for this work is shown in Figure 1. The main unit
contains three key components: a reflective or refractive
focusing unit assembly, a stationary mirror, and a tilt-
able MEMS mirror. The system is coupled to a room-
temperature photon source via fiber optics. To ensure
adequate initial alignment to the external laser system,
the MEMS unit and the stationary mirror are separately
attached to dedicated precision mounts that provide each
component with three translational plus one rotational
degrees of freedom. An attractive feature of MEMS mir-
rors is that they work well at all temperatures between
our 10 mK design temperature and 300 K.
The specific system shown in Figure 1 and described
in this paper is similar to the previous version presented
in Ref [14], but the new unit includes several critical up-
grades and uses a reflective collimator unit in place of the
original refractive optics. The design modifications that
led to the new system were driven by two main goals: (i)
to provide broad-band performance and remove the need
for wavelength-specific focusing optics, and (ii) to enable
careful exploration of the system at ∼20 mK when using
chopped and/or swept beams over a range of optical and
near-IR wavelengths.
These requirements, combined with the desire to have
a relatively long lever arm to maximize scan range across
a detector mounted at the exit port of the full unit,
preclude the use of refractive microscope objectives. In
addition, the requirement for the input to couple to a
cryogenic-friendly, SMA-terminated fiber drove us away
from integrated magnifier designs used for microscopy,
towards a separate collimator and focusing system that
can provide greater design freedom. In the final scan-
ner design shown in Figure 1, the focusing unit includes
a reflective fiber collimator mounted ∼cm away from a
parabolic mirror. The role of the stationary mirror shown
in the figure is to extend the optical path-length within
the compact unit, and redirect the focused beam onto
the MEMS mirror.
Below, we describe the recent optimization and en-
hanced modularity of the focusing unit. We show that
the new system produces smaller-diameter and more uni-
form photon-beam spots than our original design, while
maintaining the excellent scan-range characteristics of
the older system. We then describe recent design modi-
fications to the final output stage of the scanner system
where it couples to the device under test, and discuss the
significance of these modifications.
A.
New Broadband Focuser
The new MEMS scanner focusing unit was designed
to replace a refractive-based focuser unit with a drop-
in, reflective unit that would not require re-design of the
full MEMS platform. Taking this approach ensured that
our existing systems could be easily retrofitted for broad-
band operation.
As shown in Appendix B, when the
MEMS mirror is ignored, the focusing unit itself is just a
magnifier, and the beam spot size is minimized by max-
imizing the effective focal length of the collimator for a
fixed output focal length. In addition, when this system
is used as an optical chopper, the output focal length
effectively cancels out of the pulse width equation, and
