Broadband Optical Modulation and Control at Millikelvin Temperatures
N. Tabassum,1, 2 T. Aralis,1, 2, ∗J. Anczarski,1, 2 D. Baxter,3 B. Cabrera,1, 2 R. Chapla,4 N. Entin,1, 2
L. Hsu,3 H.W. Magoon,1, 2 A. Nunez,1, 2 J.L. Ryan,1, 2 M. Salatino,2 A. Simchony,1, 2 Z.J. Smith,1, 2
S. Stevens,1, 2 G. Perez,1, 2 H. Stueber,1, 2 B.A. Young,4 N.A. Kurinsky,1, 2 and K. Stifter1, 2, †
1SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, California 94025, USA
2Kavli Institute for Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94035, USA
3Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Center for Particle Astrophysics, Batavia, IL 60510 USA
4Santa Clara University, Santa Clara, CA 95053, USA
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
A universal experimental challenge when studying radiation effects on cryogenic devices is to
precisely and accurately characterize the position-dependent device response very near the energy
detection threshold. We have developed a compact cryogenic optical beam steering system that
can be used to generate O(µs) pulses of small numbers of photons over the energy range of 1.2
- 4.5eV at room temperature, and deliver those photons via fiber optic to any specified location
on the surface of a detector operating at cryogenic temperatures. This new system will allow for
robust calibration of any photon-sensitive detector, including supercondcting devices. The system
can be used efficiently to explore the physics of target materials, quantify the position sensitivity of
different sensor designs, measure phonon transport, and study the effects of quasiparticle poisoning
on detector operation. We describe the design of this pulsed calibration method and present first
results obtained with a second-generation system operated at room temperature and sub-Kelvin
temperatures.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The radiation response of cryogenic devices is an ex-
perimentally interesting question for a number of fields.
For telescope applications, it is usually suitable to test
sensors in a built environment with a fake focal plane.
For the newest generation of far-IR telescopes, however,
room-temperature radiation precludes the use of sources
above 4 K, and 4 K backgrounds represent a critical back-
ground themselves (see e.g. Refs [1, 2]). For other sensi-
tive applications, such as operating high-coherence qubits
or rare-event detectors, calibrating spatial response of de-
vices comes into conflict with the requirement to optically
isolate these devices from the outside world. External ra-
diation sources can be used to provide controlled radia-
tive doses, but these events are often both too energetic
and randomly positioned to help inform detailed mod-
els of charge and energy transport (see e.g. Refs [3, 4]).
Optical fibers can be used to deliver more precisely tar-
geted photons, but without additional components to
move the optical beam, only limited spatial information
can be gleaned from a given experimental setup (see e.g.
Refs[5–7]).
Some limited control over X-ray and opti-
cal sources can be achieved with commerically available
peizo-electric stages, but these lead to substantial heat-
ing during each movement (see e.g. Ref [8]), limiting scan
fidelity and consistency between measurements.
Some of the authors of this paper have historically
been involved in developing this MEMs mirror-based
technique for cryogenic optical control, first at 0.5 K[9–
∗taralis@slac.stanford.edu
† kstifter@slac.stanford.edu
13] in a 4 K photon bath, and more recently isother-
mally at 10 mK[14]. All of these systems notably used
custom-built refractive fiber focusers, with the majority
of measurements taking place at a single wavelength, and
used monochromatic laser or LED sources. For the final
measurement with the 0.5 K system, the photo-electric
cross-section of Si was measured as a function of wave-
length, which required swapping in a new focuser for each
measurement[13]. This data was nonetheless very useful,
and led to a desire for an intrinsically broad-band system
that could provide monochromatic operation over a wide
wavelength range by simply swapping out LEDs at room
temperature.
In discussing the need for this broad-band system, the
general architecture of a multiple-mirror system was de-
veloped, in which a first mirror could generate temporal
pulses from a filtered broad-band source, and a second
mirror could steer those pulses to create a spatially and
temporally resolved map of device response.
In this paper, we document the first development steps
towards this concept, in which we have developed a
broad-band scanner/optical chopper and measured its
performance across about a decade in wavelength, from
280 nm to 970 nm.
First, in Section II, we describe
the design modifications required to move from refrac-
tive optics to broad-band reflective optics, based around
a small multi-mode input optical fiber. We summarize
the expected optical performance when using this device
to couple light back into a larger multi-mode output fiber.
In Section III, we report on the optical performance of
the focusing system, both on its own as well as when
installed in the scanner and re-coupled into an output
fiber, the latter case including tests at 300 K and 10 mK.
Finally, we present 300 K and 10 mK measurements of
the system used as an optical chopper, demonstrating a
arXiv:2504.06995v1  [physics.ins-det]  9 Apr 2025
