Multilevel Quantum Rabi Models
10
Figure 4. Approximate analytical estimates of (a) E[λ1] (Eqs. 16 and 17), and (b)
Var[λ1] (Eq. 18), plotted against numerically calculated Monte-Carlo averages of these
estimates from 1000 random systems for each n, with n = m.
which tends to be very small for large n, m, but otherwise does not have a simple
asymptotic formula. Figures 4(a)(b) compare our approximate estimates for the average
and variance of the largest singular value (Eqs. 16 and 18) to a Monte-Carlo sampled
average of these values over 1000 random systems as a function of n(= m). The estimates
derived do indeed work well, especially for the expected value. Indeed, Eq. 16 agrees
with the simulations all the way down to n = 2, representing a significant improvement
over the asymptotic result, 2√n. Our variance estimate is less good for small n, due
to higher moments being more susceptible to compounding errors caused by successive
approximations, but improves quickly as n increases. The variance plotted in Fig. 4(b)
confirms that, even for randomized coupling matrices, the system exhibits relatively
predictable behaviour, with the variance decreasing as n increases. This implies that
for all but the very smallest systems, a stable coupling boost ∼2√n should be a fairly
stable feature of samples taken from the ensemble of many-level QRM system with
random couplings.
4.3. Energy Level Distribution for Random couplings
We now look more broadly at the distribution of the energy levels for randomly coupled
systems, going beyond just those controlled by the largest singular value.
Figure 5
maps the density of the energy levels from 600 systems with n = m = 5 as a function of
the largest coupling strength, λ1. The systems have coupling matrices drawn from the
random distribution Λij ∼λ1C N (0, 1)/[MaxSVC N (0, 1)], where here λ1 is simply a
scale factor varied to change the overall strength of the couplings and [MaxSVC N (0, 1)]
is the maximum singular value of the corresponding sampling from the C N (0, 1)
distribution.
Thus, by construction, the value of the largest singular value is equal
to λ1 for each of the 600 sampled systems. Weak detunings have also been included,
ε/ω = 0.05, with the individual detunings of both the ground and excited levels equally
spaced between −0.05ω and 0.05ω.
