Müller-Bravo et al.: SNe Ia NIR Analysis with PCA
samples are mostly biased towards very nearby SNe (z ≲0.04,
with only a few SNe, mostly from DEHVILS, between 0.04 <
z ≲0.08) and most likely bright events. However, at low red-
shifts K-corrections are expected to be small. Although the sam-
ples for the different bands have different number of SNe, we
note that their sBV distributions are approximately consistent,
with most SNe within the 0.8 < sBV < 1.2 range.
5.2. Light-curve decomposition
In Fig. 3, we show the YJH-band light curves (top, middle and
bottom rows, respectively) decomposed into three PCA com-
ponents. The first component (left column) captures most of
the contribution to the light-curve variability (∼45 −55%),
while the second one (middle column) has moderate contribution
(∼25 −35%), and the third component (right column) mainly
captures the remaining diversity (10%), although it could also
have contribution from noise within the data. In total, two PCA
components explain around 80% of the variability for each NIR
band, while three components explain 90%, demonstrating their
homogeneity.
Following the PCA decomposition, for each band X, the light
curve can be described as:
LCSN = LC +
N=3
X
i
Ci × pSN
i ,
(1)
where LC is the light-curve mean for the sample (solid red line
in Fig. 3), and the three (N = 3) components (Ci) are in common
for the entire sample used, while the coefficients (pi) depend on
each SN.
In the following section, we analyze what each of these com-
ponents represents, how they contribute to the NIR light-curve
shape, and look for correlations with other parameters.
6. Analysis
In the previous section, the NIR light curves were decomposed
using PCA. As a reminder to the reader, the PCA components
(Ci) are orthogonal, providing different but complementary in-
formation. This section provides a detailed discussion of these
components.
6.1. PCA components contribution to the NIR light curves
As can be seen from Fig. 3, the first PCA component (C0) in-
clude around half of the explained variance for each of the bands.
C0 behaves in a similar way for the J and H bands. That is, it
mainly describes how early or late the local minima and sec-
ondary peaks occur, with some contribution to the secondary
peak brightness. For the Y band, C0 mainly controls the depth
of the local minimum, including contribution to the timing of
the secondary peak as well, but with a somewhat opposite ef-
fect compared to the other two bands. This difference between
the bands might be surprising as one would expect the NIR light
curve to behave in a similar manner. However, the physical pro-
cesses that each wavelength range probes can differ (see further
below).
Examining the second PCA component (C1) reveals its pri-
mary contribution to the brightness of the secondary peak across
all bands, along with some influence on the timing of the sec-
ondary peak in the Y and H bands. However, it also controls the
depth of the local minima for the J and H bands, and the bright-
ness of the first peak for the H band. It is also worth noting that
the variability around first peak captured by the PCA on the Y
and J bands is relatively small, but not so much for the H band,
which could be due to a wider range in the phase of the first NIR
peak found at this latter band (Dhawan et al. 2015). We also find
a moderate correlation between C1 from the Y band and C0 from
the J and H bands. Additionally, C1 from the H band is particu-
larly similar to C0 from the Y band (see Fig. 3). This shows that
the different components trace similar behavior for all the NIR
bands, but with different relative importance.
As the third PCA component (C2) only contributes to ≲10%
of the variance in all bands, and as it could be capturing noise in
the data, we refrain from any interpretations and do not consider
it in the rest of the analysis. From here on, we will refer to the
PCA components (Ci) and coefficients (pi) interchangeably.
6.2. Physical interpretation of the PCA components
Interpreting PCA components presents a challenge due to the
complexity of the underlying physics governing NIR light
curves, where multiple physical processes are intertwined. K06
provides one of the few yet detailed theoretical models of SNe Ia
NIR light curves available, serving as the primary reference
for this study. In particular, K06 used radiative transfer calcu-
lations, assuming local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE), to
calculate optical and NIR light curves of SNe Ia, produced by
Chandrasekhar-mass WDs. They also studied the effect of three
main physical properties on the secondary NIR peak: the mixing
of 56Ni, the mass of 56Ni (MNi), and the mass of stable iron-group
elements (MFe) produced by electron-capture elements and as a
consequence of progenitor metallicity.
– Mixing: the mixing of iron-group elements, in particular
56Ni, into the outer layers of the ejecta hastens the occur-
rence of the secondary peak by increasing the extent of the
iron core. So, more mixing translates into an earlier sec-
ondary peak as the recombination of iron-group elements
(Fe iii→Fe ii) happens at earlier epochs.
– MNi: this parameter has two opposing effects. On the one
hand, a larger MNi implies a larger iron core, hastening the
appearance of the recombination of iron-group elements. On
the other hand, a larger MNi implies higher temperatures,
which means that the recombination temperature is reached
at later epochs as it takes longer to cool down. K06 showed
that the latter effect dominates over the former one.
– MFe: although SN Ia explosions primarily produce radioac-
tive 56Ni, some non-negligible fraction of stable iron-group
elements can be produced. The larger the amount of MFe pro-
duced by electron-capture elements (e.g. 57Co, 58Ni, 54Fe),
the larger the size of the iron core, which hastens the occur-
rence and increases the prominence of the secondary peak.
The progenitor metallicity also plays an important role in the
production of stable iron-group elements. When MFe is pro-
duced at expense of MNi, lower temperatures are reached,
producing an earlier and somewhat fainter secondary peak.
The variability captured by C0 for the J and H bands is dom-
inated by the timing of the secondary peak, with some degree
of dependence on its brightness (see Fig. 3). From the physical
properties studied by K06, MNi and metallicity produce a simi-
lar behavior as observed for this component, where SNe Ia with
later secondary peaks are also brighter. Ashall et al. (2019a) and
Ashall et al. (2019b) showed that the blue-edge velocity of the
Article number, page 5 of 16
