Space-averaged non-equilibrium Green’s function approach for quantum transport in 3D
6
3. Representative Applications for FV-NEGF
To verify the capability of our FV-NEGF method,
we consider electron transport through a 3D core-clad
nanowire. The nanowire consists of a silicon (Si) core
with a cross-sectional area of 2×2 nm2 in the yz-plane,
embedded in a silicon dioxide (SiO2) cladding with a
2 nm thickness. Here, the wire extends from 0 to 12 nm
along the x-axis. The [100] crystal orientation of Si is
aligned along the z-axis. Thus, the effective masses in
the Si core are defined as m∗
z = 0.9 (longitudinal) and
m∗
x,y =0.2 (transverse). For the SiO2 cladding, we set
m∗
x,y,z = 0.5 (isotropic). The conduction band offset
between Si and SiO2, U, is set to 3.1 eV . In Figs. 3(a)
and (b), we show our cross-sectional FV mesh and m∗
z
distribution in the 3D domain. Here, the number of
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
E (eV)
0
2
4
6
8
T(E)
𝐸! = 0.59
𝐸" = 1.02
𝐸# = 1.10
𝐸$ = 1.36
𝐸% = 1.60
𝐸& = 1.79
𝐸' = 0.33
(b)
𝑚!∗
𝑚#
(a)
(c)
Figure 3:
(a) Cross-sectional FV mesh.
The dots
on the circumference are boundary dots.
(b) The
ratio m∗
z/me in 3D as an example for non-isotropic
space-dependent material properties. (c) Transmission
function evaluated by FV-NEGF. FE method in 2D is
used to calculate cross sectional modes shown as inset
color plots. FE mesh is also plotted as an inset.
2D cells in the yz-plane is 900, and along the x-axis
there are 40 grid spaces. Quantum transport study is
then carried out by a home-built recursive NEGF code.
In Fig. 3(c), we plot the transmission function, T(E),
for a limited energy range such that seven steps are
included. We remind readers that the current-voltage
characteristic of a quantum wire at low temperature
follows T(E) which shows the typical step-like increase
(conductance step) as the electron energy (E) (bias
voltage) increases. Each conductance step corresponds
to the involvement of a new cross-sectional mode in
the transport.
Transport modes can be evaluated
by solving the Schr¨odinger equation with the same
input parameters in the 2D cross-sectional domain
(closed system).
In addition, seven cross-sectional
modes and corresponding eigenenergies are calculated
with the finite-element method and plotted as insets
in Fig. 3(c).
It is clear that the onset of the steps
aligns with the eigenenergies denoted by Ei, thereby
confirming the correctness of the methodology and its
numerical implementation. The LDOS(E) distribution
in the cross-sectional yz-plane resembles the mode
distributions shown in Fig. 3(c) (data not displayed for
brevity). Here, we refrain from quantifying the electron
density, as our analysis does not involve sweeping
the source-drain electrochemical potentials.
For the
second example, we introduce two 0.5 nm thick SiO2
separator layers (barrier) in the yz-plane.
In this
configuration, the left and right 1D wires (each 2 nm
long) connect to a central 2 nm isolated quantum
dot (0DEG), forming a 1DEG-0DEG-1DEG system,
as shown in Fig. 4(a). Here, we modify the meshing
style along the x-axis, such that grid space becomes
much finer (0.125 nm) in the area between the two
barriers. The transport characteristics of this system
can be understood as follows: (I) electrons tunnel from
the cross-sectional modes of the left 1DEG into the
bound states of the 0DEG (a fully confined region),
then into the right 1DEG (or vice versa), following
parallel tunneling mechanism.
(II) peaks in T(E)
are expected near the 0DEG eigenenergies, but their
broadening and energy shifts depend on the barrier
properties between the 1DEG wires and the 0DEG
(dot), following resonant tunneling mechanism. Here,
due to the high potential barrier, the broadening can be
very small, requiring a fine energy grid (dE) to resolve
the resonant peaks accurately. To address this, we have
used the FE method in 3D and numerically compute
the first six bound states of the 0DEG, as shown in
Fig. 4 (b) and (c). We then adopt much finer dEs near
these energies.
In fact, we intentionally choose thin
separators (0.5 nm) to induce slight broadening in the
resonance peaks. In Fig. 4(d) (I) and (II), resonance
peaks in T(E) are depicted with high resolution. The
resonance energy shifts can be obtained by subtracting
the eigenenergies shown in Fig. 4(c) from the resonance
energies presented in Fig. 4(d) (I) and (II). These shifts
are on the order of a few tens of meV. In addition,
doubly degenerate levels (at E4 = E5 and E6 = E7)
split when the 0DEG is connected to the 1DEGs on
the right and left. The local density of state (LDOS)
