6
Example: Revisiting ordinary groups
Previously in section 2 we reviewed anomaly resolution for ordinary groups. In this
section we will discuss how those results for ordinary groups can be understood in
the language of SymTFTs and (quasi-)Hopf algebras.
6.1
General picture in SymTFTs
We begin by outlining how anomaly resolution for ordinary groups is described in
terms of SymTFTs. In that language, the anomaly resolution is accomplished by a
club sandwich construction with one three-dimensional region contains a Dijkgraaf-
Witten theory for Γ (at vanishing level), bordered by another three-dimensional
region containing a Dijkgraaf-Witten theory for G at nonzero level (anomaly). The
choice of quantum symmetry β ∈H1(G,H1(K,U(1))) is implicitly encoded in the
topological interface between those two three-dimensional regions.
In the rest of the section, we will present a detailed case study for resolving
anomalous Z2 by extending to Z4.
6.2
Anomalous Z2 extended to Z4 via SymTFTs
In this subsection, we discuss how to realize the anomaly resolution for anomalous
Z2 extended to Z4 from 3D SymTFTs. This amounts to extending the SymTFT
for the anomalous Z2 into two SymTFTs slabs, one for anomalous Z2 and the
other for Z4, separated by topological interface. As investigated in e.g. [10], this
bulk construction classiﬁes the possible phases under Z4 symmetry, which we list
below
• The Z4 SPT phase, describing a totally trivially-acting Z4 symmetry.
• The ‘canonical’ Z4 gapless SPT phase, describing a fully eﬀectively-acting
Z4 symmetry.
• Another gapless SPT phase, describing a Z4 symmetry with trivially-acting
Z2 subgroup.
• Finally, there is an ‘intrinsically gapless’ SPT (igSPT) phase, which describes
our situation of interest – a Z4 symmetry with trivially-acting Z2 subgroup
in which the Z4/Z2 = Z2 quotient is anomalous.
Therefore, from a Z4 symmetry perspective, the 2D QFT with anomalous Z2
symmetry is an igSPT phase.
Before moving to an explicit 3D bulk investigation, let us ﬁrst brieﬂy discuss
from a purely 2D perspective for this anomaly resolution by turning on background
19
