we have found 9 type textures for the down-type quark mass matrices whose determinants are
real. This provides us with a solution to the strong CP problem. However, we have found
only three type textures remain, which we have called A1, A2 and A3 types. We have derived
all real parameters including the difference between the two phases in the matrix from the
experimental data of the CKM matrix and the observed quark masses.
We have extended the above model including the three right-handed neutrinos Ni (i =
1, 2, 3) to generate the neutrino masses and mixing. We have put them on the each fixed points
as for the case of 10i (i = 1, 2, 3). We have found this model predicts naturally the normal
hierarchy (NH) of the neutrino masses. The three type textures A1, A2 and A3 predict the
broad range of the CP violation parameter, δCP, as shown in Fig. 3. On the contrary, the key
parameter, mββ, for the double β decays of nuclei is predicted in a narrow region mββ ≃4meV
and (8 →10)meV as shown in Fig. 3.
We have also considered the case of two right-handed neutrinos Ns, since it is known that
two right-handed neutrinos are enough to produce the lepton asymmetry in the early universe
(leptogenesis) [12]. We have taken M1 = ∞or M3 = ∞to represent effectively the two cases
of the two right-handed neutrinos.
We have found the normal hierarchy (NH) for the first case M1 = ∞and the inverted
hierarchy (IH) for the second case M3 = ∞. We have found the NH case has a very narrow
prediction on δCP and on mββ as shown in Figs. 5 and 6, mββ ≃4meV and δCP ≃200◦or
250◦. It is very remarkable that the positive cosmological baryon asymmetry is reproduced for
M2 < M3 in this NH case 10.
Finally, we should note that all predictions are almost the same in the three types of the
textures A1, A2 and A3. Thus, the predictions in our models of two-zero textures are all given
in this paper.
Acknowledgments
T. T. Y. thanks Qiuyue Liang for discussion about two-zeros texture of quark and lepton
mass matrices. This work was in part supported by MEXT KAKENHI Grants No. 24H02244
(T. T. Y.). T. T. Y. was supported also by the Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC)
under Grant No. 12175134 as well as by World Premier International Research Center Initiative
(WPI Initiative), MEXT, Japan.
10The missing right-handed neutrino can be the dark matter, where we consider its Yukawa couplings are
vanishing instead of taking its mass infinity Mi = ∞.
11
