kinetic term rescaling factors scales with a lower power of η than the rescaling factors for the interactions
(see Eq. (143)). Third, the largest contribution (∼40 −50%) comes from the Coulomb interactions between
valence electrons which (see App. D) scales like the maximum momentum exchange Q in G0. In contrast,
the cost from Coulomb interactions between pseudoions is significantly smaller as it scales with the cutoff
Λtrunc and, importantly, not with the maximum momentum Q in G
0. Fourth, the local and non-local terms
capture a relatively modest fraction of the total rescaling, determined by the structure of the interactions
and HGH parameters, and the scaling becomes independent of the basis size in the limit of a large basis, due
to the Gaussian decay in momentum (see App. D). We also provide per-particle-pair rescaling factors for
the local and non-local terms in Table 8. While there is no steadfast rule, loosely speaking, a higher valence
electron count for a pseudoion increases its per-particle-pair rescaling factors.
In Fig. 7, we analyze the Toffoli cost of each call to the block-encoding unitary, Usa, in terms of its
constituent components corresponding to the Hamiltonian terms. Note that the quantum circuit as a whole
is designed such that gates common to the block-encoding of all Hamiltonian terms are performed only once
to reduce cost. These common gates are accounted for as a ‘shared’ cost and do not necessarily perform
operations relevant to any single Hamiltonian term (such as calculating the relevant matrix elements into
registers), but do account for the gates which combine block-encodings of different Hamiltonian terms via
LCU, and also for repeated Hamiltonian parts (e.g. SWUP operations). Furthermore, Vel and V PI
ion, and
Tel and Tion use common gates, e.g., computing |q|2 and |k|2, respectively, and hence the circuits block-
encoding these parts are designed optimally with shared gate costs. For the instances we studied, it is clear
that the dominant cost per call is caused by the operations relevant solely to the non-local term, attributed
to arithmetic and reference state preparation (in roughly equal proportion) for implicit quantum rejection
sampling. The next leading cost contribution is from the shared circuitry as explained above, the majority
of which is attributed to SWUPs.
We note that our block-encoding, both the mathematical expressions they are based on and implementa-
tion principles considered, differ from those in the literature. This results in substantially improved rescaling
factors for the non-local term, and a mild increase in cost of block-encoding of the iterate. Overall, in any
algorithm where the iterate is called a certain number of times, such as O(λ|t|) in a time-evolution or O(λ/ϵ)
in energy estimation, this can lead up to an order of magnitude improvement. We compare our rescaling
factors for a selection of pseudoions in Table 8, to Ref. [29]’s results (see Table VII of Ref. [29]). We observe
a ∼30 −180× factor of improvement for the per electron-ion pair rescaling factor of the non-local terms.
While it is not straightforward to explain this improvement as a product of distinct improvements, an expla-
nation that sheds light to it is as follows. First, the mathematical expression we use for the operator given
as in Eq. (108) differs from the one used in Ref. [29] (see Eq. (25)). Ref. [29]’s block-encoding expresses
the non-local term as a sum over momentum exchange in order to easily conform to the same structure as
the block-encoding of the Coulomb term. Doing so then allows all of the potential terms to share the same
SELECT operation. However, this comes with the cost of performing an additional LCU over momentum
exchange, which does not appear in the original mathematical form. This major difference, combined with
our use of a diagonalized form of the non-local term discussed in Sec. 5.1.5, leads to ∼8 −17× improvement
- compare the values in Table 8 and Ref. [29]’s Table (V) or Table (VI). Furthermore, we use implicit quan-
tum rejection sampling (QRS) rather than explicit QRS in our block-encodings, and with optimal reference
functions tailored to the target functions. This can lead to an additional factor of ∼5 −10× improvement
as also observed in Ref. [29]’s values in their Table (VI) vs. Table (VII). On the other hand, our compilation
per block-encoding costs approximately ∼3 −5× more. This is expected and mostly due to the fact that
we perform implicit QRS in our block-encoding rather than explicit QRS as in Ref. [29]. Furthermore, our
block-encoding of the local term differs from Ref. [29]’s only in terms of using implicit QRS rather than
explicit QRS, although, in this case, our rescaling factors are similar. These considerations eventually lead
to approximately an improvement of ∼4 −6× if QPE were to be implemented, for the three instances
PdCO3 × 3, PtCO2 × 2, AlN(wurzite) in Ref. [29].28
We note that it is possible that the block-encoding for the non-local terms to be further improved with
different ways of partitioning the full non-local interaction or potentially improving the subroutines involved
in the current block-encoding; however, we leave this for future work, especially in light of the fact that
28Note that our block-encoding includes pseudoions and electrons as compared to just electrons, which does also increase our
cost. However, even with the inclusion of pseudoion degrees of freedom and their corresponding interactions with themselves
and the electrons, we still achieve a significant performance gain.
51
