Entropy 2024, 26, 612
22 of 84
analogous to that of an underdense universe whose deceleration parameter is insufﬁcient
to prevent full cosmic dilution.
All of the above behaviour is described by the tanh-type solutions. However, there is
a countably inﬁnite set of unbounded motions described by the tan-type solutions. Some
examples are shown in Figure 6 for the phase-space. For 0 < Λe < Λc, both bounded
and unbounded motions exist for a ﬁxed value of H = H0, shown in the left panel of
Figure 6. The bounded motion consists of the distorted oscillations noted previously,
whereas the unbounded motion consists of two particles simply approaching each other at
some minimal value of |r| after which they reverse direction and proceed toward inﬁnity.
The dotted curves come from the upper expression in (123) and the dashed curves from the
lower one. As Λe →Λc, the bulges of the solid tanh-type A curve and the dotted tan-type
A curve come close, making contact at the critical value Λe = Λc. For Λe > Λc, these two
curves bifurcate into the solid curves shown in the right panel of Figure 6: the particles
cross one another before receding toward inﬁnity. The upper solid curve represents the
motion in which
p →p± =

±
p
κ2H2 + 8Λe + √8Λe

2κ
(124)
as r →±∞.
Figure 6. Phase space trajectories of bounded and the unbounded motions for H0 = 2.1 m0 and
Λe
κ2m2
0 = 1.0 (left) and
Λe
κ2m2
0 = 1.5 (right).
One peculiar feature of the unbounded motion is that the two particles diverge to
inﬁnite separation at ﬁnite proper time. The trajectory x(t) of a null ray emitted from
particle 2 at time T is governed by dτ = 0, yielding
dx
dt = ±N0(x(t), z1(t), z2(t), p(t)) −N1(x(t), z1(t), z2(t), p(t))
(125)
for the equation of the light signal directed toward (+) or away from (−) particle 1. Numer-
ically solving (125) yields the trajectories shown in Figure 7, which plots the trajectories of
null rays emitted from particle 2 at various times T. For small κm0T ≲3.4), the particles are
in causal contact, as shown by the dotted curve of positive slope in the left panel of Figure 7.
At κm0T ≈3.4, the light ray just barely catches up to particle 1, which itself is almost in
light-like motion; this is shown by the dashed curve of positive slope. Beyond this time,
the particles are no longer in causal contact. For a larger T, the null ray of positive slope
quickly asymptotes to a line parallel to the asymptotic worldline of particle 1, as shown
by the dashed curve. The light rays emitted away from particle 1 all asymptote to curves
parallel to the trajectory of particle 2. As T becomes even larger, the null ray emitted in
the direction of particle 1 experiences a repulsive effect, ultimately reversing its direction,
as shown in the right panel of Figure 7. For κm0T ≈4.82 the null ray emitted toward
particle 1 asymptotes to r = 0. For larger values of T, null rays emitted in the positive
direction eventually reverse their motion and asymptote towards curves that are parallel
to the asymptotic trajectory of particle 2, as shown by the dashed and dot-dashed lines in
the left panel of Figure 7. The trajectories of the light signals emitted away from particle 1
cannot be distinguished in the plot from the trajectory of particle 2.
