3
interactions occurring on the hydrocarbon in the first
FGD.
Each
event
in
the
dataset
includes
the
energy-
momentum four-vector for the leading muon and, if it
exists, the leading proton in both truth and reconstructed
space. For events that have been reconstructed, a detec-
tor sample ID is also included based on the sub-detectors
used to measure the muon candidate (and proton candi-
date, if any), defined as one of:
1. µTPC : only a reconstructed muon in the TPC
2. µTPC + pTPC : 1 muon and 1 proton in the TPC
3. µTPC + pFGD : 1 muon in the TPC and 1 proton
in the FGD
4. µFGD + pTPC : 1 muon in the FGD and 1 proton
in the TPC
5. µFGD : 1 muon in the FGD
6. CC1π : 1 muon and 1 π+ in the TPC
7. CCOther : 1 muon and multiple pion tracks in the
TPC
8. CCMichel : 1 muon and a michel tagged pion in
the FGD
The
final
three
sample
IDs
here
are
intended
as
background-enhanced samples and are used to help con-
strain backgrounds to the CC0π analysis.
For events
in the truth space, a topology ID is included indicating
what observable final state particles result from the in-
teraction, defined as one of:
1. CC0π0p : only an outgoing muon from the charged
current interaction
2. CC0π1p : 1 muon and 1 proton
3. CC0πNp : 1 muon and 2 or more protons
4. CC1π : 1 muon and 1 charged pion
5. CCOther : other events with a muon (neutral pion
or multiple pion production)
Events are designated as signal or background at truth
level by these topology IDs, with 1–3 serving as signal
and 4–5 serving as background. Due to limitations of the
data release, this is not the full list of backgrounds typi-
cally included in a T2K analysis. In particular, it omits
contributions from neutral current interactions, νe inter-
actions with erroneous particle identification, wrong-sign
events from ¯ν interactions, and out of fiducial volume
interactions.
The dataset also contains information about system-
atic uncertainties associated with the flux, detector, and
neutrino interaction models for the analysis. This comes
in the form of a vector of 500 weight variations for each
individual event that represent coherent random throws
of these uncertainties. However, the detector systematic
uncertainties do not include dedicated proton reconstruc-
tion effects, since the proton kinematics were not part of
the original analysis associated with this data release.
IV.
TEST SETUP
We create a set of “fake data” to serve as the unfolding
target by reweighting a subset of the available events in
the dataset with a modified charged-current quasi-elastic
(CCQE) cross section based on the RPA calculation from
Ref. [58]. This fake data represents a nontrivially differ-
ent signal model from that used in the simulated dataset,
which did not include this weak-charge screening effect
caused by the nuclear medium. The modification is per-
formed by applying an event weight to CCQE events as
a function of the true Q2 based on a parametrization of
the RPA calculation using Bernstein polynomials, which
is described in detail in Ref. [59]. The original set of non-
reweighted events and weights then serve as the simula-
tion for the unfolding procedure. Truth-level info for the
fake data is not used during the unfolding procedures,
but it is brought in for evaluation of the performance of
each method in the final stage. For convenience, in the
rest of this article we will refer to the fake data simply
as “data”, as during unfolding it is treated the same way
that real data would be.
For the events designated as simulation, we generate
500 throws of the event weights that simultaneously ac-
count for detector, cross-section, and flux systematic un-
certainties, as well as Monte Carlo statistical uncertain-
ties from the number of generated events. The weight
variations from systematic effects are taken from the T2K
public simulated data release.
Monte Carlo statistical
uncertainties are obtained by bootstrap resampling the
available events with replacement. We similarly create
500 throws of the statistical uncertainties in the observed
data by applying to it a weighted bootstrap resampling,
where each data event with weight w receives a resampled
weight wresampled = Poisson(λ = w). This reduces the
number of data events to the same statistics as Ref. [51]
and simulates the corresponding statistical uncertainty
of that result. The unfolded results are then obtained
by a toy universe method, where each of the 500 throws
is independently run through the unfolding procedure.
The resulting ensemble of 500 unfolded truth distribu-
tions gives our systematic and statistical uncertainties
on the result. To maintain comparability between the
unfolding methods under consideration, we use the same
set of 500 variations for each of the procedures.
We consider four observables for evaluating the perfor-
mance of each method:
• (pµ, cos θµ) : the two-dimensional muon kinematics
defined by its momentum and forward angle, which
were used in the differential cross-section analysis
associated with the original data release [51]
