In short, supersymmetry and anomaly cancellation force the boundary of an M-theory
compactification to have E8 gauge fields, and there is no other option. The point of this
paper is to find out whether there are more possibilities if the requirement of supersymmetry
is dropped. This analysis is carried out in detail in Section 3. We will end this Section by
describing this construction in modern language: an anomalous field theory in d dimensions
is associated to an invertible field theory in (d + 1) dimensions [35, 36], the anomaly theory
[37]; the anomalous theory is realized as a boundary condition for the anomaly theory. In
this case, the chiral degrees of freedom live in ten dimensions and the anomaly theory is,
using the identification (2.6), the M-theory topological couplings [1]. Although these terms
are topological in the sense that they do not depend on the metric explicitly, they do depend
continuously on the three-form profile, as befits the anomaly theory for a perturbative sym-
metry. From this point of view, the E8 gauge fields are simply the suitable boundary degrees
of freedom on a boundary required by the bulk topological couplings of M-theory.
3
Searching for more general boundary conditions
In the previous Section, we described how the combined requirements of anomaly inflow and
supersymmetry uniquely fix the matter content of a boundary in M-theory to be E8 gauge
fields. The anomaly polynomial of the gauge fields exactly matches the M-theory topological
couplings (2.1).
The main question we wish to address in this paper is how this picture is modified, if at all,
when the requirement of boundary supersymmetry is dropped. The role of supersymmetry
is fixing the matter content uniquely (to a single copy of the adjoint representation) as a
function of the gauge group G of the boundary. Without it, and still focusing on the case
of a simple Lie group G, we must consider chiral fermions transforming in a general matter
representation
(r1) ⊕· · · ⊕(r1)
|
{z
}
nr1 times
⊕(r2) ⊕· · · ⊕(r2)
|
{z
}
nr2 times
⊕(r3) ⊕· · · ⊕(r3)
|
{z
}
nr3 times
⊕· · ·
(3.1)
where (3.1) means that we will take nr1 multiplets of the (irreducible) r1 representation, nr2
multiplets of the r2 representation, nr3 multiplets of the r3 and so forth. The corresponding
– 5 –
