Figure 11.
An example of the normalised eigenvectors at criticality, Ra = Rac & k = kc, associated with
the highest frequency mode. Note that the solid and dotted lines represent the real and imaginary parts of the
eigenvectors, respectively. The left panel shows the u and w eigenvectors, whilst the right panel shows the b,
γq and m eigenvectors. The dashed lines mark the basic state LCL (zs, red) and the LFC (blue). The results
are shown for the parameter values: RHsurf = 0.6, bsurf = 0.05 and r = 1 × 10−5 and Ra = Rac = 7.80 × 105.
wavenumber of kz = π/zs, since there is half a wave under the LCL. Note that in
Oishi and Brown (2024), the vertical wavenumber was chosen to be kz = 2π/Lz, where
Lz = 1 is the domain height. We can write the approximate dispersion relationship
for the moisture modified internal gravity waves as,
ωr ≈
∂b/∂z|z=0 kc
p
k2c + (π/zs)2
(44)
Note that in the non-linear system, internal gravity waves cause triggering of con-
vection and are themselves generated by convective plumes (Vallis et al. 2019). We
examine the approximate relationship across the parameter space in the following
section.
4.3.
Parameter Dependence of the Linear Perturbation
To investigate how the values of the climate parameters change the action of the
linear perturbation (at criticality) on the system, we examine changes in the critical
parameters, the action on conditional instability, and in the structure of the buoyancy
and moisture fluxes as parameters are varied.
We first look at how the values of the critical Rayleigh number, Rainy number
and wavenumber change with the parameters. Figure 12 shows Rac, Ryc, kc and
max(ωr) as a function of the surface relative humidity, for various different surface
temperature increases and radiative cooling rates. Recall that the value of Ra only
reflects the value of diffusion in our system; it cannot change according to changes
in moist stability, and so it fundamentally fails to capture the moist convective
behaviour. The critical Rainy number varies much less than the Rayleigh number
across the climate parameter space, as a consequence of the incorporating a quantifi-
cation of moist stability in its definition: Rac varies by a factor of ∼8.0 across all of
the parameter values, whereas Ryc varies by a factor of ∼2.1. The Rainy number
captures the ratio of conditional instability (quantified by pCAPE and its associated
23
