CAMulator
system components, including ocean, land, cryosphere and chemistry.It has also been proposed to interactively combine
such emulators with dynamical models using a supermodeling framework [e.g., Schevenhoven et al., 2023, Chapman
et al., 2024]. These differences hinder the seamless coupling with traditional physics-based models and limit the broader
adoption of atmospheric ML-emulators in Earth system simulations.
Here, we introduce CAMulator Version 1, an ML-based emulator that mimics the Community Atmosphere Model
version 6 (CAM6) [Danabasoglu et al., 2020] while preserving both vertical and horizontal spatial resolution. CAMulator
runs approximately 350 times faster than CAM6 (see Section 2.5 for details) while enforcing key conservation properties,
including global dry mass, total water, and energy.
For model training and testing, we leverage the National Science Foundation’s (NSF) National Center for Atmospheric
Research (NCAR)-Community Research Earth Digital Intelligence Twin (CREDIT) platform [Sha et al., 2025a, Schreck
et al., 2024]. CREDIT is a machine learning platform for scientific research that provides an efficient framework for
the rapid development of auto-regressive models, making it well-suited for Earth system modeling tasks. In our study,
CREDIT serves as the backbone for an efficient data pipeline, scalable high-performance computing, model training,
and inference. We extend its capabilities from numerical weather prediction emulation to fast climate emulation and
demonstrate the necessity of incorporating physical constraints on mass, water, and energy to enhance model fidelity
and improve emulation accuracy.
In this work, we focus on emulating atmospheric physics during the historical period (1979–2014), a common validation
period for CAM6. We conduct this experiment as an AMIP simulation, where CAMulator is forced with observed sea
surface temperatures (SSTs) and incoming solar radiation. We show that CAMulator successfully captures the historical
climate trend over this period. To test model stability in an indefinite forcing mode, we run long-term integrations using
climatological SSTs as the prescribed boundary condition, ensuring consistency with the statistical properties of the
CAM6 climate system.
We find that CAMulator successfully reproduces key climate statistics, including variability associated with the El Nino
Southern Oscillation and has similar root mean square error compared to CAM6. Although geopotential height is not
directly predicted, the emulator is still able to accurately capture major modes of variability, such as the North Atlantic
Oscillation and the Pacific North American pattern, from predicted variables. This suggests that the model preserves
physical consistency across key atmospheric fields, even in extended simulations.
An important application of climate models is to predict the response to an external forcing, for example increased
ocean sea surface temperatures (SSTs). Beyond historical validation, we test CAMulator in out-of-sample scenarios
(i.e. forcing scenarios the emulator was not trained on) with ocean surface warming of +2K and +4K,. The model
demonstrates a promising ability to adjust dynamically to these warmer conditions, though its response appears weaker
under +4K warming. In this manuscript, we focus on evaluating CAMulator’s performance and exploring its potential
applications and extensions.
In this manuscript, we focus on evaluating CAMulator’s performance and exploring its potential applications and exten-
sions and is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the data sources used for model training and evaluation. Section
3 outlines the methodology, including model construction and training. Section 4 presents the results, highlighting
CAMulator’s performance in reproducing key climate statistics and its response to out-of-sample warming scenarios.
Finally, we conclude with a discussion of CAMulator’s strengths, limitations, and potential extensions for future work.
1.1
Training and Verification Data
We use the Community Atmosphere Model version 6 (CAM6), the atmospheric component of the Community Earth
System Model version 2.1.5 (CESM2), developed by the NSF NCAR [Bogenschutz et al., 2018, Gettelman et al., 2018].
At the training time, CAM6 was the latest supported model release and incorporates advancements in atmospheric
physics, cloud microphysics, and boundary layer turbulence while leveraging a finite-volume (FV) dynamical core.
For this study, we run CAM6 in AMIP mode, where it is forced by observed SSTs and sea ice concentrations from 1979
to 2014 [Huang et al., 2017, 2021, Rayner et al., 2003], with these monthly forcing fields linearly interpolated to daily
values. CAMulator also accounts for time-evolving aerosol emissions and trace gas concentrations (including CO2) to
ensure consistency with historical atmospheric conditions.
Model simulations use the scientific release resolution of CAM6, with a horizontal grid spacing of 0.9◦latitude × 1.25◦
longitude and 32 hybrid sigma-pressure levels extending up to 2.26 hPa in the vertical dimension. The emulator was
trained on a number of static and dynamic variables (see Table 1), all saved at 6-hourly intervals. For simplicity, we
keep the vertical and horizontal resolution the same.
2
