 
10 
Ryzen Threadripper PRO 3975WX @ 3.5 GHz processor with 32 cores and 32GB of RAM), and 
IP (Gurobi) run on a cluster node (an Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2680 v3 @ 2.50GHz processor 
with 24 cores and 256 GB of RAM). Problem reading time can be significant when the problem 
size is large, but it is excluded from the computational time consideration. We measure the time 
solely taken to solve given problems with classical solvers. In Fig. 1b and Fig. 3, the solution time 
for classical and quantum solvers is presented as a function of problem sizes. Note that a QUBO 
problem is NP-hard49. Evaluating the energy of a given solution has a computational cost of ğ‘‚(ğ‘›6), 
where ğ‘› (= problem size) is the number of variables. The number of reads or sweeps does not scale 
with ğ‘›, but the cost for each sweep scales as ğ‘‚(ğ‘›) for SA. Consequently, the theoretical time 
complexities of the classical solvers are known as ğ‘‚(ğ‘›7) for SA50, ğ‘‚(ğ‘›6) for SD51, and ğ‘‚(ğ‘›6) for 
TS52. On the other hand, the theoretical time complexity of the quantum solvers can be considered 
constant. 
 
 
Data availability 
All data generated and analyzed during the study are available from the corresponding author upon 
reasonable request.  
 
 
Code availability 
The codes used for generating and analyzing data are available from the corresponding author 
upon reasonable request. 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
This research used resources of the Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility at the Oak Ridge 
National Laboratory, which is supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy 
under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725. This research was supported by the Quantum 
Computing Based on Quantum Advantage Challenge Research (RS-2023-00255442) through the 
National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Korean Government (Ministry of 
Science and ICT(MSIT)).  
 
 
Author information 
Authors and Affiliations 
Department of Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering, University of Notre Dame; Notre 
Dame, Indiana 46556, United States. 
Seongmin Kim & Tengfei Luo 
 
Department of Electronic Engineering, Kyung Hee University; Yongin-Si, Gyeonggi-do 
17104, Republic of Korea. 
Sangwoo Ahn & Eungkyu Lee 
 
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Notre Dame; Notre 
Dame, Indiana 46556, United States. 
