where D does not admit a ﬁber functor but C does.
In the study of fusion categories that do not admit a ﬁber functor, we often
encounter two main cases. In one case, there are fusion categories whose objects
have non-integer quantum dimensions. A category C of this kind does not even
admit a linear functor F ∶C →Vec, as the image F(c) of any object c ∈ob(C)
needs to be a qc-dimensional vector space for qc = dimC(c) the quantum dimension
of c. Such is the case of the Ising category. In the other case, there are fusion
categories which do admit a linear functor F ∶C →Vec to the category of vector
spaces, but which lack a monoidal structure, meaning a natural isomorphism JX,Y ∶
F(X ⊗Y ) →F(X) ⊗F(Y ) satisfying axioms that make the tensor product in C
compatible with that in Vec. A familiar example of this is the category Vec(G,α)
for α ∈Z3(G,U(1)) a group 3-cocycle with nontrivial cohomology class.
4.1
Quasi-Hopf algebras and anomalies
Given that a vast array of fusion categories C equipped with a ﬁber functor (F,J) ∶
C →Vec are given by representation categories of ﬁnite-dimensional semisimple
Hopf algebras, one can ask what an appropriate analogue is for fusion categories
admitting only a linear functor F ∶C →Vec (not necessarily with a monoidal
structure J). In this case, examples are now given by representation categories of
quasi-Hopf algebras.
The deﬁnition of a quasi-Hopf algebra H is similar to that of a Hopf alge-
bra, with the key diﬀerence that the comultiplication is now coassociative up to a
nontrivial element Φ ∈H⊗3, the coassociator. As we will explain below, the coas-
sociator is precisely what encodes the obstruction to the existence of a monoidal
structure J on the forgetful functor
F ∶Rep(H) Ð→Vec
(4.2)
from the tensor category of representations of H to the category of vector spaces.
Intuitively, the ’t Hooft anomaly of Rep(H) is classiﬁed by the quasi-Hopf alge-
bra coassociator Φ, in the same sense that the ’t Hooft anomaly of Vec(G,α) is
classiﬁed by the 3-cocycle α.
Of course, a category Vec(G,α) is non-anomalous not only if α is strictly trivial
but more generally if its cohomology class is trivial. In the case of quasi-Hopf
algebras, this equivalence relation is provided by the notion of gauge equivalence
of coassociators, recalled below. If the coassociator Φ of a quasi-Hopf algebra H
is gauge equivalent to the trivial coassociator Φ′ = 1, then Rep(H) admits a ﬁber
functor. Simply put, the gauge twist turns the quasi-Hopf algebra H into a Hopf
algebra. In this case, one usually says H is gauge equivalent to a Hopf algebra.
13
