8
There are 6 independent fit parameters in the model (5
for 2-port ring resonator). These parameters, following the
nomenclature of [16], are: (i) the ring single-pass amplitude
transmission coefficient a related to the attenuation coefficient
α [cm−1] as a2 = e−α2πR with R the ring radius; (ii, iii)
the self-coupling coefficients at the two waveguide resonator
interfaces for an add-drop device, r1 and r2. For the point
coupled ring resonators, by symmetry r1 = r2 and we also
assume the coupling is lossless, hence k2
i + r2
i = 1 with k the
cross-coupling (waveguide to ring) coefficient; (iv) an effective
increase in waveguide length, leff = lwg + δl, to account
for the (slight) difference in vg in straight waveguide and the
curved ring sections; (v) effective length of IDT region lidt;
and finally (vi) the interface (power) reflection coefficient R.
These parameters are determined using the algorithm below:
Algorithm 1 Parameter Estimation from Time-Domain
Response
Input: Ring Radius R, Waveguide Length lwg, Transmission
Spectrum
Output: a, r1, r2, leff, lidt, R
1: Calculate vg from the measured cavity FSR
2: Fit the magnitude of peaks 1d and nr to estimate initial
values of a, r1, r2
3: while 1d and tt1 are not aligned in time do
4:
Increase δl
5:
Update leff = lwg + δl
6: end while
7: while model and measured peaks are not aligned in time
do
8:
Increase lidt
9: end while
10: Estimate R by minimizing:
min
R≥0 F(R)
11: return a, r1, r2, leff, lidt, R
As discussed in the main text, the interface reflection coef-
ficient (R) can be extracted by comparing the ratio between
the received signal power of a ring transit and its associated
triplet transit. For drop port R, this is done numerically by
minimizing a function F(R), subject to constraint R ≥0,
defined as follows for a representative case:
min
R≥0 F(R) = min
R≥0

ˆ
Ptt1
ˆ
P1r
−|ℓ1 + ℓ2 + ℓ3|2
,
(2)
Here, we extract R by comparing the signal amplitude of a
direct ring transit and the associated triplet transits, shown in
Fig.8.
ˆ
Ptt1 and
ˆ
P1r denote the measured peak powers of tt1
and 1r (cf. Fig.2(b)), respectively. The (amplitude) excess loss
terms (ℓ1, ℓ2 and ℓ3) and the propagation loss α, associated
with the triplet transits are defined as (path lengths being
identical, we ignore the phase):
ℓ1 =
q
e−α·lwg · r2
2 · R
(3a)
ℓ2 =
q
e−α·lwg · r2
1 · R
(3b)
ℓ3 =
p
e−α·lwg · r1 · r2 · R
(3c)
α = −2 ln(a)
Lrt
,
(3d)
where Lrt is the roundtrip length of the ring, and we make
the assumption that propagation loss extracted from the rings
is identical to the straight waveguide loss.
The key with bounding the value of R using this procedure
is to ensure one accounts for all possible paths from transmitter
to receiver. For the drop port device, the excess loss terms (ℓ1,
ℓ2 and ℓ3) listed in eqn.3 above correspond to the additional
losses accumulated by three different permutations of the
signal path comprising a triple waveguide and a half ring
transit, vs the signal path corresponding to peak 1r (cf. Fig.2).
The paths are outlined explicitly in Fig.8 and involve both
clockwise and counterclockwise traversal of the ring on the
way from transmitter to receiver IDT. These three permutations
represent distinct contribution to overall loss in Eq.2 only
when r1 ̸= r2. Also, when limR→0, the triple transit peaks
disappear.
1
2
3
4
Fig. 8. Schematic representation of the paths used to estimate R by taking
the power ratio between a ring transit and its associated triplet transit. Path 1
is the first drop-port ring traversal and corresponds to Peak 1r. Paths labelled
2–4 correspond to the three permutations of the signal path comprising triple
waveguide and half ring transit. Signals from Paths 2-4 arrive in-phase but
may have different signal strength (if r1 ̸= r2). Note that the parasitic paths
involve both clockwise and counterclockwise ring transits on the way from
transmitter to receiver IDT.
Once the valid paths (within the time/distance constraint)
are identified, the cumulative effect of each path on the output
signal is calculated. For each path, the cumulative phase shift
is determined by summing the individual contributions from
each segment (edge) in the path. The total phase shift for a
given path is computed as:
