Figure 3: Schematic drawing of the SND detector.
will be dominated by muons and the products of neutrino interactions in the material. This necessitates
the use of background tagger systems surrounding the decay volume to detect suspicious activity. The
taggers will be built from multi-gap resistive plate chambers or scintillating fibres upstream, and from
liquid scintillator detector modules mounted onto all sides of the frame of the gas bag and readout by
wavelength-shifting optical modules.
A spectrometer magnet with an aperture of 4×6 m2 and a field integral of 0.6-0.8 Tm gives SHiP
the required momentum resolution for charged decay products. This field will be achieved with a su-
perconducting magnet with a peak field of about 0.15 T [24]. The geometry of the tracker requires
optimisation with the helium-filled decay volume to ensure the best overall angle determination, which
depends on the magnetic field integral and the positioning of the tracking stations. The tracking will
be provided by four stations of drift detectors composed of ultralight 4m-long straws. The stations are
designed to each be just 0.5% of a radiation length.
An integrated particle identification system includes an electromagnetic calorimeter (ECAL) to
reconstruct electrons and photons, and a compact hadron sampling calorimeter with a low sampling ratio
to provide high-efficiency muon/hadron discrimination in a wide momentum range. Using high-precision
layers located at specific shower depths, the ECAL is also capable of measuring the photon direction with
a sufficient accuracy to reconstruct two-photon final states of FIPs such as ALP →γγ.
5
Collaboration and funding
SHiP, with its unique physics potential, emerges as a central part of CERN’s strategy to ensure a broad,
diverse scientific programme, complementary to colliders and exploiting the injectors. CERN is fully
committed to the high-intensity upgrade of the ECN3 experimental facility and to the construction of
BDF for SHiP. Following the approval of the technical design phase, the collaboration is actively working
to secure funding from national and international funding agencies. Given the agreed-upon timeline of
the TDRs and the construction, institutions from several countries have already submitted applications
or are in the process of applying. In particular, applications have been submitted or are being prepared
in Italy, Switzerland, and the UK, with other countries expected to follow soon.
Among the primary responsibilities for the initial configuration of SHiP, the muon shield is a
critical component required to ensure the low-background environment necessary for feebly interacting
particle searches. The development of the muon shield involves contributions from institutes in Germany,
Italy, Switzerland and the UK. The decay volume, veto system, tracker and spectrometer, including
timing, involve institutes in Germany, Italy, and Switzerland, together with CERN.
The SHiP collaboration is also making significant efforts to expand its institutional participation.
9
