arXiv:2504.06462v1  [physics.app-ph]  8 Apr 2025
1
A Reconﬁgurable Intelligent Surface With
Surface-Wave Assisted Beamforming Capabilities
Vasileios G. Ataloglou, Member, IEEE, and George V. Eleftheriades, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—The integration of tunability mechanisms in the
metasurface design has unleashed a tremendous potential for
wireless communications. In particular, reconﬁgurable intelligent
surfaces (RISs) can manipulate the reﬂections of an incident
electromagnetic wave at will, based on the real-time conditions,
with the aim of enhancing communication links. In this paper,
we develop an RIS at C band that operates with a transverse-
electric (TE) polarization and can shape the radiation pattern
at a single plane with high-accuracy, in addition to the more
conventional beamsteering functionalities. The beamforming is
facilitated by subwavelength unit cells that allow the excita-
tion of auxiliary surface waves in the vicinity of the RIS.
Importantly, these evanescent ﬁelds are predicted and harnessed
through an integral-equation framework used for the analysis
and optimization of the RIS. A fabricated prototype demonstrates
beamsteering up to ±60◦with an average illumination efﬁciency
of 95% and sector patterns with a varying beamwidth (ranging
from 30◦to 60◦) that verify the full-wave simulations. Lastly,
losses •are predicted and constrained during the optimization
stage leading to solutions with relatively high power efﬁciency.
Index Terms—Beamforming, Integral Equations, Method of
Moments, Reconﬁgurable Intelligent Surface, Surface Waves
I. INTRODUCTION
The continuously growing number of interconnected devices
requiring constant, reliable and high data-rate connectivity
poses challenges to the development of future generations (6G
and beyond) of wireless communication networks. Among the
innovative ideas to overcome these challenges, reconﬁgurable
intelligent surfaces (RISs) have been proposed as a way to
modify the propagation environment and improve communi-
cation links between users. An RIS is a tunable metasurface
consisting of subwavelength scatterers that can be programmed
to anomalously reﬂect an incident electromagnetic wave to-
wards one or more desired directions [1]–[3]. In this way,
RISs are utilized to increase the power of the received signals
in areas that are not sufﬁciently covered by the transmitter
due to obstacles or multipath interference. Moreover, RISs
are passive structures acting directly on the radio-frequency
(RF) signal and they usually require only a DC external
bias [4]. Therefore, they offer a cost-effective and power-
efﬁcient solution for the growing requirements of wireless
communications.
The hardware implementation of reconﬁgurable metasur-
faces operating at microwaves has been thoroughly investi-
gated and different tunable elements and design methods have
Submitted on 03/10/2024.
V. G. Ataloglou and G. V. Eleftheriades are with the Edward S. Rogers Sr.
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Toronto,
Toronto ON M5S3G4, Canada (e-mail: vasilis.ataloglou@mail.utoronto.ca,
gelefth@waves.utoronto.ca).
been proposed [5]–[15]. In the vast majority of cases, the
RIS is designed as a tunable reﬂectarray with each unit cell
inducing locally a spatially-varying phase in the reﬂected ﬁeld.
In the case that PIN diodes are used, the reﬂected phase takes
discrete values, and the structure is typically called an n-
bit RIS (n being the number of diodes per cell for a single
polarization) [9], [16], [17]. On the other hand, varactor diodes
offer a continuous tunability of the reﬂecting phase, avoiding
any drop in efﬁciency due to phase quantization. Additionally,
varactor diodes operate under a reverse DC bias voltage and,
therefore the DC power dissipation is minimal. These are the
reasons that varactor diodes were used in our presented work.
Lastly, for an RIS application, the metasurface is typically
placed in the far-ﬁeld region of the transmitting antenna,
rendering the incident illumination approximately a uniform
plane wave. This is in contrast to the earlier implementations
of such tunable reﬂective surfaces that were focused on the
realization of reconﬁgurable reﬂectarray antennas with a feed
placed in the vicinity of the metasurface [6].
For RIS applications, it is often important to modify not
only the direction of the main beam, but also the beam shape.
For instance, if a wider angular range needs to be covered
by a single RIS, a sector pattern of larger beamwidth may
be preferable compared to a narrower highly-directive beam.
While several RIS studies focus on efﬁcient beamsteering of
the reﬂected beam, the beamshaping capabilities of the RIS
and the design methods to realize them are often overlooked. A
beamshaped far-ﬁeld pattern would require both amplitude and
phase tapering throughout the metasurface aperture. One way
to fulﬁll this requirement is to deliberately introduce ohmic
losses that are controlled independently from the reﬂected
phase, thus providing a way to acquire the required complex
reﬂection coefﬁcients [18], [19]. However, this approach limits
the power efﬁciency, especially in cases that a low reﬂection
amplitude is required for a large portion of the unit cells.
Alternatively, optimization techniques based on a reﬂect-array
approach may be used to optimize the reﬂected phases includ-
ing the coupled loss to achieve some constrained beamshaping
effects [14]. Yet, the calculation of the far-ﬁeld based on
the local reﬂection coefﬁcient at each cell usually disregards
mutual coupling and leads to deviations from the expected
pattern. In particular, these discrepancies are signiﬁcant when
the unit cell size is smaller than the typical choice of half-
wavelength and surface waves are excited by means of fast-
varying parameters between adjacent cells. Metallic vias acting
as bafﬂes have been examined as a way to eliminate coupling,
but the approach can only be applied for a single polarization
and increases the fabrication complexity [20], [21].
