Multilevel Quantum Rabi Models
8
these seem irrelevant, but for ε ̸= 0 weak couplings between states in the radiation basis
mean that even the dark states generally participate in (and complicate) the dynamics.
In summary, while detunings break the exact doublet symmetry, they do so in a
very controlled way if the detunings are small. The approximate symmetry continues
to structure the spectrum in a way that provides a useful framework for analytical and
numerical approaches.
4. Coupling Scalings in Multilevel Systems
We now move on to consider larger systems, focusing in particular on systems with
either uniform or random couplings. We start by looking at how the coupling can be
boosted for the uniform and random cases, i.e. how the strongest coupling (after the
SVD has been performed) scales with the number of near-degenerate levels, before going
on to look at the overall structure of the energy level distribution for random couplings.
4.1. Coupling Boost for Uniform Couplings
The situation where all of the individual transitions have the same coupling is an
important (and simple) special case. As we have already seen, for n = m = 2, the
SVD yields the diagonal elements λ1 = 2λ, λ2 = 0, so that the system features a single
nontrivial Rabi model. It is easy to generalize this result to n = m > 2 via a constant
coupling matrix Λij = λ, which yields λ1 = nλ, λj>1 = 0, i.e.
the only nontrivial
Rabi model embedded in the system has a coupling constant that grows linearly in the
number of states. This is in contrast to the case where there is only a single ground state
(m = 1), but multiple excited states [10] (n > 1) , where the coupling scales ∼√n.
Interestingly, the reduction of the multilevel system to a single effective Rabi model
extends beyond the case of purely uniform coupling.
If it is possible to factorize
the coupling matrix in terms of two vectors v, w, so that Λij = viwj then one finds
λ1 = |v||w|, λj>1 = 0.
4.2. Coupling Boost for Random Coupling Matrix
The case of a random coupling matrix is the opposite extreme to that of uniform
couplings.
Our goal is to find an approximate distribution for the largest singular
value, λ1, of our complex n×m coupling matrix Λ, so that we can analyse its statistical
properties. To do this, we employ tools from random matrix theory and leverage known
results on the eigenvalue distribution of Wishart ensemble matrices. We leave most of
the details of the calculation to Appendix B, and simply focus on the main results here.
We assume a coupling matrix, Λ, with elements that are independent and identically
distributed (IID), taken from a complex Gaussian distribution with mean 0 and variance
1, denoted C N (0, 1).
A random variable is said to follow a complex Gaussian
distribution Z ∼C N (0, 1) if Z = X + iY , where X and Y are IID real Gaussian
