the derivative vertex is essentially given by the constant part induced by the chiral anomaly.
This implies that, e.g. limits from high-energy colliders like LEP that have been derived
for effective photon couplings [48] are relevant only for leptophilic ALPs with derivative
couplings, and similar conclusions hold for highly energetic leptonic beam dumps. More
generally, a large separation of scales often permits the approximation of the fully off-shell
vertex function by the on-shell coupling, which largely simplifies calculations, as we discuss
in detail. We also point out the great potential of muon beam-dump experiments, such
as NA64µ [49], to constrain models of leptophilic ALPs [50]. Indeed, NA64µ already sets
relevant constraints on several of the scenarios that we consider, which will substantially
improve in coming years with larger data sets.
The rest of this work is organised as follows. In Section 2, we define the basic setup
of the leptophilic ALP models and discuss the difference between the pseudoscalar and
derivative basis and the resulting ALP-photon-photon vertex function. In Section 3, we
use these results in order to calculate ALP production at leptonic beam dumps in all
relevant channels, focusing on E137 and NA64.
Constraints on leptophilic ALPs from
other experiments are discussed in Section 4, and in particular, we derive novel limits
by recasting LEP1 data on multi-photon events (largely following ref. [48]).
Here, we
also collect existing bounds in the literature from B factories, W + boson and rare meson
decays, SN 1987A, leptonic anomalous magnetic moments and cosmology.
Our results
are presented in Section 5, which mainly consist of novel limits on leptophilic ALPs from
E137 and NA64 that have been carefully derived including the track-length distribution
of the beam electrons as well as secondary electrons and positrons, which we combine
with other existing limits in order to provide a concise overview of all relevant constraints
on leptophilic ALPs.
We summarise our conclusions in Section 6 and include various
appendices with details on the experimental setup in appendix A and the cross-section
calculations in appendix B. We also compare our results for the exclusion limit from E137
with previous analyses in appendix C.
2
Setup
In this section, we introduce the effective Lagrangians for leptophilic ALP models, discuss in
detail the phenomenological and theoretical differences between pseudoscalar and derivative
couplings and study the general induced one-loop ALP couplings to photons.
2.1
ALP Couplings to Fermions
The ALP is assumed to be a pseudoscalar that is not charged under the SM gauge group,
arising as a pseudo-Goldstone boson from the spontaneous breaking of a global Peccei-
Quinn (PQ) symmetry at some UV scale Λ. At scales much smaller than Λ, the effective
Lagrangian is governed by the non-linearly realised PQ symmetry under which the ALP
shifts, a →a + const. While for the QCD axion, this symmetry is only broken by QCD
instantons, for the ALP that we consider here, there is also a soft breaking by an explicit
ALP mass term. Apart from this mass term, the most general Lagrangian then involves
– 3 –
