e
X where the geometry is not generic enough to be smooth but at the same time not singular
enough to admit a projective small resolution. 1
It has been argued in [14–16], building on [13], that the possible topologies of ﬂat B-
ﬁelds on an AGCY–3 X are in one-to-one correspondence with elements α ∈B(X). In the
following, we will denote by (X, α) an almost generic Calabi-Yau threefold X together with a
choice of B-ﬁeld topology α ∈B(X). We call the tuple (X, α) a Calabi-Yau background. The
B-ﬁeld stabilizes the geometry in the sense that the nodes that support a non-trivial B-ﬁeld
holonomy are protected against deformation and the string worldsheet theory is expected to
be regular.
Examples of almost generic Calabi-Yau threefolds have been obtained in [14] by con-
sidering relative moduli spaces of line bundles on genus one ﬁbered Calabi-Yau threefolds,
using results from [21]. Due to the ﬁbration structure, the complex dimension b2(X) of the
corresponding stringy K¨ahler moduli is at least two. On the other hand, examples with one-
dimensional moduli spaces, i.e. b2(X) = 1, have been obtained in [13, 15, 16] by considering
Calabi-Yau double covers of P3 that are ramiﬁed over symmetric determinantal octic sur-
faces. The torus ﬁbered examples studied in [14], and subsequently in [22], exhibit torsion
B(X) = ZN with N = 2, . . . , 5. 2 The symmetric determinantal double covers that have been
constructed in [13, 15, 16] yield examples with torsion B(X) = Z2.
This naturally leads to the question if there exist AGCY–3 X with b2(X) = 1 that are
not double covers and/or have torsion B(X) = ZN with N > 2.
In this paper we will show that the response in both cases is positive. To this end, we will
construct almost generic nodal quintic Calabi-Yau threefolds X1, X2 with torsion Z2, almost
generic nodal octics X3, X4 with torsion Z3 and we will argue that there exists an almost
generic Calabi-Yau threefold X5, that is a degeneration of a smooth complete intersection
X(6,6) ⊂P5
1,1,2,2,3,3, with torsion Z5. The geometries are summarized in Table 1. In each of
these examples we will use mirror symmetry and integrate the holomorphic anomaly equations
in order to calculate the corresponding torsion reﬁned Gopakumar-Vafa invariants.
Our construction of the geometries Xa for a = 1, . . . , 4 makes use of conifold transitions
between Calabi-Yau threefolds, in the spirit of [23–25]. Such transitions have already been
used to study the properties of almost generic Calabi-Yau double covers of P3 [15].
By
identifying the dual transitions under mirror symmetry, we can extract the Picard-Fuchs
operators that annihilate the periods of the mirrors of the Calabi-Yau backgrounds (Xa, α).
This allows us to calculate the topological string free energies at genus g = 0, 1 and by
integrating the holomorphic anomaly equations we obtain results up to varying genus g ≥2.
On the other hand, we deduce the existence of the almost generic Calabi-Yau threefold X5
by ﬁrst constructing an irrational diﬀerential operator, using a certain Hadamard product,
1We exclude nodes that are resolved by exceptional curves that are homologically trivial because they do not
lead to interesting physical eﬀects and can always be removed by a complex structure deformation. From the
perspective of M-theory such nodes lead to localised uncharged matter, as has also been discussed in [19, 20].
2We will always write ZN = Z/NZ.
– 2 –
