may partially offset it. These findings underscore the importance of diel varia-
tions in aerosol–cloud interactions. Our approach demonstrates that ship-tracks,
despite appearing as instantaneous observations, yield valuable insights into the
temporal evolution of cloud adjustments.
Keywords: aerosol indirect forcing, diel changes, ship tracks, aerosol cloud
interactions, effective radiative forcing
1 Introduction
Aerosol particles can change the energy balance of the Earth’s atmosphere indirectly
through interacting with clouds and modifying their brightness and coverage. Such
aerosol-induced energy perturbations are known as the aerosol effective radiative forc-
ing, including both the Twomey effect [1] and cloud adjustments[3]. It has partially
masked the global warming caused by greenhouse gases. Current best estimate of
total aerosol effective radiative forcing is between -1.7 and -0.3 Wm-2 , and remains
the largest source of uncertainty in our forcing estimates [4]. The uncertainty range –
1.4Wm-2 – is nearly half of forcing from increasing greenhouse gases, which suggests
that observed warming can be a result of either small or large net positive climate
forcing.
Aerosols affect low cloud properties by acting as cloud condensation nuclei (CCN).
Increasing CCN can lead to various changes in low cloud droplet number concentra-
tion (Nd) [1], liquid water(L ) [6], and coverage (CF)[2]. If L remains constant, clouds
become brighter with increasing CCN because of increased total droplet surface area.
But aerosols can also change L through modifying cloud precipitation and entrain-
ment. Smaller droplets in more polluted clouds decrease precipitation efficiency, but
increase L because of that. On the other hand, smaller droplets and decreased precip-
itation efficiency can also enhance entrainment of dry and warm air above cloud top,
which reduces L. Furthermore, changes in L and precipitation can affect CF. Adjust-
ments of CF and L account for a substantial portion of the total aerosol effective
radiative forcing [7–9]. Because current climate models cannot resolve these complex
interactions, they have to use parameterization, which introduces uncertainty in AIF
[4].
Opportunistic experiments have been used to constrain aerosol-cloud interac-
tions with observations because they allow both quantification and attribution of
cloud adjustments to aerosols while minimizing confounding factors[10]. Ship-tracks
are such opportunistic experiments. They are quasi-linear lines that appear brighter
than surrounding clouds and are formed due to ship-emitted aerosols affecting low
clouds [5, 11, 12]. They have been widely studied to obtain insights into aerosol-cloud
interactions[13–17]. For example, Toll et al. [15] show that L adjustment in global
models are too positive and strong, which is independently verified by another ship-
track study [7], providing important constraints for global models; ship-tracks studies
show cloud adjustments depend on the background cloud state and environmental
conditions[7, 14, 16].
2
