12 
 
κ − i∆kz 
NLOstatic = S3
 
Φ0  
κ 
 
(15) 
The total contribution of the 3rd-order nonlinear signal is given by 
 
NLOTotal = NLOoscillating + S3Φ(0)cos(ϕ)eiϕ 
(16) 
Where ϕ = arctan(∆kzλ ) and Φ0 is given by equation 3.See SI for the details. 
Fig 3 a) and b) Shows the change of absolute and imaginary parts of the nlostatic response as 
a function surface potential only. We observe a steady increase of the nlostatic response with the 
increase of the surface potential, without any peak shift, whereas in Fig 3 c) and d) we notice both 
peak and intensity change with the change of phase angle ϕ which is a function of both Debye 
length and phase mismatch. 
Fig 4 a) to e) systematically differentiate the effects of different parameters on nlostatic re- 
sponse.With a variation of surface potential (Φ0) the nlostatic increase linearly a), whereas the 
nlostatic response decreases exponentially with the increase of the distance (Z) from the surface 
charge b),nlostatic initially increases then decreases following an arctan curve for the change of 
phase mismatch c). With the change of Debye length Fig 4 d) the nlostatic decreases exponentially 
initially, then varies linearly showing little variation with the change of Debye length. Fig 4 e) 
reflects the change in nlostatic with the variation of phase angle. Which clearly shows a periodic al- 
ternation of nlostatic with the phase angle ϕ, for different values of surface potential. It also reflects 
that for the system where the surface potential is negligible even the change of phase mismatch 
can not significantly give a high nlostatic response. Thus if phase mismatch is zero but the surface 
potential is not still we will get a strong nlostatic signal but the reverse is not true. 
In Fig. 4 f) the left side shows the variation of nlostatic with the alternation of ionic strength. The 
yellow curve, where it is a function of both the phase factor κ κ 
−i∆kz and the surface potential(Φ0) 
increases and then decreases again. Where the red curve shows the change of nlostatic as a function 
of ionic strength when the surface potential contributes only and it shows a sharp decrease initially 
