Warm-Start QAOA via a Reduction to Max-Cut
•
11
(↓) worse than QUBO-Relaxed with 10 initializations
Rand.
TSP
PO
MIS
P
↓
↑
↑
↔
𝛼
↑
↓
↑
↔
Fig. 2. Classification of best performing vertex on top-rotation GW2 relative to QUBO-relaxed warmstart. For every prob-
lem/metric, the last vertex on top rotation was used for comparison except TSP optimal sampling probability where no
rotation was used.
4.1.1
Random QUBOs.
For both random QUBOs the optimal sampling probability falls under (↓), while the instance-specific approxima-
tion ratio falls under (↑).
For the instance-specific approximation ratio, GW2 outperforms QUBO-Relaxed with both 50 and 10 initializations,
and is above 0.25 standard deviations for discrete random QUBOs while being within 0.25 standard deviations for
continous random QUBOS.
For the optimal sampling probability, QUBO-Relaxed with 10 initializations and 50 initializations are within
0.25 standard deviations of each other for both continuous and discrete random QUBOs. QUBO-Relaxed with 10
initializations outperforms GW2 in both instances, but it is within 0.25 of GW2 for continuous random QUBOs
whereas it is not for discrete random QUBOs.
The difference between these metrics is likely due to GW2 creating initial states that are superpositions of
the optimal state and other high-cost but suboptimal states, which carries through subsequent optimizations.
4.1.2
Traveling Salesman.
For TSP, the optimal sampling probability falls under (↑), while the instance-specific approximation ratio falls
under (↓).
The optimal sampling probability obtained by both GW2 as well as QUBO-Relaxed are relativley low when
compared to other problems. This is likely due to the constraints in the cost function being significantly larger
(and contributing more terms to the QUBO matrix). For our case of 5 cities, there are 216 possible QUBO bitstrings
but only 24 feasible solutions.
With that being said, for the optimal sampling probability, the warmstarts in decreasing order are, GW2 no
rotation, QUBO-Relaxed with 10 initializations, QUBO-Relaxed with 50. None of these are within 0.25 standard
deviations of each other. Although QUBO-Relaxed performing better with fewer initializations is surprising, it is
likely an artifact of the generally low optimal sampling probabilities.
For the instance-specific approximation ratio, GW2 is significantly lower than QUBO-Relaxed with 50 ini-
tializations, but its within 0.25 standard deviations for QUBO-Relaxed with 10 initializations. The reason why
increasing the number of initializations has a singificant improvement on the cost is likely also a result of the
large number of constraint terms in the cost function.
ACM Trans. Quantum Comput., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: April 2025.
