Diffuse
Specular
Normal
PANDORA / Ours
Input
PANDORA / Ours / GT
AoP
DoP
(a)
(b)
s0
Figure 6. Results of Owl and Gnome models. (a) Comparison of
the estimated AoP and DoP. (b) Comparison of the estimated ge-
ometry and radiance decomposition. For Owl model, the average
PSNR/SSIM on 10% held-out test set between the estimated re-
sults of s0 and the corresponding ground-truth are 24.46/0.8756
(ours) and 25.07/0.8972 (PANDORA). The PSNR/SSIM of
which on Gnome model are 28.13/0.9274 and 28.43/0.9378.
Comparisons with polarization methods.
Tested on the
synthetic data, both visualized results (Fig. 5) and quanti-
tative comparison (Tab. 2) reveal that our method achieves
comparable performance with SOTAs. Using Bust model as
an example, we present the ground-truth diffuse and specu-
lar components, as well as normals and environment map.
Next, we study the raw data collected by PANDORA [7]
(Owl and Gnome), as shown in the leftmost column of
Fig. 6(a). These datasets are obtained by acquiring raw im-
ages with a dedicated polarization camera equipped with
SONY IMX250MZR sensor [25]. After demosaicing, the
raw image could be decomposed into four polarization im-
ages with different polarizing angles of 0◦, 45◦, 90◦, and
135◦. In the following experiments, we use the image with
the polarizer’s angle of 135◦as input and leverage our ap-
proach to implicitly reconstruct the Stokes vectors and other
information. For each case, we randomly select 90% of the
images for training. The results are shown in Fig. 6.
It is noteworthy that, in PANDORA, the AoP and DoP
are directly calculated from the captured data and are used
as ground truths. In contrast, our approach generates inter-
mediate outputs from the network, and our results can also
nicely interpret the polarization states. Furthermore, since
polarization is closely related to surface geometry and ma-
terial properties, better estimated polarization cues result in
high-quality decomposed diffuse and specular components,
Normal
Diffuse
Specular
N/A
w/o pol
(Ref-NeRF)
w/o pol
(Ref-NeRF)
w/o pol and
diffuse only
(VolSDF)
N/A
w/o pol and
diffuse only
(VolSDF)
Figure 7. Ablation study. For each example, the top row depicts
the results obtained by excluding polarization cues during render-
ing. Additionally, we exclusively focus on the diffuse components,
and the corresponding outcomes are presented in the middle row.
The bottom row showcases our outputs.
such as the tummy of the Owl and the beard of the Gnome.
4.3. Analysis
Ablation study.
As shown in Fig. 7, we conduct two ab-
lation studies for validation, such as, the effectiveness of
polarization cues and the consideration of specular compo-
nents. We first replace the polarized rendering as described
in Sec. 8 with the normal volume rendering. This design
choice is actually an enhanced variant of Ref-NeRF [27].
Secondly, we compute the RGB loss between the ren-
dered diffuse radiances, by removing the specular compo-
nent during rendering, and the ground truth, this is actually
VolSDF [33] with mask supervision used as a baseline.
Based on the reconstruction results, such as the top case
of Fig. 7, where the surface exhibits distinct specular re-
gions, without polarization cues, the network faces chal-
lenges in accurately learning distinctive features, leading to
less precise surface geometry. Despite this, our method still
demonstrates robustness in capturing surface details, even
in regions with prominent specular components.
On the other hand, the final radiance decomposition re-
sults demonstrate that polarization cues can aid the network
in better approximating true diffuse and specular compo-
nents. In general, to ensure the consistency across multiple
views, the network tends to focus on learning the diffuse
