Therefore, to truly ensure security at the paranoid level under QKD necessitates addressing an addi-
tional layer of scrutiny: the independence from underlying devices [16]. This prerequisite gave rise to the
concept of Device-Independent Quantum Key Distribution (DI-QKD). DI-QKD, and its slightly more
lenient version, Semi-Device-Independent (SDI) QKD, ensure security based solely on the principles of
quantum mechanics, without dependence on the specifics of the hardware used. Thus, potential vul-
nerabilities or backdoors due to device malfunctions or imperfections are eliminated, providing a robust
mechanism for secure communication.
1.2. From classical to quantum cryptography
Classical cryptography is broadly categorized into two main types: secret (or symmetric) key cryptog-
raphy and public-key (asymmetric) cryptography. In secret key cryptography, a single key is employed
for both encrypting and decrypting messages, exemplified by the one-time pad (OTP) [17, 18] or the
Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) [19]. The OTP can achieve perfect information-theoretic security
against adversaries with unlimited computational power, as discussed in Ref. [4]. Moreover, the threat of
quantum attacks on AES requires only doubling the size of the key to achieve equivalent levels of security
[20]2. The primary challenge with symmetric cryptography lies in the secure distribution of the secret
key prior to communication.
Public-key cryptography, such as the Diffie-Hellman [2] and RSA [3] protocols, circumvents this issue
by employing a pair of keys for each participant: a public key, which can be shared openly, and a
private key, which remains confidential. This enables Alice to encrypt a message using Bob’s public key,
ensuring that only Bob can decrypt it with his private key. This eliminates the need to exchange secret
keys in advance. Importantly, public-key cryptography also provides a mean for authentication: Bob
can sign a message with his private key, and Alice (or anyone) can use the public key to confirm that
it was indeed signed by Bob. From a practical standpoint, public-key systems are slower in that they
require larger keys and more communication between users, compared to symmetric encryption. Thus,
in current communication protocols such as Transport Layer Security (TLS), for example, a public-key
method is used for authentication and key exchange in an initial handshaking session, while subsequent
data encryption employs symmetric encryption.
Nowadays, the security of many public key ciphers is built on the computational difficulty of math-
ematical problems like integer factorization or the discrete logarithm problem, making it potentially
vulnerable to advances in quantum computing. Notably, algorithms capable of solving these problems in
polynomial time on a quantum computer have already been proposed [22, 23]. It is thus through quantum
mechanics that Facta lex inventa fraus is realized, through the emergence of quantum computing as a
significant threat, (the fraus) to the security of current public key cryptography. Still, quantum physics
itself offers a new and robust set of laws (lex) through QKD, capable of providing unconditionally secure
key distribution in theory.
1.3. Standard Quantum Key Distribution
1.3.1. Theoretical security of QKD
To introduce standard prepare and measure QKD, we specifically elaborate the BB84 protocol [18] or
conjugate coding [24], sketched in Fig. 1b. A general protocol for prepare-and-measure (PM) QKD can
be found in Box 1.
Step 1 –(Data generation) Alice prepares eigenstates of σz or σx bases (red or blue of Fig. 1) and
attached them with a classical register. Then the classical-quantum preparation is
ψCAiQi = 1
4
X
ai,xi∈{0,1}
|xiai⟩⟨xiai| ⊗Hxi |ai⟩⟨ai| Hxi,
(1)
where the first system corresponds to her classical register, storing values of classical bits xi, ai ( xi, ai ∈
{0, 1}). The second system is the quantum state ψQi, which she sends to Bob. Here H is the Hadamard
matrix, such that H0 = 1 is identity.
Bob is unaware of Alice’s input xi, so he randomly selects a measurement basis yi and obtains result
bi (Here yi, bi ∈{0, 1}). To each result he attaches a random classical bit Ti, so that with probability
2Known quantum attacks on AES use Grover’s search algorithm, which provides quadratic speedup [21]. Thus, to achieve
“quantum-safe” security equivalent to AES256 (256 key bits) under classical attacks requires upgrading to AES512.
4
