Before attempting the canonical quantization in this scenario, in the next section, let us sum-
marize and comment on the picture we have introduced. First, the spacetime has topological
dimension d (e.g., d = 4), thus one calculates in the standard way any algebra, vector, tensor,
etc. usually appearing in QFT. Second, we conceptualize that quantum fields perceive an effec-
tive (varying) dimension deff < d, and this is defined by the behavior of the propagator for large
momenta. The highlighted scenario shares some features with the one in [16], being one main
difference that we consider and motivate a varying effective dimension. Another distinction is
that we face the problem of rendering consistent canonical quantization in QFT, thereby dealing
with well-known constraints.
3
Canonical quantization with varying effective dimension
We now turn our attention to actual QFT (in 1+3 topological dimensions). The aim is to gen-
eralize the canonical quantization of fields to the case of a fractal space-time with a running
effective dimension.
Consider a real scalar field ϕ(x) and write the Feynman propagator,
GF(x −y) = ⟨0|T ϕ(x)ϕ(y)|0⟩,
(13)
with T being the time-ordering operator.
In the same spirit as section 2.1, assume that space-time has fractal properties at scale M
and thus GF(x −y) has to be smoothed as GF(x −y, M). From (13), it follows that the field ϕ
must depend on the parameter M. One can visualize the field ϕ(x, M) in terms of a convolution
with a smoothing function, parametrized by M, as in (2).
As in the usual QFT, it is convenient to write the classical field, before quantization, in the
Fourier representation (fixing d = 4)
ϕ(x, M) =
1
(2π)4
Z
ϕ(p, M)eipxd4p .
(14)
Essentially, the standard quantization consists of replacing ϕ(p) with the ladder operators,
ϕ(p) →a(⃗p), a†(⃗p) (from here on, we denote the 3-vector with ⃗x to distinguish it from x,
denoting the 4-vector). In our case, we first recast ϕ(p, M) as
ϕ(p, M) =
p
r(p, M)ˆϕ(p) ,
(15)
where r is a positive definite function, and r ≈1 for p ≪M, reproducing standard QFT at low
energy, but changing physics at deep UV. Then we have 3,
ϕ(x, M) =
1
(2π)4
Z p
r(p, M)ˆϕ(p)eipxd4p .
(16)
3To keep contact with [16], this expression can be regarded as a Stieltjes-Fourier transform of measure dµH :=
p
r(p, M)d4p.
6
