6
of the qubit transition and prevents |F = 0, mF = 0⟩−
|F = 1, mF = ±1⟩transitions [31]. In practice, the laser
polarization of the global beam is optimized to maximize
the Rabi rate of a counter-propagating beam, but as the
IA beams must be able to generate both co-propagating
and counter-propagating gates, their polarization will not
be purely ˆσ±.
The fourth-order light shift from combs α and β on
each qubit level is,
∆E(±)
α,β = ±
X
l

Ω(l)
α,β
2
4(ω(l)
α −ω(0)
β
−ω|1⟩−|0⟩)
,
(14)
where the + and −sign correspond to a shift of level
|1⟩and |0⟩, respectively. Hence, the differential fourth-
order light shift on the qubit transition from each pair of
combs is δLS
α,β = ∆E(+)
α,β −∆E(−)
α,β = 2∆E(+)
α,β. The inter-
comb detunings are important for determining the value
of Eq. 14 as they dictate the two-photon detuning from
the qubit transition for pairs of comb teeth separated by
l harmonics and thus cannot be neglected as in Eq. 13.
An example MS(π/2) gate (with target qubits q0
and q1 in a 2- or 4-qubit register) has standard pa-
rameters τ = 250 µs and a blue-sideband detuning of
δk = ω(105)
b
−ω(0)
g
−ω|1⟩−|0⟩−ν0 = 52 kHz from the
lowest motional mode k = 0. This gate requires a two-
photon Rabi rate of Ω(105)
b,g
/2π = Ω(105)
r,g
/2π = 122.1 kHz,
which we achieve by scaling the value of h(0)
α
(for each α)
accordingly. We approximate beam amplitudes and po-
larizations of the experiment in the model. Specifically,
the global beam has ∼2× the amplitude of the individ-
ual beams at the ion. Likewise, the global beam polariza-
tion is set to maximize counter-propagating interactions
at the expense of co-propagating interactions for which
we measure a 7× reduction in the amount of ˆπ polariza-
tion (driving co-propagating) relative to ˆσ± polarization
(driving counter-propagating). Therefore we reduce the
fourth-order shifts from the global beam intra-comb (a
co-propagating interaction) by a factor of 72 due to in-
compatible polarizations to induce a light shift. This re-
sults in a total differential fourth-order light shift approx-
imately P
α,β δLS
α,β = 418Hz. This light shift is clearly
dependent on the overall power in each comb, changing
for different θ and h(j)
α , and thus methods for mitigating
the light shift must account for these dependencies.
B.
Empirical Cancellation of Light Shifts
Fourth-order light shifts from the red or blue Raman
drive alone cause the qubit to quickly dephase; therefore,
it is important that these terms cancel to improve the
coherence of the MS(θ) gate. In the previous section, we
considered the effect of all combs simultaneously. If in-
stead, we examine the effects of δLS
g,b and δLS
g,r separately,
we find they are of opposite sign and comparable magni-
tudes. Instead of scaling h(j)
α
for each comb together, we
can scale each comb independently such that δLS
g,b and δLS
g,r
cancel, but with the overall two-photon Rabi rate being
comparable to the target.
To find the optimal cancellation point, we begin by
directly measuring the resulting light shift and its coher-
ence via a Ramsey measurement. Specifically, we insert
increasing numbers of ‘single-qubit’ MS(π/2) gates be-
tween two microwave π/2 pulses. In this case, we drive
an MS(π/2) gate with the parameters necessary for the
maximally entangling two-qubit version of the gate but
only with a single ion’s IA beam on.
In this way, we prevent any changes to the spin proba-
bilities thus isolating the magnitude of the light shift. We
repeat this scan for different ratios ablue/ared = ζbr of the
red and blue MS gate tones applied to the AOMs. While
the ratios are varied, the amplitudes are changed in or-
der to maintain the parameters for a two-qubit MS(π/2)
gate.
We note that the scaling of ζbr is performed in
a manner consistent with the amplitude scaling neces-
sary for arbitrary θ – specifically, only the amplitude of
the global beam is adjusted to determine rotation, thus
leaving adjustment on the IA tones for the purposes of
balancing ζbr for the light shift.
Figures 5a-d show these Ramsey measurements after
M applications of a single-qubit MS(π/2). We quantify
the light shift effects by fitting the Ramsey measurements
to a cosine with a Gaussian decay profile to find the ac-
cumulated phase and coherence decay constants.
Figure 5a shows the Ramsey reasurement for a signif-
icant mismatch of ζbr = 0.6. The accumulated phase is
∼98° per single-qubit MS(π/2) gate, along with a fast
Gaussian decay constant of Mσ,1q = 5.7 gates which is
highlighted in red on Fig. 5e and f.
Figures 5e,f also
show that as ζbr is increased, the degree of cancellation
improves, evidenced by the decreasing phase accumula-
tion per gate and the increasing coherence of Ramsey
oscillations. Interestingly, there is a slight difference be-
tween the ratio at which accumulated phase is minimized
and the ratio at which the coherence is maximized. The
longest coherence occurs at ζbr = 1.05 and is found to
have Mσ,1q = 81.9 gates with each MS gate accumulat-
ing 6.2° of light shift (Fig. 5c and the green shaded regions
in Fig. 5e and f). However, the phase is best nullified at
ζbr = 1.1 with Mσ,1q = 37.5 and each gate accumulating
1.8° of light shift (Fig. 5d and the blue shaded regions in
Fig. 5e and f). To summarize, the ratio ζbr resulting in
the most coherent operation leaves a residual light shift,
which we compensate with a calibration described in the
next section.
In order to more easily calibrate ζbr for any given
ion and gate pair, we test an echo sequence against
the Ramsey sequence and find similar decay profiles
(Fig. 6) indicating largely homogeneous dephasing on
these timescales. Thus for calibration, we can now sim-
ply scan ζbr within an echo containing a fixed number
of single-qubit MS gates and select the point where the
ion best returns to its initial state. For a chain of ions,
this calibration is done within a single scan by applying
