XXX:18
Israel et al.
Fig. 15. Star Topology
Fig. 16. Radial Topology
Fig. 17. Statistics-based Topology
Fig. 18. Cyber-physical network connection between UCCs and their respective substations for the 2k-bus
model on the footprint of Texas. The green dots are generation substations, the blue dots are transmission
substations, the red dots are UCCs, and the yellow dot is the BA.
information in its substations. To determine which cyber node belongs to which substation or its
corresponding power node, the algorithm from [24] is modified. In this modification, the centroid
of the generated cyber network is overlaid on top of the centroid of the power network. Then,
the cyber network is rotated to find the Euclidean norm of the distance between each cyber node
and the power node. The cyber network is rotated on top of the power network to minimize the
Euclidean norm of all nodes. The overlay with the minimum value of the Euclidean norm is selected
to align the cyber nodes with their corresponding substations in the power network. This approach
allows adding geographic information to the cyber nodes and overlays the cyber topology onto the
power system topology.
5.4
Local Area Network
Based on the cyber models in [30], the Local Area Network (LAN) inside one of the substations is
illustrated in Fig. 19. This example substation has two buses, which are represented by the two
relays. The nodes are color-coded by node type: routers are pink, firewalls are gold, switches are
deep violet, hosts are green, and relay controllers are lavender.
The layout of nodes and links inside a substation is consistent across the different test cases
with the same components used in substations and control centers, as seen in Fig. 19 and Fig. 20.
Each node in these figures has attributes such as utility ID, substation ID, label, and their respective
VLAN.
5.5
Comparison with related work
A related work that develops cyber-physical communication networks from a specified power
grid model is the algorithm and software tool presented in [19]. This tool constructs a topology
that mirrors our statistics-based approach, applying it across the power grids of several European
countries. It specifically models transmission substations within the 380–400 kV high-voltage
transmission network.
In Table 6, there is an attempt to contrast this cyber-physical model generation tool with the
approach in [19]. While there are many areas where the two approaches complement each other,
the focus here is particularly on wide area network topologies and the types of data (data flows)
that occur within a substation, as well as between substations, control centers, and regulatory
agencies. For instance, the model generates various network topologies, including star, radial, and
statistical, whereas the referenced work only supports a statistical topology. Additionally, in the
