upgraded to integrate a vacuum system through the shielding downstream of the T4 target to minimise
interactions of the high intensity beam with material on the beam line and to reduce beam loss in the
shallow downstream transfer tunnels. As part of the upgrade, the wobbling system used to select the
secondary particle type and momentum for the H6/H8 beamlines will include a pulsed wobbling magnet
to switch protons towards ECN3 so that SHiP can operate in parallel with the other North Area users in
EHN1 and EHN2, by distributing the protons on different cycles.
A set of orthogonally aligned dipole magnets located on the beamline 100 m upstream of SHiP’s
production target in TCC8 will produce a circular beam sweep on the target’s front face in order to
dilute the energy deposited by the beam in the target. To maximise the inelastic proton collisions and
at the same time provide the cleanest possible background environment by suppressing decays of pions
and kaons to muons and neutrinos, SHiP’s proton target should be long and made from a combination
of materials with the highest possible atomic mass and atomic number. The baseline target design is
composed of water-cooled blocks of titanium-zirconium-doped molybdenum alloy (TZM), cladded by a
tantalum-alloy, in the core of the proton shower, followed by blocks of tantalum-cladded pure tungsten.
In total, it corresponds to 12 nuclear interaction lengths. Recent developments improving on this design
propose a target made completely from tungsten, cooled by helium. Beam tests with a prototype tungsten
target is foreseen for early 2026. The BDF/SHiP target has to fully absorb the 400 GeV 2.6 MJ/pulse
every 7.2 seconds, corresponding to roughly 350 kW of average beam power. It puts the target
system in a category that has technological synergies with neutron spallation sources worldwide.
Collaboration with existing and future user facilities, such as ISIS/STFC in the UK and ESS in
Sweden, are underway.
The target system is integrated into a free-standing shielded complex in TCC8. The first layer
of shielding, aiming at absorbing the showers of secondary particles, consists of 400 cm of cast iron
around the target vessel. The target assembly and this proximity shielding is confined in a low vacuum
(10−3 mbar) tank in order to reduce air activation and reduce radiation-accelerated corrosion due to ozone
production and various other nitric acid compounds. A second assembly of cast iron and concrete blocks
encapsulates the vacuum tank. Immediately downstream of the target, the proximity shield incorporates
a copper/tungsten plug to further reduce background over the shortest possible length. The downstream
hadron stopper and shielding are thick enough to ensure that the radiation environment in the experi-
mental hall allows non-radiation-tolerant electronics. The hadron stopper section is also magnetised to
provide the first section of sweeping power for SHiP’s muon shield.
The nTOF Collaboration in collaboration with the HI-ECN3 project have put forward a proposal
to implement an activation station close to the SHiP proton target to profit from the wide-spectrum ultra-
high neutron flux. The setup can be operated in synergy with the operation of SHiP without disturbing
the main physics programme. It will allow unique measurements of key nuclear reactions for the first
time, of urgent need in the fields of nuclear astrophysics, nuclear energy and nuclear medicine [22].
The HI-ECN3 project is currently in the technical design phase with the delivery of the Technical
Design Report for the intensity upgrade and BDF expected mid-2026. The project is working in close
synergy with the North Area Consolidation (NA-CONS) project to upgrade the required accelerator in-
frastructure as part of Phase 1 of the consolidation programme to be implemented during Long Shutdown
3 in 2026 - 2029. This is followed by the construction work of the BDF in TCC8 during the first part
of Run 4 in parallel to resumed operation of the North Area experiments, aiming for completion of the
BDF ahead of first beam on target in 2031.
The cost of upgrading and implementing BDF in ECN3 for SHiP is approximately 100 MCHF
lower than the ECN4 proposal presented in the 2020 ESPP proposal [23]. The saving was made by
removing the need for major civil engineering works and by re-using existing infrastructure as well
as profiting from the ongoing investment in the consolidation of the North Area. Alongside the NA-
CONS project, the upgrade of ECN3 will secure the long-term future of the SPS Fixed Target physics
programme at CERN.
7
