Transient population dynamics of nanoparticles during pulsed EUV exposures
M. Chaudhuri1∗, L. C. J. Heijmans1, A. M. Yakunin1, P. Krainov2, D. Astakhov2 and M. van de Kerkhof1,3
1ASML The Netherlands B.V., P.O.Box 324, 5500AH Veldhoven, The Netherlands
2ISTEQ B.V., Eindhoven, The Netherlands and
3Department of Applied Physics, Eindhoven University of Technology,
PO Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands
The transient population dynamics of charged (postive or negative) and neutral nanoparticles
have been investigated in a pulsed Extreme Ultra-Violet (EUV) exposure environment with 3DPIC
simulations. At the initial stage of the simulation, all the particles are kept neutral. As the number
of EUV pulses increases over time, the population of neutral particle decreases faster at the expense
of negatively charged particle generation outside the beam location. However, a small population
(< 1%) of neutral particles become positively charged due to EUV photon interaction within the
beam area and remains in steady state over time. The critical pulse numbers have been estimated
for diﬀerent nanometer size particles above which most of the particles outside the beam locations
become negatively charged: smaller is the particle size, larger is the critical pulse number.
Population dynamics in generic terminology is used to
model or study the size and lifetime composition of pop-
ulations as dynamical systems. The size of the popula-
tion under consideration and the sizes of other interact-
ing populations are correlated with the environmental
parameters. The evolution of natural populations is in-
ﬂuenced by its interactions with varying surrounding en-
vironmental conditions and have an important impact on
population dynamics. The models in population dynam-
ics theory have been based on a fundamental principle
which says that the relative growth rate of a population
is a function of the environment in which it lives.
It
can be described as the change of population which is
the result of four key parameters, such as birth, death,
immigration and emigration. These factors can be used
to follow and predict changes in a population. Several
models have been developed to address population re-
sponse to a periodically or stochastically changing en-
vironment in time [1]. It is an active research ﬁeld in
climate change [1], mathematical biology [2], epidemiol-
ogy [3], ecology [4, 5], genetics [6, 7], cosmology [8, 9],
space debris [10], nonlinear population dynamics [11],
quantum manifestation of population dynamics [12], eco-
nomics [13], etc. The physics of particle contamination
within EUV lithography scanners in the context of semi-
conductor technology is the latest addition to this fasci-
nating interdisciplinary ﬁeld due to interactions of nano-
/micro-particles with surrounding pulsed EUV and EUV
induced plasma environments.
EUV lithography technology is introduced to continue
with Moore’s law [14] in semiconductor chip manufactur-
ing industry which uses highly energetic EUV photons
(energy ∼92 eV) with the wavelength of 13.5 nm [15].
One of the side eﬀect of this development is the gener-
ation of EUV induced plasma due to the interaction of
such highly energetic EUV photons with low pressure (1-
10 Pa) background hydrogen gas [16–23]. The spatial and
temporal evolution of the EUV plasmas has been investi-
gated in laboratory experiments and with particle-in-cell
(PIC) models [24–27]. The technological complexity in-
creases with pulsed mode operation in complex geometry
during which EUV pulse is ﬁred for few tens of nanosec-
onds duration and creates highly transient non-LTE (Lo-
cal Thermodynamic Equilibrium) plasma which decays
for approx ∼20 µs before the next EUV pulse triggers.
The major impacts of this developmemt are associated
with plasma-surface interaction (critical surfaces in the
optical path or nearby area) and plasma-particle inter-
actions.Whenever the plasma comes in contact with sur-
faces, it creates a local electric ﬁeld which depends on
surface properties (material, sharp edge, roughness, etc).
On the other side, the particles get charged when they
come in contact with plasma and start responding to the
electric ﬁeld. So, the plasma plays a signiﬁcant role on
the dynamics of mirco- and nanoparticles in the com-
plex geometries of EUV lithographic tools. Understand-
ing and controlling the dynamics of particles are essen-
tial for high volume manufacturing of chip production in
EUV lithography processes. Even the presence of a single
particle on the mask is a high risk as it creates a defect in
the imaged pattern on the wafer and all the chips become
damaged [28].
Diﬀerent particle charging mechanisms
have been explored in the context of plasma-particle in-
teractions depending on their locations, whether they are
at surface [29–36] or in the bulk [37–52]. In recent times,
the micro-/nano-particle response to afterglow (both spa-
tial and temporal) physics in the bulk has been studied
extensively [53–76]. In the context of pulsed mode op-
eration of EUV lithography scanners, the bulk particle
charging mechanisms in highly transient EUV and EUV
induced plasma have been explored [77]. It was found
that local transient plasma conditions strongly inﬂuence
the charge state of the particles: positive, negative or
neutral and hence their interactions with local electric
ﬁeld leading to transport from one location to another.
In this way, the population of the particles with diﬀerent
charge states are interconnected with surrounding local
plasma environments. It is extremely important to con-
trol the population dynamics of particles eﬃciently to
minimize contamination risks. The goal of this work is
to make the ﬁrst attempt to explore transient population
dynamics of nano particles in pulsed EUV and EUV in-
arXiv:2504.05971v1  [physics.plasm-ph]  8 Apr 2025
