Fig. 3 (a) Field-dependent Jc and (b) normalized ﬂux pinning force density fp as a function of the
reduced ﬁeld h for as-cast Ta1/6Nb2/6Hf1/6Zr1/6Ti1/6. Reproduced with permission from [71].
ﬁeld range as the temperature decreases. The self-ﬁeld Jc of 10,655 A/cm2 at 2 K rep-
resents the highest value observed; however, it remains below the practical threshold of
105 A/cm2. The critical exponent α in the magnetic ﬁeld dependence of Jc expressed
as ∝H−α (H: external ﬁeld) is 0.85 at 2 K, indicating that collective pinning occurs
within the sample. Figure 3(b) plots the normalized ﬂux pinning force density, fp, as
a function of the reduced ﬁeld, h, at various temperatures. The magnetic ﬁeld depen-
dence of fp is well described by the surface pinning model or the double exponential
model. The former suggests that grain boundaries in the polycrystalline sample act as
ﬂux pinning centers. However, the as-cast Ta1/6Nb2/6Hf1/6Zr1/6Ti1/6 with its single-
phase structure appears inadequate for practical applications as a superconducting
wire due to the absence of strong ﬂux pinning centers.
3.2 Bulk sample prepared by spark plasma sintering
Subsequently, the Korean research team employed a combination of planetary ball
milling and spark plasma sintering (SPS) as the sample preparation method[61]. Pow-
ders of the constituent elements, in their stoichiometric ratios, were loaded into a
stainless-steel jar under an argon atmosphere and subjected to ball milling. SPS was
then performed on the compacted powders. Tc of the SPS sample was determined to
be 7.83 K, which is nearly identical to that of the as-cast bulk sample. µ0Hc2(0) was
measured as 10.5 T, which is lower than that of the arc-melted sample (12.05 T). The
calculated ξGL(0) for the SPS sample was 5.66 nm. The X-ray diﬀraction pattern of
the SPS sample revealed impurity phases of Hf2Fe and ZrFe2. Contamination with Fe,
originating from the stainless-steel balls and jar used during ball milling, was found
to be unavoidable.
The isothermal magnetic hysteresis loops measured below Tc are presented in Fig.
4. The loop shape is markedly diﬀerent from that of the arc-melted sample in the as-
cast state. The M-H (M: magnetization, H: external ﬁeld) loop of the SPS sample
exhibits magnetization quenching at low magnetic ﬁelds, a phenomenon that becomes
6
