to a notable contribution to the uncertainty for predictions for gluon–gluon fusion Higgs boson
production. There are efforts to estimate the theoretical uncertainties due to (missing) higher
order terms. These would be in addition to the (dominant) experimental uncertainties from
the data included in the PDF fits. The theory uncertainties would be obtained by variations
of the renormalization and factorization scales that are used to evaluate the matrix elements at
NNLO. Considering separate scales of each type for each data-set calculation would add too many
degrees of freedom and remove much of the constraining power of the PDF fit. Connecting the
renormalization or factorization scales, even for similar processes, may be treating those scales as
more physical than they deserve. Perhaps there is more justification for treating the factorization
scale in this manner than the renormalization scale. There is also the issue of whether introducing
additional uncertainties in the PDFs through scale variations, and then in addition, performing
scale variations in the predictions in the nominal manner, may lead to an over-counting of
the uncertainty. Ref. [20] proposes using a physical basis (for example structure functions or
similar observables) rather than the PDFs themselves. Considering correlated factorization scale
variations in the PDF fit, and not in the resultant predictions, may not be ideal but an acceptable
solution for certain specific physical quantities. See also Refs. [21,22] for further discussion.
Ref. [13] proposes taking into account the missing higher order uncertainties in the cross
sections included in the PDF fits by adding a theory uncertainty to the experimental covariance
matrix. Since the theory uncertainties are uncorrelated with the experimental ones, the two
uncertainties can be added in quadrature in the covariance matrix. The global fit processes are
divided into five separate types (DIS NC, DIS CC, Drell–Yan, jets and top), with a hypothesis
that calculations within a given type will be likely to have similar structures of higher-order
corrections. An assumption is made that the renormalization scale is only correlated within
a single type of process, while the factorization scale is fully correlated across all processes.
Resultant fits to the NNPDF4.0 data set do not substantially change the PDF uncertainties,
but may have a non-negligible effect on PDF central values.
MSHT [23] has carried out an exercise of parametrising the higher order effects with
nuisance parameters based on a prior probability distribution (using the information currently
available regarding N3LO matrix elements and the approximate splitting functions). Where
not explicitly available, the N3LO/NNLO K-factors are parametrised as a superposition of both
NLO and NNLO K-factors, allowing the fit to determine the combination of shapes and an
overall magnitude. The result is a reduction in χ2 for the global fit greater than that expected
by the extra degrees of freedom.
In order to fully determine PDFs at N3LO, a number of contributing items have to be
known:
– parton splitting functions at 4 loops to evolve the PDFs in x and Q2
– transition matrix elements at 3 loops to change the number of PDF flavors at heavy quark
mass thresholds
– coefficient functions for DIS at 3 loops
– hadronic cross sections at N3LO
Recently, additional moments have been calculated allowing a better determination of the
necessary 4-loop splitting functions (see the benchmarking exercise and references therein in
Ref. [24]; for more recent updates see Ref. [25]), partial information is known for the 3-loop
transition matrix elements, and the 3-loop light flavor coefficient functions are known for DIS,
with approximations for the heavy flavor coefficient functions (although there has been recent
progress on this front [26]). There is limited information, however, at N3LO for the hadronic
5
