13
We further define a chiral winding phase ϕ(kz)
=
arg(det[U(kz)V †(kz)]).
Here, the unitary matrices U
and V arise from a singular value decomposition with
h(kz) = UDV †. By tracking the evolution of ϕ(kz), we
can conclude WS by counting the winding number of ϕ.
For example, Fig. 5 (g) shows the evolution of ϕ(kz) at
µ = 0, clearly showing WS = 2. Notably, this double-
MZM vortex phase has also been predicted to exist in
superconducting SnTe [57, 64].
Notably, there exist two pairs of degenerate VLT tran-
sitions, one at µ = 0.144 and another at µ = −0.225.
Interestingly, we find that these degenerate transitions
fail to trigger any change in vortex topology. Hence, we
will ignore these “fake transitions” from now on. Below,
we summarize the VLT indices for each region,
(WS, ζ0, ζ2, Q1) =















(0, 0, 0, 0)
µ > 0.712,
(1, 0, 1, 0)
µ ∈(0.168, 0.712),
(2, 0, 0, 0)
µ ∈(−0.239, 0.168),
(1, 0, 1, 0)
µ ∈(−0.628, −0.239),
(0, 0, 0, 0)
µ < −0.628.
(29)
This result not only agrees well with our π-junction-based
predictions, but also establish the Dirac octet as a new
playground for various Majorana physics.
V.
APPLICATION TO REAL-WORLD
SUPERCONDUCTORS
Thus far, we have theoretically proposed and estab-
lished a topological correspondence relation between π-
phase junctions and vortex lines, as numerically con-
firmed by comprehensive model studies. In this section,
we will develop a JVC-based ab-initio workflow to diag-
nose JT and further extrapolate VLT for real-world can-
didate superconductors, without performing challenging
large-scale vortex simulations. We will first discuss the
general construction scheme of π-junction Hamiltonians
at the first-principles level. As concrete examples, we will
proceed to apply our theoretical strategy to investigate
and clarify the Majorana possibilities of two supercon-
ducting materials that have been experimentally synthe-
sized, 2M-WS2 and Sr3SnO. Remarkably, both systems
are numerically confirmed to be promising playgrounds
for discovering and engineering JT and VLT.
A.
Ab-initio simulations of a π-junction
For a candidate superconductor χ, we will first conduct
the density-functional theory (DFT) [65] to calculate the
full electronic band structure of its normal state within
the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) [66]. This
will be followed by a Wannier-function projection [67] to
obtain a multi-orbital electronic tight-binding Hamilto-
nian hw(k) that accurately captures the low-energy dis-
persions of χ. We will then construct a slab Hamiltonian
Hα(k∥) to describe an ˆα-directional π-junction geometry
by updating hw(k) to a BdG form H(k). Although the
above procedure looks straightforward, there are several
technical aspects that can be tricky in practice.
First of all, hw(k) must respect the full crystalline and
time-reversal symmetries of χ, which, however, may not
always hold in conventional Wannierization procedures.
To understand this stringent symmetry requirement, we
note that the pairing matrix for the conventional s-wave
channel is exactly the unitary matrix UT of the TRS
operation Θ = UT K, up to a possible minus sign. For
example, UT = isy in Eq. 1, and so is the s-wave pairing
matrix. Consequently, we will be able to write down the
correct BdG matrix H(k) if and only if (i) hw(k) respects
TRS; and (ii) the exact matrix form of UT is known for
hw(k). Besides, a knowledge of lattice-symmetry repre-
sentations for hw(k) will also be essential for evaluating
JT symmetry indicators for Hα(k∥).
To cope with this challenge, we employ the full-
potential local-orbital (FPLO) package [68] to conduct
first-principles simulations, which features a built-in
module that can wannierize the DFT band structure
based on symmetry-conserving maximally localized Wan-
nier functions (MLWFs) [69]. Specifically, the real-space
hopping matrix element between two Wannier orbitals is
given by,
tαβ(R −R′) = ⟨R′α|ˆh0|Rβ⟩,
(30)
where ˆh0 formally represents the electronic Hamiltonian
operator for χ.
Here, |Rα⟩represents the symmetry-
preserving Wannier function at the real-space lattice vec-
tor R = ma+nb+lc, where α denotes the orbital or spin
index and a, b and c denote the primitive lattice vectors
of the crystal. Upon a Fourier transform, we have
[h0(k)]αβ =
X
R
eik·Rtαβ(R).
(31)
Secondly, we are often interested in simulating a π-
junction that does not align with any of the primitive
lattice vectors, as will be the case for 2M-WS2. Hence,
we need to develop a formalism that allows us to con-
struct a slab Hamiltonian Hα(k∥) along any direction.
This process involves two main steps. First, for a given
Miller-index plane (hkl), we identify all lattice vectors
v = ua + vb + wc lying within the plane by satisfying
the condition v·[hkl] = 0. Next, a pair of in-plane lattice
vectors (a′, b′) is selected to minimize the enclosed area
while maximizing their linear independence. An out-of-
plane vector c′ is further determined by minimizing the
slab volume, which ensures our updated choice of lattice
parameters is the smallest possible one. (a′, b′, c′) thus
defines a new unit cell for the slab-geometry construc-
tion. Notably, the new cell may have an enlarged volume
compared to the original one.
We
now
construct
a
rotation
matrix
U
=
(a′, b′, c′)(a, b, c)−1
which
transforms
the
hopping
