the eavesdropper.
The key rate, accounting for finite-size effects, is expressed as:
rfinite = n
N (r −∆(n)) ,
(167)
where n represents the number of signals used for key preparation, N is the total number of exchanged
signals, and r denotes the asymptotic key rate. The correction function ∆(n) is employed to compensate
for the utilization of the Holevo function in the context of a finite number of signals. It is a function that
relies on the number of signals used for key preparation (n) and the probability of error associated with
the privacy amplification procedure ϵP A (∆(n) ∼
q
1
n log2(2/ϵP A)).
Numerical results indicate that under realistic conditions and considering finite-size effects, CV-MDI-
QKD is viable for metropolitan distances within experimental constraints. In particular, a total number
of signals exchanged in the range of N = 106 to 109 is sufficient to achieve a high key rate of 10−2 bits
per use over metropolitan distances, even in the presence of excess noise of approximately 0.01.
For the protocol considering collective attacks, the CV-MDI-QKD protocol with an asymmetric struc-
ture and finite-size effects can securely transmit over approximately 86 km under ideal reconciliation
efficiency and optimal modulation variance conditions for n = 1010 block size. When the reconciliation
efficiency is 96.9%, the maximum transmission distance achievable is approximately 75 km.
Lupo et al.
[361] studied the security proof for coherent attacks.
The advantage of their study
compared to the previous ones is that the correlations between Alice and Bob are generated through
the variable Z announced by the relay which allows Alice and Bob to do parameter estimation with a
negligible amount of public communication. Therefore, the whole raw key can be exploited for both
parameter estimation and secret-key extraction. They first investigated the security against collective
attacks by presenting an improved estimation of the conditional smooth min-entropy obtained by applying
a new entropic inequality and found the following lower bound on the secret-key rate:
rfinite ≥r −
1
√n∆AEP(2
3pϵs, d) + 1
n log(p −2
3pϵs) + 1
n2 log(2ϵ),
(168)
where p is the probability of successful error correction, ϵs is the smoothing parameter entering the
smooth conditional min-entropy and ∆AEP(δ, d) is a function of dimensionality d (∆AEP(δ, d) ≤4(d +
1)
p
log(2/δ2)).
The secret key rate for coherent attacks can be modified by applying the results of [387] as
rfinite ≥n −k
k
r∞−
√
n −k
n
∆AEP(2
3pϵs, d) + 1
n log(p −2
3pϵs) + 2
n log(2ϵ) −2
n log
K + 4
4

,
(169)
where k is the number of signals used for the energy test and K ∼n. Based on numerical examples,
it is in principle possible to generate a secret key against the most general class of coherent attacks
for block sizes of the order of 107–109, depending on loss and noise.
In particular, this composable
security analysis confirms that CV-MDI protocols allow for high QKD rates on the metropolitan scale,
supporting the results of the asymptotic analysis of Pirandola et al. [101]. The viability of utilizing the
entire raw key for both parameter estimation and key extraction was later demonstrated by Lupo et
al. [388]. Their work CV-MDI-QKD revealed that parameter estimation in this scheme can be achieved
with minimal public communication, as correlations are postselected by the central relay. Consequently,
the public variable announced by the relay encompasses all the information regarding the correlations
between Alice and Bob, making it sufficient, along with the local data, to estimate the covariance matrix.
This crucial discovery eliminates the trade-off between the secret key rate and the accuracy of parameter
estimation in the finite-size regime of CV-QKD. Similar results are presented in [389, 390].
Non-Gaussian postselection, such as virtual photon subtraction from a coherent state source, improves
CV-QKD protocols by enhancing secret key rates and tolerating excess noise over longer distances [391,
392]. Zhao et al. [393] and Ma et al. [394] demonstrated its application in coherent-state CV-MDI-
QKD, optimizing performance through Alice’s photon subtraction with carefully chosen parameters while
maintaining protocol security. Kumar et al. [395] showed that photon subtraction on two-mode squeezed
coherent states extends transmission distances up to 68 km but reduces key rates compared to vacuum
states.
Practical applications, such as photon subtraction over fiber-to-water channels [396], further
validate this approach. Recently, Papanastasiou et al. [397] and Ghalaii et al. [398] analyzed composable
finite key generation, demonstrating secure CV-MDI QKD over free-space optical links under realistic
conditions.
64
