20
enough. This transition point increases for larger ğœ…, as indicated by the blue wedge region
in Figure 8(c), meaning that an orders of magnitude higher ğœ…is possible with cupular
deflection still tracking angular velocity, if the Stokes number is accordingly increased in a
very particular way.
We may interpret the effect of high fluid inertia by considering the response of the cupula
as the forcing frequency is increased. For small forcing frequencies the deformation will
follow the angular acceleration, and as the forcing frequency is increased the cupula will
start deforming in phase with the angular velocity, as expected from Â§ 3.2; this is well known
in the vestibular literature (Benson 1990). However, our results from this section suggest that
when the forcing frequency is further increased (in humans, to about 100 Hz), the cupular
deformation will again be in phase with the angular acceleration.
5.3. Non-uniform channel widths
As noted in the introduction, an advantage of our theoretical formulation is that it is also
compatible with a non-uniform and arbitrary channel width, described by the function ğ‘(ğ‘ ),
so long as the small aspect ratio between channel width and length is maintained. This case
is more delicate than the one we saw in the last subsection, as the pressure gradient is no
longer constant but depends on ğ‘(ğ‘ ), and must be integrated along the channel to obtain the
pressure jump across the cupula. In Appendix C a method based on the Laplace transform
and the convolution theorem is developed, through which we obtain an approach to solving
the problem for both non-uniform channel widths and St > 0. The main result is that we
obtain the same form of equation (5.6) for the deflection ğœ‚0(ğ‘Ÿ, ğ‘¡), with the Kernel K(ğ‘¥; St)
given by the (temporal) inverse Laplace transform of
ËœK(ğœ; St) =
 âˆ«2ğœ‹
0
dğ‘ 
ğ‘(ğ‘ )4 Ãâˆ
ğ‘›=0 ğœ†âˆ’2
ğ‘›

ğ‘(ğ‘ )2Stğœ+ ğœ†2ğ‘›
 âˆ’1
!âˆ’1
.
(5.15)
For a given canal profile ğ‘(ğ‘ ), the Kernel may be numerically obtained by fixing a
discretization of ğœinto a finite number of points. For each point, the integral can be populated
for ğ‘(ğ‘ ) and computed using standard quadrature methods. This will yield ËœK(ğœ; St) for a
finite number of ğœ. The equation for the pressure jump (5.7), can then be either solved in
Laplace space, inverting the transformed solution using an efficient algorithm (Kuhlman
2013), or in real space using a trapezoidal method.
We have developed a general framework that allows us to solve for the cupular displacement
and pressure jump for complicated canal geometries allowing also for the possibility of fluid
inertia. As an example of the scenarios in which this approach might be useful, we now
reconsider some of the numerical results presented in figure 4.
5.4. Fluid inertia explains discrepancies between numerics and model
Figure 4 generally shows excellent agreement between the St = 0 model presented in Â§ 3 and
our COMSOL numerics, especially at the scale of the largest velocities, which were used
for comparison in figure 4. However, if we zoom in to situations where the velocity is small,
such as when ğ‘¡= 0.5, then we might expect to observe differences caused by small errors
in the phase of the motion. Figure 9 shows just such an effect: the agreement between the
predictions of the St = 0 asymptotics (dashed black curves) and COMSOL simulations (blue
markers) is no longer satisfactory for small and moderate values of the stiffness ğœ…â‰²1: while
the absolute error is small, the relative error is very large. This is because even for small
Stokes numbers, the exact time at which the velocity zero is different from that predicted by
the St = 0 asymptotics of Â§ 3, which essentially assume that the motion is quasi-steady.
