A&A proofs: manuscript no. main
get log10 MBH/M⊙= 8.83 ± 0.46, where most of the error comes
from propagating the scatter of Eq. 2. This number is in line with
previously reported estimation (Graham et al. 2015b).
3.2. Single disky broad-line region with a spiral perturbation
BLRs are often considered spherically symmetric and virialized.
However, multiple observational results, mostly from reverbera-
tion mapping campaigns, have proven this is not always the case
(Eracleous et al. 1995; Bentz et al. 2010; Grier et al. 2017). This
is especially true when emission lines deviate from pure Gaus-
sianity (Zastrocky et al. 2024) as this is often tracing the pres-
ence of sub-structures in the BLR clouds distribution or devia-
tions from virial equilibrium (Pancoast et al. 2014). Even though
the structure of the BLR has been typically investigated with
velocity-resolved reverberation mapping, here we follow an ap-
proach closer to that presented in Raimundo et al. 2020 on sin-
gle epoch observations. Similarly to what is done in that work,
we employ a nested sampling approach for the parameter esti-
mation; however, instead of focusing on the BLR kinematics,
we consider asymmetric deviation in its emissivity. Our semi-
analytic model is based on Storchi-Bergmann et al. 2003a where
asymmetric emission lines are modeled by introducing a spi-
ral perturbation in a disk-like BLR rotating in circular Keple-
rian motion around its SMBH. Such kind of perturbations are
expected to arise in the self-gravitating part of accretion disks
(Wang et al. 2022).
In what follows, we summarize the main assumptions of the
model “spiral model” hereinafter) that is described in detail in
Sottocorno et al. (in prep.). The BLR is assumed to be on a razor-
thin disk-like configuration whose axial symmetry is broken due
to the presence of a spiral perturbation. Under these assumptions,
the BLR emissivity profile reads:
<
ϵ(ξ, ϕ) = ξ−1 · exp
−(ξ −ξc)2
2σ2
ξc

(
1+
A
2 exp
"
−4 log 2
δ2
(ϕ −ψ0)2
#
+
A
2 exp
"
−4 log 2
δ2
(2π −ϕ + ψ0)2
#)
,
(3)
where ξ is the cylindrical radius normalized to the gravitational
radius Rg = GMBH/c2, and ϕ is the azimuthal angle. ξc and σξc
are the radial position and the extent of the bulk of the emissivity
profile respectively, while A and δ define the relative intensity of
the spiral perturbation with respect to the underground Gaussian
emissivity and the azimuthal width of the spiral, respectively.
Finally, ϕ −ψ0 denotes the azimuthal distance from the ridge of
the spiral arm, where ψ0 = ϕ0 + log10 (ξ/ξsp)/ tan p. Here ϕ0 is
the initial angular position of the spiral at the innermost radius
of the spiral ξsp, while p is the spiral pitch angle.
The emissivity profile of Eq. 3 differs from that assumed by
Storchi-Bergmann et al. 2003b for a Gaussian multiplicative fac-
tor in the radial dependence of the emissivity. This choice en-
sures that the bulk of the BLR emissivity is localized close to the
radius predicted by the luminosity-radius relation (Bentz et al.
2009; Shen et al. 2024).
The emission line profiles of the BLR are the emissivity-
weighted sum of the contribution coming from each resolution
element of the BLR scaled by a luminosity normalization pa-
rameter LHβ (for the Hβ) and LHγ (for the Hγ). We assume each
resolution element to emit as a Gaussian centered at the Hβ (or
Hγ) Doppler-shifted wavelength and whose width is regulated
by a broadening parameter, σλ. The Doppler shift of each reso-
lution element is computed by assuming the BLR is inclined by
an angle, i, with respect to line-of-sight.
A summary of the model parameters together with the as-
sumed priors and the best-fit parameters is reported in Tab. 2.
We assumed either uniform or log-uniform priors for most of
the parameters, except for the inclination angle which follows a
uniform distribution for sin i. We allowed a maximum inclina-
tion angle of π/4 since for a higher inclination angle, we do not
expect to observe BELs due to the obscuration from the dusty
torus. Moreover, we assume the BLR extending between 200
and 18000 gravitational radii, which, in the case of a 108.8 M⊙
BH, becomes from ≃0.006 pc to ≃0.58 pc. This number must
be considered as an order of magnitude estimate of the BLR size
since the gravitational radius is affected by the error propagation
on the BH mass. Still, since the spiral model does not explicitly
depend on the BH mass, the results regarding the appearance of
PG 1302-102 BLR will remain unchanged.. Finally, since the
Hβ and Hγ emission line might not necessarily be localized at
the same distance from the SMBH and subject to the same dy-
namics (Kuhn et al. 2024), we included different radial lengths,
widths, and broadening parameters for the two lines.
The spiral model presented here does not account for any-
thing else besides a broad emission component at a chosen ref-
erence wavelength (the Hβ and Hγ in our case). For this reason,
in order to apply such a model directly to the spectrum presented
in Fig. 1, we must account for all the sources of emission that
are not associated with a broad component (“background model”
hereinafter). Since the spiral model has a higher computational
cost, to limit the number of iterations before reaching conver-
gence we fixed the background model to the best fit obtained
in Model 1 excluding the broad Gaussian contribution associ-
ated with the Hβ, Hγ, and the very broad and redshifted compo-
nent. Even with this approximation the overall parameter estima-
tion required more than a week13 before reaching convergence.
Therefore, in order to obtain a complete parameter estimation
without excluding any data14in a reasonable amount of time, we
followed the approach outlined in Rigamonti et al. 2022, 2023,
implementing a GPU parallelization strategy for a much faster
(few hundred times) computation of the likelihood function.
The top panel of Fig. 3 shows the best-fit spiral model in
black (see Tab. 2 for the estimated parameters) on top of the
ESPRESSO data in gray. The gold line refers to the broad emis-
sion from the spiral BLR, while all the other colors refer to the
components of the background model that have been taken from
Model 1. The bottom panel represents the residuals defined as
(data-model)/error. Compared to Model 1, the spiral model pro-
vides a better fit to the data, reducing the residuals both in the re-
gion dominated by the Hβ and the Hγ. Notably, the spiral model
is able to account for the excess at λ ≃5000Å giving a phys-
ical interpretation to the very broad and very redshifted com-
ponent included in Model 1. The same model, without chang-
ing the overall geometrical structure15 of the BLR, improved the
fit of the Hγ emission (see Sec. 4 for a more detailed discus-
sion). Notably, even though we did not impose any prior relat-
ing the scale radius, width, and broadening of the Hβ and Hγ
13 On an 8-core machine equipped with 13th Gen Intel(R) Core(TM)
i7-1355U.
14 A possibility could have been to focus on the Hβ only reducing the
analyzed wavelength range and the overall computational cost of the
parameter estimation.
15 We note that i, A, δ, ϕ0, and p are the same for the Hβ and Hγ.
Article number, page 6 of 13
