3
two-photon resonance condition. Figure 2.a presents the
corresponding time sequence. The IR probe beam was
always present.
The cold atoms were captured in the
MOT during a charging time tch = 1 s after which the
cooling beams were turned off (releasing the cold atomic
cloud).
Simultaneously, the blue light was turned on.
The transmission of the IR probe was recorded 500 µs
after turning on the blue light (allowing the EIT signal
to approach its maximum) and averaged over an interval
tm = 1 ms.
The IR transmission was recorded for
alternate realizations of the cold cloud with and without
the MW field present in simultaneity with the coupling
beam.
The signal shown in Fig.
2.b is the difference
between these two conditions. Each point corresponds
to the averaging of 100 realizations of the MOT. The
base line in 2.b represents the EIT signal in the absence
of MW.
FIG. 2.
a) Time sequence (MOT: cooling beams, PB: probe
beam, CB: coupling beam, MW: MW field, AW: absorption
averaging time-window). b) Probe beam EIT variation as a
function of MW frequency. The dotted lines indicate the theo-
retical frequencies corresponding to transitions to the nearest
Rydberg levels shown in Fig. 1 [30].
As expected, the spectrum shows narrow absorption
peaks at MW frequencies corresponding to the transi-
tion to the nearby energy levels indicated in Fig. 1.a.
However, the most striking feature of the spectrum in
Fig.2.b is arguably the increase in transparency beyond
the level reached by optical-only Rydberg excitation
(zero of the vertical axis) which is observed over several
hundreds of MHz to the blue of the 55D3/2 →54F5/2
transition frequency.
The variations of the IR beam absorption signal ap-
pearing in Fig.2.b can be the result of MW-induced vari-
ations in the Rydberg excitation probability or of varia-
tions of the total number of atoms. We argue that the
first mechanism can explain the sharp increase of the ab-
sorption at MW frequencies corresponding to Rydberg
transition frequencies but is unable to account for the
above mentioned broad transparency increase. Instead,
we claim that the increase in the transparency is the re-
sult of the removal of atoms from the cloud as a conse-
quence of the strong DDI between pairs of atoms made
possible by the MW field.
FIG. 3.
a) Time sequence (same notation as in Fig. 2. CCD:
trigger pulse to camera). b) Images of the cold cloud fluo-
rescence after Rydberg optical excitation and alternate MW
field. i-v: Difference images between acquisitions with and
without MW radiation. i-iii: MW frequency ≃14.5 GHz and
different exposition times te. iv: MW frequency ≃14.0 GHz,
te = 2 ms. v: difference image noise background (without
MW field). vi: MOT fluorescence without Rydberg excita-
tion. The dashed white lines indicate the approximate path
of the Rydberg exciting laser beams across the cold cloud.
In i-v the gray background corresponds to zero difference be-
tween images and darker tones indicate a negative difference.
In vi the black background corresponds to zero fluorescence
and lighter tones correspond to increasing fluorescence.
To test our claim, we have taken images with a CCD
camera of the fluorescence emitted by the cold atomic
cloud immediately after turning off the simultaneous ir-
radiation of the cloud by the probe and coupling op-
tical fields and with MW radiation present once every
two MOT realizations. Details of the time sequence are
given in Fig. 3.a. The fluorescence was induced by the
MOT trapping laser beams. A delay tr ∼1 ms was al-
lowed between the turning off of the blue and the MW
fields and the acquisition of the image (300 µs acquisi-
tion time). This delay is long enough to allow the decay
of excited atoms to the ground state. Under such condi-
tions, the image brightness reflects the number of atoms
