4
tion (Petrossian et al., 1992). Soon after the vocabulary
of fluid-like motion was used by (Rozas et al., 1997) to
describe the rotation of two same sign vortices in free
space. Even though this work studies the propagation
in a linear medium, the authors emphasized that both
fluid flow and diffraction of light may be described us-
ing potential theory, and therefore they expected similar
phenomena to occur in both systems.
Thereafter, one of the pioneering groups in the study
of paraxial fluids of light, J. Fleischer and colleagues at
Princeton, have made significant experimental contribu-
tions using photorefractive crystals. In an early work,
(Fleischer et al., 2003) demonstrated the formation of
optical patterns and nonlinear self-organization in a fluid
of light. In particular, they explored how spatial solitons
interact to create complex structures such as optical lat-
tices and localized wave packets, effectively mimicking
fluid-like phenomena and bridging the gap between non-
linear optics and fluid dynamics. Following this approach
of classical nonlinear dynamics, they obtained pioneered
results on dispersive shock waves (Wan et al., 2007). An
intense theoretical activity has followed, targeting in par-
ticular cubic-quintic nonlinearity, where a fifth order non-
linear term is present to counter balance the third order
one (Kozyreff, 2010; Novoa et al., 2009; Paz-Alonso and
Michinel, 2005). These works are widely inspired by a
seminal theoretical work by (Josserand et al., 1995) on
vortex nucleation in a superfluid model.
Interest in paraxial fluids of light has steadily grown,
driven in part by the theoretical work of (Larr´e and Caru-
sotto, 2015), which advanced the analogy between atomic
ultracold gases and fluids of light, particularly through
the derivation of a generalized quantum theory of parax-
ial light propagation. As pioneered by (Lai and Haus,
1989a,b) for optical fibers, (Larr´e and Carusotto, 2015)
proposed a theoretical approach with a quantized elec-
tromagnetic field that is able to describe in its full gen-
erality the dynamics of interacting photons propagating
in the paraxial approximation. Interestingly this formal-
ism allows for many-body phenomena to be investigated
with the reconstruction of the quantum state of light and
its statistics after propagation using typical quantum-
optics techniques. While this quantum-optics approach
for paraxial fluids of light is still missing for clear exper-
imental demonstrations and therefore is not at the core
of this review, this direction is truly promising and will
be described in Section VIII.C.
In the meantime, we give a general overview of the
paraxial fluids of light formalism in Section II. In partic-
ular, we explicit the link between fluids of light and ultra-
cold atomic quantum gases which has been very fruitful
in the last decade. The question of the dimensionality of
the system is discussed in Section III. In Section IV.B, we
precise the analogy with a dictionary of terms between
the two fields, to help bridging the gap between them.
Moreover, we will compare typical experimental param-
eters and experimental techniques to see where fluids of
light could bring novel opportunities to study quantum
gases physics. For fluids of light, several experimental
platforms have emerged: atomic clouds, photorefractive
crystals and thermo-optic liquids and in Section V, we
compare these systems with common figures of merits to
evidence the advantages of each platforms. We describe
specific experimental and numerical techniques in Sec-
tion VI. In Section VII, we review the recent experiments
in the field, following three directions: quantum hydrody-
namics (solitons and vortices), out-of-equilibrium physics
and superfluidity. We conclude this review with our vi-
sion on the future directions of the field in Section VIII.
II. DETAILED THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
To describe the phenomena involving fluids of light, we
first establish the formal description of the system, and
then link the physics of light propagating in a nonlinear
medium with the physics of cold gases.
A. Nonlinear optics and the χ(3) nonlinearity
The propagation of light in a nonlinear medium is de-
scribed by an expression of the medium electric polar-
ization P as a function of the incoming electric field E.
From the Maxwell equations, we solve the propagation of
an electromagnetic field E in a medium as follows (Boyd,
2008):
∇2E −1
c2
∂2E
∂t2 =
1
ε0c2
∂2P
∂t2 ,
(1)
where c is the speed of light in vacuum, ε0 is the vacuum
electric permittivity and P is the electric polarization
in the medium. The electric susceptibility χ links these
two quantities as P(t) = ε0χE(t). In the case of nonlin-
ear media, the susceptibility also depends on the electric
field. The effect of the susceptibility is thus described as
an expansion in powers of the electric field:
P = ε0[ˆχ(1).E + ˆχ(2) : EE + ˆχ(3)...EEE + . . . ]
(2)
where ˆχ(n) is the n-th order susceptibility, a tensor of
rank n + 1. The corresponding tensor products are in-
dicated by the dots notation ., :, .... This expansion can
equivalently be written as:
Pi = ε0χ(1)
ij Ej + ε0χ(2)
ijkEjEk + ε0χ(3)
ijklEjEkEl . . .
(3)
where the indices (i, j, k, l, . . . ) run over the cartesian co-
ordinates (x, y, z) and a repetition of indices implies sum-
mation using the Einstein summation convention.
Since P(r) = −P(−r) in a medium with central
symmetry, all terms with even powers vanish.
Terms
