2
0
1
2
3
4
5
Total contribution,τi 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Benefit function
B1(τi)
B2(τi)
B3(τi)
Fig. 1.
Three kinds of benefit functions of the PGG. The lin-
ear benefit function (the dash-dot line), B1(τi) = bτi/5, where
b = 1. The saturating benefit function (the dashed line), B2(τi) =
b(1 −exp(−βsatτi)), where b = 1 and βsat = 2. The sigmoid ben-
efit function (the solid line) , B3(τi) =
b
1+exp(−βsig(τi−T )), where
b = 1, βsig = 5, and T = 5/2.
can be effectively described by utilizing N-player games [25–
30]. In particular, the public goods game (PGG) is a paradigm
of multi-player games [31–42]. Thus, the evolution of coop-
eration within continuous public goods games merits further
exploration. Notably, when analyzing public goods games,
various forms of benefit functions are typically considered.
The most common types include linear, saturating, and sig-
moid benefit functions
[16, 35, 36]. However, the evolu-
tionary dynamics of cooperation in continuous public goods
games with these benefit functions remain unknown in struc-
tured populations. Therefore, it is worthwhile to investigate
the evolutionary dynamics in continuous public goods games
with these different forms of benefit functions in structured
populations.
In this paper, we thus consider the continuous PGG in the
structured population depicted by a regular network. By em-
ploying the pair approximation approach, we obtain the inva-
sion fitness and subsequently derive dynamic equations under
three different benefit functions, thereby analyzing the evolu-
tion of cooperative investments. For the PGG with a linear
benefit function, our analysis reveals that cooperative invest-
ments evolve to either maximum or minimum depending on
the benefit-to-cost ratio. We then turn our attention to the
game with a saturating benefit function and find a potential
singular strategy that serves as an evolutionarily stable strat-
egy (ESS). Next, we analyze the PGG with a sigmoid bene-
fit function. Our observations indicate that when the thresh-
old value in the benefit functions is small, a singular strategy
serving as an ESS exists; when the threshold is intermediate,
both singular strategies, ESS and repellor, exist; and when the
threshold is large, only a unique repellor displays.
II.
MODEL
We consider the continuous PGG in an infinitely structured
population represented by a regular network of degree k. In-
dividuals are assigned to the nodes of the network and each of
them participates in k +1 games organized by himself/herself
d hi /h
k
i hb
h
i
l
individual investment. We respectively consider linear, satu-
rating, and sigmoid functions for the benefit functions B(τi),
by following previous works [16, 35, 36]. Specifically, we
consider the following expressions for the benefit function:
B(τi) = bτi/n (linear), B(τi) = b(1−exp(−βsatτi)) (saturat-
ing), and B(τi) =
b
1+exp(−βsig(τi−T )) (sigmoid). For clarity,
these benefit functions are plotted in Fig. 1. For the cost func-
tion, we adopt the standard linear form C(xi) = cxi where
b > c , which is widely used in evolutionary public goods
games [43, 44]. We stress that the linear cost function is a
classical assumption, ensuring the consistency with existing
studies [16, 35, 36].
Here, each individual i participates in k + 1 games where
he/she is a member and collects the total payoff from all the
involved games, denoted as Πi. The payoffs obtained from
interactions with their k neighbors determine the birth rates,
given by bi = exp(ωΠi/n), where ω > 0 represents the
strength of selection [45–47]. This exponential payoff to the
birth rate map is designed to ensure that the birth rates are al-
ways positive and can be easily converted into probabilities
for reproduction.
After playing the game, the death-birth updating is em-
ployed to describe the update process [24, 48, 49]. To be
specific, a random individual is selected to die, and the sur-
rounding neighbours compete for the empty site proportional
to their birth rates.
In
what
follows,
through
theoretical
analysis
and
individual-based simulations, we respectively investigate
the evolutionary dynamics of cooperation in the continuous
public goods game with the proposed linear, saturating, and
sigmoid functions.
