14 
 
between ABAB and ABAC, and between ABCA and ABCB.  
The blue rectangles and arrows in Figs. 4b and 4c mark the tip scanning areas and 
the tip moving directions, respectively. The blue dashed lines in Figs. 4a to 4c indicate 
the DW positions separating two polar stackings before tip manipulation. After 
scanning the sample from left to the right, the DW between two polar states is pulled to 
the right, transforming ABAC stacking with downward polarization to ABCB stacking 
with upward polarization. The cyan dashed lines in Fig. 4b and 4c mark the new DW 
positions after the first area scan (indicated by the blue rectangle in Fig. 4b). Fig. 4c 
shows the resultant pattern after scanning the tip in the reverse direction. The dashed 
white line marks the new position of DW after the second area scan (indicated by the 
blue rectangle in Fig. 4c), which transforms the ABCB domain with upward 
polarization partially back into ABAC domain with downward polarization. Therefore, 
we demonstrate that spontaneous electric polarizations in tetralayer graphene can be 
reversibly switched by mechanical manipulation and such controlled switching is 
accomplished through a sliding DW mechanism. We note that the domain wall indicated 
 
Fig. 4. Reversible switching between the two polar ABAC and ABCB stackings by an 
AFM tip. a, SNOM image of device 2 before mechanical manipulation, where two DWs 
indicated by the blue and green dashed lines separate six domains whose stackings are 
denoted by symbols in color. The domain pattern is the same as the one shown in Figs. 2 
and 3 of device 1. b, SNOM image of the same region after moving the DW formed between 
two originally adjacent polar stackings (DW indicated by the blue dashed line) to the right 
by the AFM tip. The blue rectangle marks the scanning area of the AFM tip, with arrows 
indicating the tip moving directions. The new DW after the mechanical manipulation is 
indicated by the cyan dashed line, meaning that original ABAC stacking with polarization 
downward is changed to ABCB stacking with polarization upward. c, SNOM image of the 
same region after moving the DW formed between two adjacent polar stackings after 
movement in (b) to the left by the AFM tip. The blue rectangle marks the scanning area of 
the AFM tip, with arrows indicating the tip moving directions. The new DW position after 
the mechanical manipulation is indicated by the white dashed line, meaning that ABCB 
stacking with polarization upward can be switched back to ABAC stacking with polarization 
downward. Inset of (c) is the schematic of the domain pattern and DW movement. The scale 
bar in (a) is 1 µm (same scale in (b-c)).  
