16
(iii) Slight hole doping will destroy the vortex MZMs.
The second point above is an immediate deduction from
the JVC, by noting that the space group of 2M-WS2 does
not possess a high-fold rotation symmetry that would
support nodal vortices. As a result, a Z2 topological JT
in 2M-WS2 will always imply the existence of a Z2 Kitaev
vortex with end-localized MZMs.
C.
Sr3SnO
Our first-principles diagnosis also enables us to predict
new candidate material systems with Majorana physics.
Here, we take Sr3SnO as an example, which is an anti-
perovskite that has been experimentally synthesized and
measured. Intrinsic superconductivity with Tc ∼5K has
been reported for the hole-doped compound [47]. Mean-
while, DFT and effective model analysis have revealed
rich topological band features for the low-energy elec-
trons [42–46]. However, it has remained unclear, both
theoretically and experimentally, whether MZMs would
necessarily arise in Sr3SnO from the coexistence of band
topology and superconductivity.
The cubic antiperovskite Sr3SnO crystallizes in the
space group of Pmˆ3m (No.221). As shown in Fig. 7(a),
oxygen atoms and Sn atoms are located at the center and
corners of the cube, respectively, which are surrounded
by six Sr atoms in an octahedral arrangement. The Sr-
based d electrons of Sr atoms and Sn-based p electrons
contribute to two sets of J=3/2 quartets near the Fermi
level, which have been coined as the “Dirac octet” [42].
It is the inter-quartet band inversion that leads to various
topological crystalline physics, which is a generic feature
for the antiperovskite A3BX family with A =(Ca, Sr,
La), B =(Pb, Sn) and X =(C, N, O).
We apply FPLO to calculate the DFT band structure
of Sr3SnO, as shown in Fig. 7 (b). Due to the crystal
symmetry, there exist six massive Dirac points with a
tiny gap of 19 meV along the Γ-X line, which is in ex-
cellent agreement with previous literature. We further
construct a set of symmetry-conserving MLWFs based
on 30 d-orbitals of Sr atom and 6 p-orbitals of Sn atoms.
The Wannier model h0(k) quantitatively reproduces the
DFT band structure, as shown by the dotted blue line in
Fig 7 (b). As discussed in Refs. [42, 45, 46], Sr3SnO fea-
tures two inequivalent mirror symmetries, Mx(x, y, z) →
(−x, y, z) and Mxy(x, y, z) →(y, x, z), based on which
we can define two electronic mirror Chern numbers [56],
Cx ∈Z and Cxy ∈Z.
Besides, the centrosymmetric
nature of the lattice allows us to define a Z4 inversion
symmetry indicator κ0 for the occupied electrons, with
κ0 = 2.
Interestingly, ab initio values of Cx and Cxy are miss-
ing in the literature. Thanks to the symmetry-preserving
MLWFs, we can feasibly decompose h0(k) into different
mirror sectors for a target mirror symmetry, and numeri-
cally evaluate the mirror-indexed Wilson loop spectra on
the mirror-invariant high-symmetry plane. Our Wilson-
loop results for Mx and Mxy are shown in Figs. 7 (d)
and (e), where red and blue dots denote the positive and
mirror parities, respectively. In particular, we find that,
Cx = Cxy = 2.
(37)
In Sec. IV D, we have discussed an 8-band effective model
hDO(k) for Sr3SnO, whose topological physics is con-
trolled by two parameters v1,2. Eq. 37 directly suggests
that v2/v1∈(0.5, 3), which is also our choice of parame-
ters in Sec. IV D. As will be shown below, this effective
model hDO(k) has indeed captured the key Josephson
topological features for Sr3SnO.
We proceed to construct the π-junction Hamiltonian
H[001](kx, ky) with a 500-layer slab along [001] and ∆0 =
15 meV. We further diagonalize H[001] at Γ and track the
evolution of zero-momentum Andreev bound states as a
function of µ, as shown in Fig. 7 (d). At Γ, we find two
level crossings at µ(1)
Γ
= −0.075 eV and µ(2)
Γ
= −0.143
eV, while other TRIMs do not display any gap closure.
We further calculate the Z4 indicator and find that
κ =





1
µ > −0.075,
2
µ ∈(−0.143, −0.075),
1
µ < −0.143,
(38)
where µ is in units of eV. In Figs. 7 (g) and (h), we plot
the Wilson loop flow for all 18,000 occupied states in the
500-layer π-junction of Sr3SnO. A gapless helical winding
pattern is found at µ = 0, consistent with κ = 1.
For completeness, in Figs. 7 (i) - (k), we proceed to
calculate a 2D color map of gap distribution in the (ky, µ)
space. Notably, we find two pairs of off-TRIM critical
points that are missing in Fig. 7 (f), with one pair at
µ(+)
k
= 0.032 eV and the other at µ(−)
k
= −0.160 eV. As
discussed in Sec. III, a pair of off-TRIM criticalities can
change the value of certain BdG mirror Chern number
by ±2, but they are invisible to either Z2 index ν0 or
Z4 indicator κ. This is why Eq. 38 fails to capture them.
Thus far, our ab initio junction simulations have revealed
two JT criticalities at TRIM (i.e., Γ) and two pairs of off-
TRIM gap closures. Quite remarkably, all of the above
JT features, including JT critical points and the values
of of κ, have been quantatitvely reproduced by the low-
energy sector of Dirac-octet model hDO(k) in Fig. 5.
Combining effective theory (Fig. 5) and ab-initio re-
sults (Fig. 7), we expect that the on-TRIM transition at
µ(2)
Γ
and off-TRIM transition at µ(−)
k
will merge and lead
to three VLT transitions very close to µc,1 ∼−0.2 eV.
Similarly, the on-TRIM and off-TRIM transitions at µ(1)
Γ
and µ(+)
k
will be mapped to three neighboring VLT tran-
sitions at µc,2 ∼0 eV. Now, we can predict and sketch
the VLT phase diagram for Sr3SnO as follows:
1. The vortex is Z2 topological and features a single
MZM for both µ < −0.2 (heavily hole doped) and
µ > 0 (electron doped).
