Scattering Protons
13
1.3. Parton Distribution Functions
In Section 1.3.1, we generalize the concept of PDFs, and relate them to the DIS parton model
using the factorization theorem. Then in Section 1.3.2 we introduce the PDF renormalization
group equations, which allow for the description of PDF scale dependence taking into account
the QCD splitting. Finally, in Section 1.3.3 we explain how the higher order QCD corrections
are organized inside the DIS structure functions.
1.3.1. Collinear factorization
PDF operator definition.
In the previous section we have introduced the concept of Parton
Distribution Function (PDF) from a phenomenological point of view. Starting from the quantized
quarks ψq and gluon fields Aµ of the QCD Lagrangian (Eq. (1.2)), one can construct the PDFs as
Fourier transform of the operator matrix element that counts the number of quarks and gluons
in the hadron state |P⟩and at given momentum fraction. For quark fields, we define
fq(x) =
Z dξ−
4π e−ixP +ξ−⟨P| ¯ψq(ξ−)γ+U(ξ−, 0)ψq(0) |P⟩,
(1.51)
where the hadron momentum is P µ = (P 0, 0, 0, P z) and P ± =
P 0±P z
√
2
are the light-cone
coordinates, with the extracted parton carrying a momentum xP µ with x ∈[−1, 1]. U is the
parallel transport operator of the gauge field given by the path ordering
U(ξ−, 0) = P exp
"
−ias
Z ξ−
0
dηA(η−)
#
(1.52)
The connection between Eq. (1.51) and the phenomenological quantities in Section 1.2.2 is
then
fq(x) =



q(x)
for
x > 0
−¯q(−x)
for
x < 0
(1.53)
assuming the caveat that, to obtain the correct helicity combinations, one now has to sum or
subtract the spin projection as in Eq. (1.46). The gluon PDF can be defined in an analogous way.
We refer to Refs. [47, 48] and Refs. [42, 43] for a more detailed discussion on the unpolarized
or polarized case. Finally, let us notice that PDFs, as defined in Eq. (1.51) must undergo the
renormalization procedure which subtracts the ultraviolet divergences of the bare field.
Factorization theorem.
The operator PDF definition is valid for any hadron (including nuclei)
implying that PDFs are really a characteristic property of the hadron and do not depend on the
scattering process we are looking at. But most importantly, it allows us to prove the factorization
theorem [48]: any inclusive DIS observable can be computed as convolution between the PDF fi,
describing the non-perturbative (i.e. long distance) dynamics and the partonic matrix element
