Activated solids: Spontaneous deformations, non-affine fluctuations, softening, and
failure
Parswa Nath,1 Debankur Das,2 Surajit Sengupta,3, ∗and Debasish Chaudhuri1, 4, †
1Institute of Physics, Sachivalaya Marg, Bhubaneswar-751005, Odisha, India
2Georg-August-Universitt Gttingen, Wilhelmsplatz 1, 37073 Gttingen, Germany
3Tata Institute for Fundamental Research Hyderabad, 36/P Gopanapally, Hyderabad 500107, India.
4Homi Bhabha National Institute, Anushakti Nagar, Mumbai 400094, India
(Dated: April 10, 2025)
We investigate spontaneous deformations in activated solids by analyzing crystal deformations
through non-affine fluctuations. A scaling law for non-affinity is derived, showing it scales quadrat-
ically with activity and inversely with density. At high activity, the non-affine parameter diverges,
signaling defect proliferation and melting to a hexatic phase. This softening is marked by reduced
shear modulus, solid order, and hexatic order. At a higher activity, the hexatic melts to a fluid. We
propose locally tuned activity to control non-affinity, demonstrated through numerical simulations.
Our predictions are testable in active colloids performing persistent random motion.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The study of active solids is inspired by biological sys-
tems like cell assemblies, tissues, and bacterial biofilms,
as well as artificial ones such as robotic solids [1–15].
These systems are out of equilibrium at microscopic
scales, with elements that locally consume and dissipate
energy, generating propulsion or stress and breaking de-
tailed balance. Unlike crystalline solids, which break con-
tinuous translational and rotational symmetries in equi-
librium, amorphous solids can be stabilized by compres-
sion and are governed by local force and torque balance
[16–19]. In active solids maintaining such balance is es-
sential for stability, as any departure can lead to defor-
mation and flow.
Drawing inspiration from nature, various artificial
micro- and nano-swimmer systems have been developed
over last decades [20, 21]. These self-propelled colloids
move by harnessing ambient energy – optical, thermal,
electrical, or chemical – through an auto-catalytic pro-
cess. Their behavior can be modeled by the active Brow-
nian particle (ABP) framework, where particles move at
a constant speed in their direction of motion, with ran-
dom reorientations. This paper examines the impact of
such activity on a sterically stabilized solid.
Equilibrium solids display low-energy phonon modes,
described by displacement fields and elasticity theory. At
higher excitations, topological defects, manifested as sin-
gularities in the displacement field, emerge. This frame-
work not only captures the behavior of plastic deforma-
tion and yielding in various solids [22–24], but also of-
fers a robust description of two-dimensional solid melt-
ing from quasi-long ranged ordered to disordered phase
within the BKTHNY theory, driven by the proliferation
of topological defects [25–29].
While the displacement
field approach can be applied to amorphous solids with
∗Deceased
† Corresponding author: debc@iopb.res.in
limited success [30], the absence of broken translational
symmetry complicates distinguishing smooth from sin-
gular displacements [31, 32]. Instead, atomic configura-
tions with localized, non-singular displacements – both
proposed [30, 33] and observed experimentally [34] – are
thought to function analogously to lattice defects in these
materials.
A generalized approach to classifying atomic dis-
placements in solids have been developed over the last
decade [35–43].
Building on concepts used to iden-
tify local plastic events in structural glasses [17], it has
been shown that atomic displacements within a coarse-
graining region can be projected onto two orthogonal
subspaces.
The affine component represents homoge-
neous linear transformations, such as isotropic expansion,
shear strains, and rotations, while the nonaffine compo-
nent captures the residual displacements.
These com-
ponents are linearly independent [36]. Nonaffine modes
have been linked to defect precursors in various lattice
structures [42], bridging the projection formalism with
conventional plasticity theories. This approach has also
addressed fundamental questions in solid rigidity [41] and
dynamic yield strength in nanoscale crystals [44]. Exper-
imentally, nonaffine rearrangements have been observed
to correlate with structural anisotropy in metallic glasses
[45] and colloidal crystals [46].
In this paper, we explore spontaneous deformations in
active solids using the concepts discussed above.
The
study of active matter [20, 21] has revealed novel non-
equilibrium phenomena, such as flocking [47, 48], pat-
tern formation and instabilities in active polar or apolar
nematics [49–53], and motility-induced phase separation
in active Brownian particles [54–57], with their mecha-
nisms understandable as low density phenomena [55, 58–
60]. Experimental realizations involve, apart from natu-
ral flocks and swarms, rely on active colloids, active gran-
ular or robotic systems such as hexbugs [12, 13, 20, 61–
67]. At high densities, active systems can exhibit liquid
crystalline, jammed, or crystalline states [15, 60, 68–72].
Recent studies also highlight extreme spontaneous defor-
arXiv:2504.06914v1  [cond-mat.soft]  9 Apr 2025
