One might still like to ask: “How does it work? What is the ma-
chinery behind the law?” No one has found any machinery behind
the law. No one can “explain” any more than we have just “ex-
plained.” No one will give you any deeper representation of the sit-
uation. We have no ideas about a more basic mechanism from
which these results can be deduced.
We would like to emphasize a very important difference between
classical and quantum mechanics. We have been talking about the
probability that an electron will arrive in a given circumstance. We
have implied that in our experimental arrangement (or even in the
best possible one) it would be impossible to predict exactly what
would happen. We can only predict the odds! This would mean, if
it were true, that physics has given up on the problem of trying to
predict exactly what will happen in a deﬁnite circumstance. Yes!
Physics has given up. We do not know how to predict what would
happen in a given circumstance, and we believe now that it is im-
possible, that the only thing that can be predicted is the probability
of different events. It must be recognized that this is a retrenchment
in our earlier ideal of understanding nature. It may be a backward
step, but no one has seen a way to avoid it.
We make now a few remarks on a suggestion that has sometimes
been made to try to avoid the description we have given: “Perhaps the
electron has some kind of internal works—some inner variables—
that we do not yet know about. Perhaps that is why we cannot predict
what will happen. If we could look more closely at the electron we
would be able to tell where it would end up.” So far as we know, that
is impossible. We would still be in difficulty. Suppose we were to as-
sume that inside the electron there is some kind of machinery that
determines where it is going to end up. That machine must also de-
termine which hole it is going to go through on its way. But we must
not forget that what is inside the electron should not be dependent
on what we do, and in particular upon whether we open or close one
of the holes. So if an electron, before it starts, has already made up
its mind (a) which hole it is going to use, and (b) where it is going
135
Quantum Behavior
