way, since it is a reversible machine. Therefore 3X is neither greater
nor less than a foot, and we discover then, by argument alone, the
law that X = 1/3 foot. The generalization is clear: one pound falls a
certain distance in operating a reversible machine; then the ma-
chine can lift p pounds this distance divided by p. Another way of
putting the result is that three pounds times the height lifted, which
in our problem was X, is equal to one pound times the distance
lowered, which is one foot in this case. If we take all the weights
and multiply them by the heights at which they are now, above the
ﬂoor, let the machine operate, and then multiply all the weights by
all the heights again, there will be no change. (We have to generalize
the example where we moved only one weight to the case where
when we lower one, we lift several different ones—but that is easy.)
We call the sum of the weights times the heights gravitational
potential energy—the energy which an object has because of its re-
lationship in space, relative to the earth. The formula for gravita-
tional energy, then, so long as we are not too far from the earth (the
force weakens as we go higher) is
.
(4.3)
It is a very beautiful line of reasoning. The only problem is that
perhaps it is not true. (After all, nature does not have to go along
with our reasoning.) For example, perhaps perpetual motion is, in
fact, possible. Some of the assumptions may be wrong, or we may
have made a mistake in reasoning, so it is always necessary to check.
It turns out experimentally, in fact, to be true.
The general name of energy which has to do with location rela-
tive to something else is called potential energy. In this particular
case, of course, we call it gravitational potential energy. If it is a ques-
tion of electrical forces against which we are working, instead of
gravitational forces, if we are “lifting” charges away from other
charges with a lot of levers, then the energy content is called elec-
gravitational
potential energy
for one object
(weight)
(height)
#
=
f
p
76
Six Easy Pieces
