state the axioms and then make all sorts of deductions. (So, not
satisﬁed to learn physics in four years, you want to learn it in four
minutes?) We cannot do it in this way for two reasons. First, we
do not yet know all the basic laws: there is an expanding frontier
of ignorance. Second, the correct statement of the laws of physics
involves some very unfamiliar ideas which require advanced math-
ematics for their description. Therefore, one needs a considerable
amount of preparatory training even to learn what the words mean.
No, it is not possible to do it that way. We can only do it piece by
piece.
Each piece, or part, of the whole of nature is always merely an
approximation to the complete truth, or the complete truth so far
as we know it. In fact, everything we know is only some kind of
approximation, because we know that we do not know all the laws
as yet. Therefore, things must be learned only to be unlearned again
or, more likely, to be corrected.
The principle of science, the deﬁnition, almost, is the follow-
ing: The test of all knowledge is experiment. Experiment is the sole
judge of scientiﬁc “truth.” But what is the source of knowledge?
Where do the laws that are to be tested come from? Experiment,
itself, helps to produce these laws, in the sense that it gives us hints.
But also needed is imagination to create from these hints the great
generalizations—to guess at the wonderful, simple, but very strange
patterns beneath them all, and then to experiment to check again
whether we have made the right guess. This imagining process is
so difficult that there is a division of labor in physics: there are the-
oretical physicists who imagine, deduce, and guess at new laws, but
do not experiment; and then there are experimental physicists who
experiment, imagine, deduce, and guess.
We said that the laws of nature are approximate: that we ﬁrst
ﬁnd the “wrong” ones, and then we ﬁnd the “right” ones. Now,
how can an experiment be “wrong”? First, in a trivial way: if some-
thing is wrong with the apparatus that you did not notice. But these
things are easily ﬁxed, and checked back and forth. So without
2
Six Easy Pieces
