physics—the ﬁrst American to achieve this status. Born in New
York in 1918 and educated on the East Coast, he was too late to
participate in the Golden Age of physics, which, in the ﬁrst three
decades of this century, transformed our worldview with the twin
revolutions of the theory of relativity and quantum mechanics.
These sweeping developments laid the foundations of the ediﬁce we
now call the New Physics. Feynman started with those foundations
and helped build the ground ﬂoor of the New Physics. His contri-
butions touched almost every corner of the subject and have had a
deep and abiding inﬂuence over the way that physicists think about
the physical universe.
Feynman was a theoretical physicist par excellence. Newton had
been both experimentalist and theorist in equal measure. Einstein
was quite simply contemptuous of experiment, preferring to put
his faith in pure thought. Feynman was driven to develop a deep
theoretical understanding of nature, but he always remained close
to the real and often grubby world of experimental results. Nobody
who watched the elderly Feynman elucidate the cause of the Chal-
lenger space shuttle disaster by dipping an elastic band in ice water
could doubt that here was both a showman and a very practical
thinker.
Initially, Feynman made a name for himself from his work on the
theory of subatomic particles, speciﬁcally the topic known as quan-
tum electrodynamics or QED. In fact, the quantum theory began
with this topic. In 1900, the German physicist Max Planck pro-
posed that light and other electromagnetic radiation, which had
hitherto been regarded as waves, paradoxically behaved like tiny
packets of energy, or “quanta,” when interacting with matter. These
particular quanta became known as photons. By the early 1930s
the architects of the new quantum mechanics had worked out a
mathematical scheme to describe the emission and absorption of
photons by electrically charged particles such as electrons. Although
this early formulation of QED enjoyed some limited success, the
theory was clearly ﬂawed. In many cases calculations gave incon-
sistent and even inﬁnite answers to well-posed physical questions.
x
Introduction
