the inequalities of the collisions on one side to the other, from one
moment to the next. Therefore, if we look at very tiny particles
(colloids) in water through an excellent microscope, we see a per-
petual jiggling of the particles, which is the result of the bombard-
ment of the atoms. This is called the Brownian motion.
We can see further evidence for atoms in the structure of crystals.
In many cases the structures deduced by x-ray analysis agree in their
spatial “shapes” with the forms actually exhibited by crystals as they
occur in nature. The angles between the various “faces” of a crystal
agree, within seconds of arc, with angles deduced on the assump-
tion that a crystal is made of many “layers” of atoms.
Everything is made of atoms. That is the key hypothesis. The most
important hypothesis in all of biology, for example, is that every-
thing that animals do, atoms do. In other words, there is nothing that
living things do that cannot be understood from the point of view that
they are made of atoms acting according to the laws of physics. This
was not known from the beginning: it took some experimenting
and theorizing to suggest this hypothesis, but now it is accepted,
and it is the most useful theory for producing new ideas in the ﬁeld
of biology.
If a piece of steel or a piece of salt, consisting of atoms one next
to the other, can have such interesting properties; if water—which
is nothing but these little blobs, mile upon mile of the same thing
over the earth—can form waves and foam, and make rushing noises
and strange patterns as it runs over cement; if all of this, all the life
of a stream of water, can be nothing but a pile of atoms, how much
more is possible? If instead of arranging the atoms in some deﬁnite
pattern, again and again repeated, on and on, or even forming little
lumps of complexity like the odor of violets, we make an arrange-
ment which is always different from place to place, with different
kinds of atoms arranged in many ways, continually changing, not
repeating, how much more marvelously is it possible that this thing
might behave? Is it possible that that “thing” walking back and
forth in front of you, talking to you, is a great glob of these atoms
20
Six Easy Pieces
