no one knew what Feynman would say until he stood in front of a
lecture hall ﬁlled with students and said it. The Caltech professors
who assisted him would then scramble as best they could to handle
mundane details, such as making up homework problems.
Why did Feynman devote more than two years to revolutionize
the way beginning physics was taught? One can only speculate, but
there were probably three basic reasons. One is that he loved to
have an audience, and this gave him a bigger theater than he usually
had in graduate courses. The second was that he genuinely cared
about students, and he simply thought that teaching freshmen was
an important thing to do. The third and perhaps most important
reason was the sheer challenge of reformulating physics, as he un-
derstood it, so that it could be presented to young students. This
was his specialty, and was the standard by which he measured
whether something was really understood. Feynman was once asked
by a Caltech faculty member to explain why spin 1/2 particles obey
Fermi-Dirac statistics. He gauged his audience perfectly and said,
“I’ll prepare a freshman lecture on it.” But a few days later he re-
turned and said, “You know, I couldn’t do it. I couldn’t reduce it to
the freshman level. That means we really don’t understand it.”
This specialty of reducing deep ideas to simple, understandable
terms is evident throughout The Feynman Lectures on Physics, but
nowhere more so than in his treatment of quantum mechanics. To
aﬁcionados, what he has done is clear. He has presented, to begin-
ning students, the path integral method, the technique of his own
devising that allowed him to solve some of the most profound prob-
lems in physics. His own work using path integrals, among other
achievements, led to the 1965 Nobel Prize that he shared with Ju-
lian Schwinger and Sin-Itero Tomanaga.
Through the distant veil of memory, many of the students and
faculty attending the lectures have said that having two years of
physics with Feynman was the experience of a lifetime. But that’s
not how it seemed at the time. Many of the students dreaded the
class, and as the course wore on, attendance by the registered stu-
dents started dropping alarmingly. But at the same time, more and
xxii
Special Preface
