got older the ratio of the age of the universe to the time which it
takes for light to go across a proton would be gradually increasing.
Is it possible that the gravitational constant is changing with time?
Of course the changes would be so small that it is quite difficult to
be sure.
One test which we can think of is to determine what would have
been the effect of the change during the past 109 years, which is
approximately the age from the earliest life on the earth to now,
and one-tenth of the age of the universe. In this time, the gravity
constant would have increased by about 10 percent. It turns out
that if we consider the structure of the sun—the balance between
the weight of its material and the rate at which radiant energy is
generated inside it—we can deduce that if the gravity were 10 per-
cent stronger, the sun would be much more than 10 percent
brighter—by the sixth power of the gravity constant! If we calculate
what happens to the orbit of the earth when the gravity is changing,
we ﬁnd that the earth was then closer in. Altogether, the earth would
be about 100 degrees centigrade hotter, and all of the water would
not have been in the sea, but vapor in the air, so life would not have
started in the sea. So we do not now believe that the gravity constant
is changing with the age of the universe. But such arguments as the
one we have just given are not very convincing, and the subject is
not completely closed.
It is a fact that the force of gravitation is proportional to the
mass, the quantity which is fundamentally a measure of inertia—
of how hard it is to hold something which is going around in a cir-
cle. Therefore two objects, one heavy and one light, going around
a larger object in the same circle at the same speed because of grav-
ity, will stay together because to go in a circle requires a force which
is stronger for a bigger mass. That is, the gravity is stronger for a
given mass in just the right proportion so that the two objects will
go around together. If one object were inside the other it would
stay inside; it is a perfect balance. Therefore, Gagarin or Titov
would ﬁnd things “weightless” inside a spaceship; if they happened
111
The Theory of Gravitation
