of the limbs of ﬂeas. After these matters were worked out with a
great deal of interest, the biologists went into the machinery inside
the living bodies, ﬁrst from a gross standpoint, naturally, because
it takes some effort to get into the ﬁner details.
There was an interesting early relationship between physics and
biology in which biology helped physics in the discovery of the con-
servation of energy, which was ﬁrst demonstrated by Mayer in con-
nection with the amount of heat taken in and given out by a living
creature.
If we look at the processes of biology of living animals more
closely, we see many physical phenomena: the circulation of
blood, pumps, pressure, etc. There are nerves: we know what is
happening when we step on a sharp stone, and that somehow or
other the information goes from the leg up. It is interesting how
that happens. In their study of nerves, the biologists have come
to the conclusion that nerves are very ﬁne tubes with a complex
wall which is very thin; through this wall the cell pumps ions, so
that there are positive ions on the outside and negative ions on
the inside, like a capacitor. Now this membrane has an interesting
property; if it “discharges” in one place, i.e., if some of the ions
were able to move through one place, so that the electric voltage
is reduced there, that electrical inﬂuence makes itself felt on the
ions in the neighborhood, and it affects the membrane in such a
way that it lets the ions through at neighboring points also. This
in turn affects it farther along, etc., and so there is a wave of “pen-
etrability” of the membrane which runs down the ﬁber when it is
“excited” at one end by stepping on the sharp stone. This wave is
somewhat analogous to a long sequence of vertical dominoes; if
the end one is pushed over, that one pushes the next, etc. Of
course this will transmit only one message unless the dominoes
are set up again; and similarly in the nerve cell, there are processes
which pump the ions slowly out again, to get the nerve ready for
the next impulse. So it is that we know what we are doing (or at
least where we are). Of course the electrical effects associated with
50
Six Easy Pieces
