too. The fact that this happened does not bring on the destruction
of science. What is the fundamental hypothesis of science, the
fundamental philosophy? We stated it in the ﬁrst chapter: the sole
test of the validity of any idea is experiment. If it turns out that most
experiments work out the same in Quito as they do in Stockholm,
then those “most experiments” will be used to formulate some
general law, and those experiments which do not come out the
same we will say were a result of the environment near Stockholm.
We will invent some way to summarize the results of the experi-
ment, and we do not have to be told ahead of time what this way
will look like. If we are told that the same experiment will always
produce the same result, that is all very well, but if when we try
it, it does not, then it does not. We just have to take what we see,
and then formulate all the rest of our ideas in terms of our actual
experience.
Returning again to quantum mechanics and fundamental
physics, we cannot go into details of the quantum-mechanical
principles at this time, of course, because these are rather difficult
to understand. We shall assume that they are there, and go on to
describe what some of the consequences are. One of the conse-
quences is that things which we used to consider as waves also
behave like particles, and particles behave like waves; in fact
everything behaves the same way. There is no distinction between
a wave and a particle. So quantum mechanics uniﬁes the idea of
the ﬁeld and its waves, and the particles, all into one. Now it is
true that when the frequency is low, the ﬁeld aspect of the phe-
nomenon is more evident, or more useful as an approximate de-
scription in terms of everyday experiences. But as the frequency
increases, the particle aspects of the phenomenon become more
evident with the equipment with which we usually make the mea-
surements. In fact, although we mentioned many frequencies, no
phenomenon directly involving a frequency has yet been detected
above approximately 1012 cycles per second. We only deduce the
higher frequencies from the energy of the particles, by a rule
36
Six Easy Pieces
