to land, we should ﬁnd P1 for those electrons that have chosen hole
1, P2 for those that have chosen hole 2, and necessarily the sum P1 +
P2 for those that arrive through the two holes. There seems to be no
way around this. But we have veriﬁed experimentally that that is not
the case. And no one has ﬁgured a way out of this puzzle. So at the
present time we must limit ourselves to computing probabilities. We
say “at the present time,” but we suspect very strongly that it is some-
thing that will be with us forever—that it is impossible to beat that
puzzle—that this is the way nature really is.
The uncertainty principle
This is the way Heisenberg stated the uncertainty principle origi-
nally: If you make the measurement on any object, and you can
determine the x-component of its momentum with an uncertainty
Dp, you cannot, at the same time, know its x-position more accu-
rately than 
. The uncertainties in the position and mo-
mentum at any instant must have their product greater than half
the reduced Planck constant. This is a special case of the uncer-
tainty principle that was stated above more generally. The more
general statement was that one cannot design equipment in any
way to determine which of two alternatives is taken, without, at
the same time, destroying the pattern of interference.
Let us show for one particular case that the kind of relation given
by Heisenberg must be true in order to keep from getting into trou-
ble. We imagine a modiﬁcation of the experiment of Fig. 6-3, in
which the wall with the holes consists of a plate mounted on rollers
so that it can move freely up and down (in the x-direction), as
shown in Fig. 6-6. By watching the motion of the plate carefully
we can try to tell which hole an electron goes through. Imagine
what happens when the detector is placed at x = 0. We would expect
that an electron which passes through hole 1 must be deﬂected
downward by the plate to reach the detector. Since the vertical com-
ponent of the electron momentum is changed, the plate must recoil
with an equal momentum in the opposite direction. The plate will
/
x
p
2
'
$
D
D
136
Six Easy Pieces
