most synonymously. Usually electromagnetic rays coming from nu-
clei are called gamma rays, while those of high energy from atoms
are called x-rays, but at the same frequency they are indistinguishable
physically, no matter what their source. If we go to still higher fre-
quencies, say to 1024 cycles per second, we ﬁnd that we can make
those waves artiﬁcially, for example with the synchrotron here at
Caltech. We can ﬁnd electromagnetic waves with stupendously high
frequencies—with even a thousand times more rapid oscillation—
in the waves found in cosmic rays. These waves cannot be controlled
by us.
Quantum physics
Having described the idea of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, and that
this ﬁeld can carry waves, we soon learn that these waves actually
behave in a strange way which seems very unwavelike. At higher
frequencies they behave much more like particles! It is quantum me-
chanics, discovered just after 1920, which explains this strange be-
havior. In the years before 1920, the picture of space as a
three-dimensional space, and of time as a separate thing, was
changed by Einstein, ﬁrst into a combination which we call space-
time, and then still further into a curved space-time to represent
gravitation. So the “stage” is changed into space-time, and gravita-
tion is presumably a modiﬁcation of space-time. Then it was also
found that the rules for the motions of particles were incorrect. The
mechanical rules of “inertia” and “forces” are wrong—Newton’s laws
are wrong—in the world of atoms. Instead, it was discovered that
things on a small scale behave nothing like things on a large scale.
That is what makes physics difficult—and very interesting. It is
hard because the way things behave on a small scale is so “unnat-
ural”; we have no direct experience with it. Here things behave like
nothing we know of, so that it is impossible to describe this behav-
ior in any other than analytic ways. It is difficult, and takes a lot of
imagination.
Quantum mechanics has many aspects. In the ﬁrst place, the
33
Basic Physics
