When Jupiter is closer to the earth the time is a little less, and when
it is farther from the earth, the time is more. This is why moons ap-
pear to be, on the average, a little ahead or a little behind, depending
on whether they are closer to or farther from the earth. This phe-
nomenon showed that light does not travel instantaneously, and fur-
nished the ﬁrst estimate of the speed of light. This was done in 1656.
If all of the planets push and pull on each other, the force which
controls, let us say, Jupiter in going around the sun is not just the
force from the sun; there is also a pull from, say, Saturn. This force
is not really strong, since the sun is much more massive than Saturn,
but there is some pull, so the orbit of Jupiter should not be a perfect
ellipse, and it is not; it is slightly off, and “wobbles” around the cor-
rect elliptical orbit. Such a motion is a little more complicated. At-
tempts were made to analyze the motions of Jupiter, Saturn, and
Uranus on the basis of the law of gravitation. The effects of each of
these planets on each other were calculated to see whether or not
the tiny deviations and irregularities in these motions could be com-
pletely understood from this one law. Lo and behold, for Jupiter and
Saturn, all was well, but Uranus was “weird.” It behaved in a very
peculiar manner. It was not travelling in an exact ellipse, but that
was understandable, because of the attractions of Jupiter and Saturn.
But even if allowance were made for these attractions, Uranus still
was not going right, so the laws of gravitation were in danger of
being overturned, a possibility that could not be ruled out. Two
men, Adams and Le Verrier, in England and France, independently,
arrived at another possibility: perhaps there is another planet, dark
and invisible, which men had not seen. This planet, N, could pull
on Uranus. They calculated where such a planet would have to be
in order to cause the observed perturbations. They sent messages to
the respective observatories, saying, “Gentlemen, point your tele-
scope to such and such a place, and you will see a new planet.” It
often depends on with whom you are working as to whether they
pay any attention to you or not. They did pay attention to Le Ver-
rier; they looked, and there planet N was! The other observatory
then also looked very quickly in the next few days and saw it too.
100
Six Easy Pieces
