there is the electron, which has a very small mass on this scale, only
0.510 Mev. Then there is that other, the μ-meson, the muon, which
has a mass much higher, 206 times as heavy as an electron. So far
as we can tell, by all experiments so far, the difference between the
electron and the muon is nothing but the mass. Everything works
exactly the same for the muon as for the electron, except that one
is heavier than the other. Why is there another one heavier; what is
the use for it? We do not know. In addition, there is a lepton which
is neutral, called a neutrino, and this particle has zero mass. In fact,
it is now known that there are two different kinds of neutrinos, one
related to electrons and the other related to muons.
Finally, we have two other particles which do not interact
strongly with the nuclear ones: one is a photon, and perhaps, if the
ﬁeld of gravity also has a quantum-mechanical analog (a quantum
theory of gravitation has not yet been worked out), then there will
be a particle, a graviton, which will have zero mass.
What is this “zero mass”? The masses given here are the masses
of the particles at rest. The fact that a particle has zero mass means,
in a way, that it cannot be at rest. A photon is never at rest; it is al-
ways moving at 186,000 miles a second. We will understand more
what mass means when we understand the theory of relativity,
which will come in due time.
Thus we are confronted with a large number of particles, which
together seem to be the fundamental constituents of matter. For-
tunately, these particles are not all different in their interactions with
one another. In fact, there seem to be just four kinds of interaction
between particles which, in the order of decreasing strength, are
the nuclear force, electrical interactions, the beta-decay interaction,
and gravity. The photon is coupled to all charged particles and the
strength of the interaction is measured by some number, which is
1/137. The detailed law of this coupling is known, that is quantum
electrodynamics. Gravity is coupled to all energy, but its coupling
is extremely weak, much weaker than that of electricity. This law is
also known. Then there are the so-called weak decays—beta decay,
43
Basic Physics
