since you are not assumed to be sufficiently talented yet, we shall
discuss the consequences in more detail, and not just leave you with
only these two bare principles. We shall brieﬂy relate the story of
the discovery of the law of gravitation and discuss some of its con-
sequences, its effects on history, the mysteries that such a law en-
tails, and some reﬁnements of the law made by Einstein; we shall
also discuss the relationships of the law to the other laws of physics.
All this cannot be done in one chapter, but these subjects will be
treated in due time in subsequent chapters.
The story begins with the ancients observing the motions of plan-
ets among the stars, and ﬁnally deducing that they went around the
sun, a fact that was rediscovered later by Copernicus. Exactly how
the planets went around the sun, with exactly what motion, took a
little more work to discover. In the beginning of the ﬁfteenth century
there were great debates as to whether they really went around the
sun or not. Tycho Brahe had an idea that was different from any-
thing proposed by the ancients: his idea was that these debates about
the nature of the motions of the planets would best be resolved if
the actual positions of the planets in the sky were measured suffi-
ciently accurately. If measurement showed exactly how the planets
moved, then perhaps it would be possible to establish one or another
viewpoint. This was a tremendous idea—that to ﬁnd something out,
it is better to perform some careful experiments than to carry on
deep philosophical arguments. Pursuing this idea, Tycho Brahe stud-
ied the positions of the planets for many years in his observatory on
the island of Hven, near Copenhagen. He made voluminous tables,
which were then studied by the mathematician Kepler, after Tycho’s
death. Kepler discovered from the data some very beautiful and re-
markable, but simple, laws regarding planetary motion.
Kepler’s laws
First of all, Kepler found that each planet goes around the sun in a
curve called an ellipse, with the sun at a focus of the ellipse. An el-
lipse is not just an oval, but is a very speciﬁc and precise curve that
90
Six Easy Pieces
