idea that a particle has a deﬁnite location and a deﬁnite speed is no
longer allowed; that is wrong. To give an example of how wrong clas-
sical physics is, there is a rule in quantum mechanics that says that
one cannot know both where something is and how fast it is moving.
The uncertainty of the momentum and the uncertainty of the posi-
tion are complementary, and the product of the two is bounded by
a small constant. We can write the law like this: 
, but
we shall explain it in more detail later. This rule is the explanation
of a very mysterious paradox: If the atoms are made out of plus and
minus charges, why don’t the minus charges simply sit on top of
the plus charges (they attract each other) and get so close as to com-
pletely cancel them out? Why are atoms so big? Why is the nucleus
at the center with the electrons around it? It was ﬁrst thought that
this was because the nucleus was so big; but no, the nucleus is very
small. An atom has a diameter of about 10–8 cm. The nucleus has a
diameter of about 10–13 cm. If we had an atom and wished to see
the nucleus, we would have to magnify it until the whole atom was
the size of a large room, and then the nucleus would be a bare speck
which you could just about make out with the eye, but very nearly
all the weight of the atom is in that inﬁnitesimal nucleus. What keeps
the electrons from simply falling in? This principle: If they were in
the nucleus, we would know their position precisely, and the uncer-
tainty principle would then require that they have a very large (but
uncertain) momentum, i.e., a very large kinetic energy. With this en-
ergy they would break away from the nucleus. They make a com-
promise: they leave themselves a little room for this uncertainty and
then jiggle with a certain amount of minimum motion in accor-
dance with this rule. (Remember that when a crystal is cooled to
absolute zero, we said that the atoms do not stop moving, they still
jiggle. Why? If they stopped moving, we would know where they
were and that they had zero motion, and that is against the uncer-
tainty principle. We cannot know where they are and how fast they
are moving, so they must be continually wiggling in there!)
Another most interesting change in the ideas and philosophy
/
x
p
2
'
$
D D
34
Six Easy Pieces
