to let go of a piece of chalk, for example, it would go around the
earth in exactly the same way as the whole spaceship, and so it
would appear to remain suspended before them in space. It is very
interesting that this force is exactly proportional to the mass with
great precision, because if it were not exactly proportional there
would be some effect by which inertia and weight would differ. The
absence of such an effect has been checked with great accuracy by
an experiment done ﬁrst by Eötvös in 1909 and more recently by
Dicke. For all substances tried, the masses and weights are exactly
proportional within 1 part in 1,000,000,000, or less. This is a re-
markable experiment.
Gravity and relativity
Another topic deserving discussion is Einstein’s modiﬁcation of
Newton’s law of gravitation. In spite of all the excitement it created,
Newton’s law of gravitation is not correct! It was modiﬁed by Ein-
stein to take into account the theory of relativity. According to
Newton, the gravitational effect is instantaneous, that is, if we were
to move a mass, we would at once feel a new force because of the
new position of that mass; by such means we could send signals at
inﬁnite speed. Einstein advanced arguments which suggest that we
cannot send signals faster than the speed of light, so the law of gravi-
tation must be wrong. By correcting it to take the delays into ac-
count, we have a new law, called Einstein’s law of gravitation. One
feature of this new law which is quite easy to understand is this: In
the Einstein relativity theory, anything which has energy has mass—
mass in the sense that it is attracted gravitationally. Even light,
which has an energy, has a “mass.” When a light beam, which has
energy in it, comes past the sun there is an attraction on it by the
sun. Thus the light does not go straight, but is deﬂected. During
the eclipse of the sun, for example, the stars which are around the
sun should appear displaced from where they would be if the sun
were not there, and this has been observed.
Finally, let us compare gravitation with other theories. In recent
112
Six Easy Pieces
