tures. It takes, of course, a certain intelligence on his part to see
which are the central theorems and central ideas, and which are the
more advanced side issues and applications which he may under-
stand only in later years.
In giving these lectures there was one serious difficulty: in the way
the course was given, there wasn’t any feedback from the students to
the lecturer to indicate how well the lectures were going over. This is
indeed a very serious difficulty, and I don’t know how good the lec-
tures really are. The whole thing was essentially an experiment. And
if I did it again I wouldn’t do it the same way—I hope I don’t have
to do it again! I think, though, that things worked out—so far as
the physics is concerned—quite satisfactorily in the ﬁrst year.
In the second year I was not so satisﬁed. In the ﬁrst part of the
course, dealing with electricity and magnetism, I couldn’t think of
any really unique or different way of doing it—of any way that
would be particularly more exciting than the usual way of present-
ing it. So I don’t think I did very much in the lectures on electricity
and magnetism. At the end of the second year I had originally in-
tended to go on, after the electricity and magnetism, by giving
some more lectures on the properties of materials, but mainly to
take up things like fundamental modes, solutions of the diffusion
equation, vibrating systems, orthogonal functions, . . . developing
the ﬁrst stages of what are usually called “the mathematical methods
of physics.” In retrospect, I think that if I were doing it again I
would go back to that original idea. But since it was not planned
that I would be giving these lectures again, it was suggested that it
might be a good idea to try to give an introduction to the quantum
mechanics—what you will ﬁnd in Volume III.
It is perfectly clear that students who will major in physics can
wait until their third year for quantum mechanics. On the other
hand, the argument was made that many of the students in our
course study physics as a background for their primary interest in
other ﬁelds. And the usual way of dealing with quantum mechan-
ics makes that subject almost unavailable for the great majority of
xxvii
Feynman’s Preface
