shrinks when it melts. The particular crystal pattern of ice shown
here has many “holes” in it, as does the true ice structure. When the
organization breaks down, these holes can be occupied by molecules.
Most simple substances, with the exception of water and type metal,
expand upon melting, because the atoms are closely packed in the
solid crystal and upon melting need more room to jiggle around,
but an open structure collapses, as in the case of water.
Now although ice has a “rigid” crystalline form, its temperature
can change—ice has heat. If we wish, we can change the amount
of heat. What is the heat in the case of ice? The atoms are not stand-
ing still. They are jiggling and vibrating. So even though there is a
deﬁnite order to the crystal—a deﬁnite structure—all of the atoms
are vibrating “in place.” As we increase the temperature, they vibrate
with greater and greater amplitude, until they shake themselves out
of place. We call this melting. As we decrease the temperature, the
vibration decreases and decreases until, at absolute zero, there is a
minimum amount of vibration that the atoms can have, but not
zero. This minimum amount of motion that atoms can have is not
enough to melt a substance, with one exception: helium. Helium
merely decreases the atomic motions as much as it can, but even at
absolute zero there is still enough motion to keep it from freezing.
Helium, even at absolute zero, does not freeze, unless the pressure
is made so great as to make the atoms squash together. If we in-
crease the pressure, we can make it solidify.
Atomic processes
So much for the description of solids, liquids, and gases from the
atomic point of view. However, the atomic hypothesis also describes
processes, and so we shall now look at a number of processes from
an atomic standpoint. The ﬁrst process that we shall look at is as-
sociated with the surface of the water. What happens at the surface
of the water? We shall now make the picture more complicated—
and more realistic—by imagining that the surface is in air. Figure
1-5 shows the surface of water in air. We see the water molecules
10
Six Easy Pieces
