watch them, the electrons come through just as we would expect
them to come through. Whether the holes are closed or open, those
which we see come through hole 1 are distributed in the same way
whether hole 2 is open or closed.
But wait! What do we have now for the total probability, the
probability that an electron will arrive at the detector by any route?
We already have that information. We just pretend that we never
looked at the light ﬂashes, and we lump together the detector clicks
which we have separated into the two columns. We must just add
the numbers. For the probability that an electron will arrive at the
backstop by passing through either hole, we do ﬁnd P'12 = P'1 + P'2.
That is, although we succeeded in watching which hole our elec-
trons come through, we no longer get the old interference curve
P12, but a new one, P'12, showing no interference! If we turn out
the light P12 is restored.
We must conclude that when we look at the electrons the distri-
bution of them on the screen is different than when we do not look.
Perhaps it is turning on our light source that disturbs things? It
must be that the electrons are very delicate, and the light, when it
scatters off the electrons, gives them a jolt that changes their mo-
tion. We know that the electric ﬁeld of the light acting on a charge
will exert a force on it. So perhaps we should expect the motion to
be changed. Anyway, the light exerts a big inﬂuence on the elec-
trons. By trying to “watch” the electrons we have changed their mo-
tions. That is, the jolt given to the electron when the photon is
scattered by it is such as to change the electron’s motion enough so
that if it might have gone to where P12 was at a maximum, it will
instead land where P12 was a minimum; that is why we no longer
see the wavy interference effects.
You may be thinking: “Don’t use such a bright source! Turn the
brightness down! The light waves will then be weaker and will not
disturb the electrons so much. Surely, by making the light dimmer
and dimmer, eventually the wave will be weak enough that it will
have a negligible effect.” OK. Let’s try it. The ﬁrst thing we observe
is that the ﬂash of light scattered from the electrons as they pass by
129
Quantum Behavior
