direction and they have no wings. Otherwise, it is a somewhat sim-
ilar theory!) Galileo discovered a very remarkable fact about mo-
tion, which was essential for understanding these laws. That is the
principle of inertia—if something is moving, with nothing touch-
ing it and completely undisturbed, it will go on forever, coasting
at a uniform speed in a straight line. (Why does it keep on coasting?
We do not know, but that is the way it is.)
Newton modiﬁed this idea, saying that the only way to change
the motion of a body is to use force. If the body speeds up, a force
has been applied in the direction of motion. On the other hand, if
its motion is changed to a new direction, a force has been applied
sideways. Newton thus added the idea that a force is needed to
change the speed or the direction of motion of a body. For example,
if a stone is attached to a string and is whirling around in a circle,
it takes a force to keep it in the circle. We have to pull on the
string. In fact, the law is that the acceleration produced by the
force is inversely proportional to the mass, or the force is propor-
tional to the mass times the acceleration. The more massive a thing
is, the stronger the force required to produce a given acceleration.
(The mass can be measured by putting other stones on the end of
the same string and making them go around the same circle at the
same speed. In this way it is found that more or less force is re-
quired, the more massive object requiring more force.) The bril-
liant idea resulting from these considerations is that no tangential
force is needed to keep a planet in its orbit (the angels do not have
to ﬂy tangentially) because the planet would coast in that direction
anyway. If there were nothing at all to disturb it, the planet would
go off in a straight line. But the actual motion deviates from the
line on which the body would have gone if there were no force,
the deviation being essentially at right angles to the motion, not
in the direction of the motion. In other words, because of the prin-
ciple of inertia, the force needed to control the motion of a planet
around the sun is not a force around the sun but toward the sun.
(If there is a force toward the sun, the sun might be the angel, of
course!)
93
The Theory of Gravitation
