that you will have some feeling for what it is we are leaving out.
For we will have to leave out some important subjects that we can-
not avoid coming close to.
So we will give now the introduction to the subject of quantum
mechanics, but will not be able actually to get into the subject until
much later.
“Quantum mechanics” is the description of the behavior of mat-
ter in all its details and, in particular, of the happenings on an
atomic scale. Things on a very small scale behave like nothing that
you have any direct experience about. They do not behave like
waves, they do not behave like particles, they do not behave like
clouds, or billiard balls, or weights on springs, or like anything that
you have ever seen.
Newton thought that light was made up of particles, but then it
was discovered, as we have seen here, that it behaves like a wave.
Later, however (in the beginning of the twentieth century), it was
found that light did indeed sometimes behave like a particle. His-
torically, the electron, for example, was thought to behave like a
particle, and then it was found that in many respects it behaved
like a wave. So it really behaves like neither. Now we have given
up. We say: “It is like neither.”
There is one lucky break, however—electrons behave just like
light. The quantum behavior of atomic objects (electrons, pro-
tons, neutrons, photons, and so on) is the same for all; they are
all “particle waves,” or whatever you want to call them. So what
we learn about the properties of electrons (which we shall use for
our examples) will apply also to all “particles,” including photons
of light.
The gradual accumulation of information about atomic and
small-scale behavior during the ﬁrst quarter of this century, which
gave some indications about how small things do behave, produced
an increasing confusion which was ﬁnally resolved in 1926 and
1927 by Schrödinger, Heisenberg, and Born. They ﬁnally obtained
a consistent description of the behavior of matter on a small scale.
We take up the main features of that description in this chapter.
116
Six Easy Pieces
