might hope to ﬁgure out what would happen, but the many num-
bers needed to keep track of all these molecules exceed so enor-
mously the capacity of any computer, and certainly the capacity of
the mind, that it was important to develop a method for dealing
with such complicated situations. Statistical mechanics, then, is the
science of the phenomena of heat, or thermodynamics. Inorganic
chemistry is, as a science, now reduced essentially to what are called
physical chemistry and quantum chemistry: physical chemistry to
study the rates at which reactions occur and what is happening in
detail (How do the molecules hit? Which pieces ﬂy off ﬁrst?, etc.),
and quantum chemistry to help us understand what happens in
terms of the physical laws.
The other branch of chemistry is organic chemistry, the chemistry
of the substances which are associated with living things. For a time
it was believed that the substances which are associated with living
things were so marvelous that they could not be made by hand,
from inorganic materials. This is not at all true—they are just the
same as the substances made in inorganic chemistry, but more com-
plicated arrangements of atoms are involved. Organic chemistry
obviously has a very close relationship to the biology which supplies
its substances, and to industry, and furthermore, much physical
chemistry and quantum mechanics can be applied to organic as
well as to inorganic compounds. However, the main problems of
organic chemistry are not in these aspects, but rather in the analysis
and synthesis of the substances which are formed in biological sys-
tems, in living things. This leads imperceptibly, in steps, toward
biochemistry, and then into biology itself, or molecular biology.
Biology
Thus we come to the science of biology, which is the study of living
things. In the early days of biology, the biologists had to deal with
the purely descriptive problem of ﬁnding out what living things
there were, and so they just had to count such things as the hairs
49
The Relation of Physics to Other Sciences
