different aspects of exactly the same thing. A changing electric ﬁeld
cannot exist without magnetism.) If we move the charged paper
farther out, the delay is greater. Then an interesting thing is ob-
served. Although the forces between two charged objects should go
inversely as the square of the distance, it is found, when we shake a
charge, that the inﬂuence extends very much farther out than we
would guess at ﬁrst sight. That is, the effect falls off more slowly
than the inverse square.
Here is an analogy: If we are in a pool of water and there is a
ﬂoating cork very close by, we can move it “directly” by pushing
the water with another cork. If you looked only at the two corks,
all you would see would be that one moved immediately in re-
sponse to the motion of the other—there is some kind of “interac-
tion” between them. Of course, what we really do is to disturb the
water; the water then disturbs the other cork. We could make up a
“law” that if you pushed the water a little bit, an object close by in
the water would move. If it were farther away, of course, the second
cork would scarcely move, for we move the water locally. On the
other hand, if we jiggle the cork a new phenomenon is involved,
in which the motion of the water moves the water there, etc., and
waves travel away, so that by jiggling, there is an inﬂuence very much
farther out, an oscillatory inﬂuence, that cannot be understood from
the direct interaction. Therefore the idea of direct interaction must
be replaced with the existence of the water, or in the electrical case,
with what we call the electromagnetic ﬁeld.
The electromagnetic ﬁeld can carry waves; some of these waves
are light, others are used in radio broadcasts, but the general name
is electromagnetic waves. These oscillatory waves can have various
frequencies. The only thing that is really different from one wave to
another is the frequency of oscillation. If we shake a charge back and
forth more and more rapidly, and look at the effects, we get a whole
series of different kinds of effects, which are all uniﬁed by specifying
but one number, the number of oscillations per second. The usual
“pickup” that we get from electric currents in the circuits in the
walls of a building has a frequency of about one hundred cycles per
31
Basic Physics
