certain amount of random motion goes into the atomic system. We
cannot see it, but we can measure it with thermometers, etc.)
There are many other forms of energy, and of course we cannot
describe them in any more detail just now. There is electrical energy,
which has to do with pushing and pulling by electric charges. There
is radiant energy, the energy of light, which we know is a form of
electrical energy because light can be represented as wigglings in
the electromagnetic ﬁeld. There is chemical energy, the energy
which is released in chemical reactions. Actually, elastic energy is,
to a certain extent, like chemical energy, because chemical energy
is the energy of the attraction of the atoms, one for the other, and
so is elastic energy. Our modern understanding is the following:
chemical energy has two parts, kinetic energy of the electrons inside
the atoms, so part of it is kinetic, and electrical energy of interaction
of the electrons and the protons—the rest of it, therefore, is elec-
trical. Next we come to nuclear energy, the energy which is involved
with the arrangement of particles inside the nucleus, and we have
formulas for that, but we do not have the fundamental laws. We
know that it is not electrical, not gravitational, and not purely
chemical, but we do not know what it is. It seems to be an addi-
tional form of energy. Finally, associated with the relativity theory,
there is a modiﬁcation of the laws of kinetic energy, or whatever you
wish to call it, so that kinetic energy is combined with another thing
called mass energy. An object has energy from its sheer existence. If I
have a positron and an electron, standing still doing nothing—never
mind gravity, never mind anything—and they come together and
disappear, radiant energy will be liberated, in a deﬁnite amount,
and the amount can be calculated. All we need know is the mass of
the object. It does not depend on what it is—we make two things
disappear, and we get a certain amount of energy. The formula was
ﬁrst found by Einstein; it is E = mc2.
It is obvious from our discussion that the law of conservation of
energy is enormously useful in making analyses, as we have illus-
trated in a few examples without knowing all the formulas. If we
83
Conservation of Energy
