to ﬁnd the pattern in space. The result was the following remark-
able discovery: The DNA molecule is a pair of chains, twisted
upon each other. The backbone of each of these chains, which are
analogous to the chains of proteins but chemically quite different,
is a series of sugar and phosphate groups, as shown in Fig. 3-2.
Now we see how the chain can contain instructions, for if we
could split this chain down the middle, we would have a series
BAADC . . . and every living thing could have a different series.
Thus perhaps, in some way, the speciﬁc instructions for the man-
ufacture of proteins are contained in the speciﬁc series of the
DNA.
Attached to each sugar along the line, and linking the two chains
together, are certain pairs of cross-links. However, they are not all
of the same kind; there are four kinds, called adenine, thymine, cy-
tosine, and guanine, but let us call them A, B, C, and D. The in-
teresting thing is that only certain pairs can sit opposite each other,
for example A with B and C with D. These pairs are put on the two
chains in such a way that they “ﬁt together,” and have a strong en-
ergy of interaction. However, C will not ﬁt with A, and B will not
ﬁt with C; they will only ﬁt in pairs, A against B and C against D.
Therefore if one is C, the other must be D, etc. Whatever the letters
may be in one chain, each one must have its speciﬁc complemen-
tary letter on the other chain.
What then about reproduction? Suppose we split this chain in
two. How can we make another one just like it? If, in the substances
of the cells, there is a manufacturing department which brings up
phosphate, sugar, and A, B, C, D units not connected in a chain,
the only ones which will attach to our split chain will be the correct
ones, the complements of BAADC . . . , namely, ABBCD . . . Thus
what happens is that the chain splits down the middle during cell
division, one half ultimately to go with one cell, the other half to
end up in the other cell; when separated, a new complementary
chain is made by each half-chain.
Next comes the question, precisely how does the order of the A,
B, C, D units determine the arrangement of the amino acids in the
57
The Relation of Physics to Other Sciences
