had all the formulas for all kinds of energy, we could analyze how
many processes should work without having to go into the details.
Therefore conservation laws are very interesting. The question nat-
urally arises as to what other conservation laws there are in physics.
There are two other conservation laws which are analogous to the
conservation of energy. One is called the conservation of linear mo-
mentum. The other is called the conservation of angular momen-
tum. We will ﬁnd out more about these later. In the last analysis,
we do not understand the conservation laws deeply. We do not un-
derstand the conservation of energy. We do not understand energy
as a certain number of little blobs. You may have heard that pho-
tons come out in blobs and that the energy of a photon is Planck’s
constant times the frequency. That is true, but since the frequency
of light can be anything, there is no law that says that energy has
to be a certain deﬁnite amount. Unlike Dennis’s blocks, there can
be any amount of energy, at least as presently understood. So we
do not understand this energy as counting something at the mo-
ment, but just as a mathematical quantity, which is an abstract and
rather peculiar circumstance. In quantum mechanics it turns out
that the conservation of energy is very closely related to another
important property of the world, things do not depend on the absolute
time. We can set up an experiment at a given moment and try it
out, and then do the same experiment at a later moment, and it
will behave in exactly the same way. Whether this is strictly true or
not, we do not know. If we assume that it is true, and add the prin-
ciples of quantum mechanics, then we can deduce the principle of
the conservation of energy. It is a rather subtle and interesting
thing, and it is not easy to explain. The other conservation laws are
also linked together. The conservation of momentum is associated
in quantum mechanics with the proposition that it makes no dif-
ference where you do the experiment, the results will always be the
same. As independence in space has to do with the conservation of
momentum, independence of time has to do with the conservation
of energy, and ﬁnally, if we turn our apparatus, this too makes no
difference, and so the invariance of the world to angular orientation
84
Six Easy Pieces
