are indestructible bullets—they cannot break in half. In our exper-
iment we ﬁnd that bullets always arrive in lumps, and when we ﬁnd
something in the detector, it is always one whole bullet. If the rate
at which the machine gun ﬁres is made very low, we ﬁnd that at
any given moment either nothing arrives or one and only one—
exactly one—bullet arrives at the backstop. Also, the size of the
lump certainly does not depend on the rate of ﬁring of the gun.
We shall say: “Bullets always arrive in identical lumps.” What we
measure with our detector is the probability of arrival of a lump.
And we measure the probability as a function of x. The result of
such measurements with this apparatus (we have not yet done the
experiment, so we are really imagining the result) is plotted in the
graph drawn in part (c) of Fig. 6-1. In the graph we plot the prob-
ability to the right and x vertically, so that the x-scale ﬁts the dia-
gram of the apparatus. We call the probability P12 because the
bullets may have come either through hole 1 or through hole 2.
You will not be surprised that P12 is large near the middle of the
graph but gets small if x is very large. You may wonder, however,
why P12 has its maximum value at x = 0. We can understand this
fact if we do our experiment again after covering up hole 2, and
once more while covering up hole 1. When hole 2 is covered, bul-
lets can pass only through hole 1, and we get the curve marked P1
in part (b) of the ﬁgure. As you would expect, the maximum of P1
occurs at the value of x which is on a straight line with the gun and
hole 1. When hole 1 is closed, we get the symmetric curve P2 drawn
in the ﬁgure. P2 is the probability distribution for bullets that pass
through hole 2. Comparing parts (b) and (c) of Fig. 6-1, we ﬁnd
the important result that
P12 = P 1 + P 2.
(6.1)
The probabilities just add together. The effect with both holes
open is the sum of the effects with each hole open alone. We shall
call this result an observation of “no interference,” for a reason that
you will see later. So much for bullets. They come in lumps, and
their probability of arrival shows no interference.
119
Quantum Behavior
