Chemistry
The science which is perhaps the most deeply affected by physics
is chemistry. Historically, the early days of chemistry dealt almost
entirely with what we now call inorganic chemistry, the chemistry
of substances which are not associated with living things. Consid-
erable analysis was required to discover the existence of the many
elements and their relationships—how they make the various rela-
tively simple compounds found in rocks, earth, etc. This early
chemistry was very important for physics. The interaction between
the two sciences was very great because the theory of atoms was
substantiated to a large extent by experiments in chemistry. The
theory of chemistry, i.e., of the reactions themselves, was summa-
rized to a large extent in the periodic chart of Mendeléev, which
brings out many strange relationships among the various elements,
and it was the collection of rules as to which substance is combined
with which, and how, that constituted inorganic chemistry. All
these rules were ultimately explained in principle by quantum me-
chanics, so that theoretical chemistry is in fact physics. On the
other hand, it must be emphasized that this explanation is in prin-
ciple. We have already discussed the difference between knowing
the rules of the game of chess and being able to play. So it is that
we may know the rules, but we cannot play very well. It turns out
to be very difficult to predict precisely what will happen in a given
chemical reaction; nevertheless, the deepest part of theoretical
chemistry must end up in quantum mechanics.
There is also a branch of physics and chemistry which was de-
veloped by both sciences together, and which is extremely impor-
tant. This is the method of statistics applied in a situation in which
there are mechanical laws, which is aptly called statistical mechanics.
In any chemical situation a large number of atoms are involved,
and we have seen that the atoms are all jiggling around in a very
random and complicated way. If we could analyze each collision,
and be able to follow in detail the motion of each molecule, we
48
Six Easy Pieces
