proximately 29 days) how far the moon moves in its orbit in one
second, and can then calculate how far it falls in one second.* This
distance turns out to be roughly 1/20 of an inch in a second. That
ﬁts very well with the inverse square law, because the earth’s radius
is 4000 miles, and if something which is 4000 miles from the center
of the earth falls 16 feet in a second, something 240,000 miles, or
60 times as far away, should fall only 1/3600 of 16 feet, which also is
roughly 1/20 of an inch. Wishing to put this theory of gravitation
to a test by similar calculations, Newton made his calculations very
carefully and found a discrepancy so large that he regarded the
theory as contradicted by facts, and did not publish his results. Six
years later a new measurement of the size of the earth showed that
the astronomers had been using an incorrect distance to the moon.
When Newton heard of this, he made the calculation again, with
the corrected ﬁgures, and obtained beautiful agreement.
This idea that the moon “falls” is somewhat confusing, because,
as you see, it does not come any closer. The idea is sufficiently in-
teresting to merit further explanation: the moon falls in the sense
that it falls away from the straight line that it would pursue if there
were no forces. Let us take an example on the surface of the earth.
An object released near the earth’s surface will fall 16 feet in the
ﬁrst second. An object shot out horizontally will also fall 16 feet;
even though it is moving horizontally, it still falls the same 16 feet
in the same time. Figure 5-3 shows an apparatus which demon-
strates this. On the horizontal track is a ball which is going to be
driven forward a little distance away. At the same height is a ball
which is going to fall vertically, and there is an electrical switch
arranged so that at the moment the ﬁrst ball leaves the track, the
second ball is released. That they come to the same depth at the
same time is witnessed by the fact that they collide in midair. An
object like a bullet, shot horizontally, might go a long way in one
second—perhaps 2000 feet—but it will still fall 16 feet if it is aimed
95
The Theory of Gravitation
* That is, how far the circle of the moon’s orbit falls below the straight line tangent
to it at the point where the moon was one second before.
