neutral, and plus, with several masses almost the same. There are
groups or multiplets with almost the same mass, within 1 or 2 per-
cent. Each particle in a multiplet has the same strangeness. The ﬁrst
multiplet is the proton-neutron doublet, and then there is a singlet
(the lambda), then the sigma triplet, and ﬁnally the xi doublet. Very
recently, in 1961, even a few more particles were found. Or are they
particles? They live so short a time, they disintegrate almost instan-
taneously, as soon as they are formed, that we do not know whether
they should be considered as new particles, or some kind of “reso-
nance” interaction of a certain deﬁnite energy between the Λ and
π products into which they disintegrate.
In addition to the baryons the other particles which are involved
in the nuclear interaction are called mesons. There are ﬁrst the
pions, which come in three varieties, positive, negative, and neutral;
they form another multiplet. We have also found some new things
called K-mesons, and they occur as a doublet, K+ and K0. Also,
every particle has its antiparticle, unless a particle is its own antipar-
ticle. For example, the π– and the π+ are antiparticles, but the π0
is its own antiparticle. The K– and K+ are antiparticles, and the K0
and 
. In addition, in 1961 we also found some more mesons or
maybe mesons which disintegrate almost immediately. A thing
called ω which goes into three pions has a mass 780 on this scale,
and somewhat less certain is an object which disintegrates into two
pions. These particles, called mesons and baryons, and the antipar-
ticles of the mesons are on the same chart, but the antiparticles of
the baryons must be put on another chart, “reﬂected” through the
charge-zero column.
Just as Mendeléev’s chart was very good, except for the fact that
there were a number of rare earth elements which were hanging
out loose from it, so we have a number of things hanging out loose
from this chart—particles which do not interact strongly in nuclei,
have nothing to do with a nuclear interaction, and do not have a
strong interaction (I mean the powerful kind of interaction of nu-
clear energy). These are called leptons, and they are the following:
K
0
42
Six Easy Pieces
