distance. In order to see what this teeming is about, we will magnify
it another two hundred and ﬁfty times and we will see something
similar to what is shown in Fig. 1-1. This is a picture of water mag-
niﬁed a billion times, but idealized in several ways. In the ﬁrst place,
the particles are drawn in a simple manner with sharp edges, which
is inaccurate. Secondly, for simplicity, they are sketched almost
schematically in a two-dimensional arrangement, but of course they
are moving around in three dimensions. Notice that there are two
kinds of “blobs” or circles to represent the atoms of oxygen (black)
and hydrogen (white), and that each oxygen has two hydrogens
tied to it. (Each little group of an oxygen with its two hydrogens is
called a molecule.) The picture is idealized further in that the real
particles in nature are continually jiggling and bouncing, turning
and twisting around one another. You will have to imagine this as
a dynamic rather than a static picture. Another thing that cannot
be illustrated in a drawing is the fact that the particles are “stuck
together”—that they attract each other, this one pulled by that one,
etc. The whole group is “glued together,” so to speak. On the other
hand, the particles do not squeeze through each other. If you try
to squeeze two of them too close together, they repel.
The atoms are 1 or 2 ¥ 10–8 cm in radius. Now 10–8 cm is called
an angstrom (just as another name), so we say they are 1 or 2
angstroms (Å) in radius. Another way to remember their size is this:
if an apple is magniﬁed to the size of the earth, then the atoms in
the apple are approximately the size of the original apple.
Now imagine this great drop of water with all of these jiggling
particles stuck together and tagging along with each other. The
water keeps its volume; it does not fall apart, because of the attrac-
tion of the molecules for each other. If the drop is on a slope, where
it can move from one place to another, the water will ﬂow, but it
does not just disappear—things do not just ﬂy apart—because of
the molecular attraction. Now the jiggling motion is what we rep-
resent as heat: when we increase the temperature, we increase the
motion. If we heat the water, the jiggling increases and the volume
between the atoms increases, and if the heating continues there
5
Atoms in Motion
