known. It will never be known until we ﬁnish the picture, if ever.
What we wish to do here is to see to what extent this amalgamation
process has gone on, and what the situation is at present, in under-
standing basic phenomena in terms of the smallest set of principles.
To express it in a simple manner, what are things made of and how
few elements are there?
Physics before 1920
It is a little difficult to begin at once with the present view, so we
shall ﬁrst see how things looked in about 1920 and then take a few
things out of that picture. Before 1920, our world picture was
something like this: The “stage” on which the universe goes is the
three-dimensional space of geometry, as described by Euclid, and
things change in a medium called time. The elements on the stage
are particles, for example the atoms, which have some properties.
First, the property of inertia: if a particle is moving it keeps on
going in the same direction unless forces act upon it. The second
element, then, is forces, which were then thought to be of two va-
rieties: First, an enormously complicated, detailed kind of interac-
tion force which held the various atoms in different combinations
in a complicated way, which determined whether salt would dis-
solve faster or slower when we raise the temperature. The other
force that was known was a long-range interaction—a smooth and
quiet attraction—which varied inversely as the square of the dis-
tance, and was called gravitation. This law was known and was very
simple. Why things remain in motion when they are moving, or
why there is a law of gravitation, was, of course, not known.
A description of nature is what we are concerned with here.
From this point of view, then, a gas, and indeed all matter, is a myr-
iad of moving particles. Thus many of the things we saw while
standing at the seashore can immediately be connected. First the
pressure: this comes from the collisions of the atoms with the walls
or whatever; the drift of the atoms, if they are all moving in one
27
Basic Physics
