direction on the average, is wind; the random internal motions are
the heat. There are waves of excess density, where too many par-
ticles have collected, and so as they rush off they push up piles of
particles farther out, and so on. This wave of excess density is
sound. It is a tremendous achievement to be able to understand
so much. Some of these things were described in the previous
chapter.
What kinds of particles are there? There were considered to be
92 at that time: 92 different kinds of atoms were ultimately dis-
covered. They had different names associated with their chemical
properties.
The next part of the problem was, what are the short-range forces?
Why does carbon attract one oxygen or perhaps two oxygens, but
not three oxygens? What is the machinery of interaction between
atoms? Is it gravitation? The answer is no. Gravity is entirely too
weak. But imagine a force analogous to gravity, varying inversely
with the square of the distance, but enormously more powerful and
having one difference. In gravity everything attracts everything else,
but now imagine that there are two kinds of “things,” and that this
new force (which is the electrical force, of course) has the property
that likes repel but unlikes attract. The “thing” that carries this
strong interaction is called charge.
Then what do we have? Suppose that we have two unlikes that
attract each other, a plus and a minus, and that they stick very close
together. Suppose we have another charge some distance away.
Would it feel any attraction? It would feel practically none, because
if the ﬁrst two are equal in size, the attraction for the one and the
repulsion for the other balance out. Therefore there is very little
force at any appreciable distance. On the other hand, if we get very
close with the extra charge, attraction arises, because the repulsion
of likes and attraction of unlikes will tend to bring unlikes closer
together and push likes farther apart. Then the repulsion will be
less than the attraction. This is the reason why the atoms, which
are constituted out of plus and minus electric charges, feel very little
28
Six Easy Pieces
