by six electrons (the negative particles in the ordinary world of mat-
ter are all electrons, and these are very light compared with the pro-
tons and neutrons which make nuclei), this would be atom number
six in the chemical table, and it is called carbon. Atom number
eight is called oxygen, etc., because the chemical properties depend
upon the electrons on the outside, and in fact only upon how many
electrons there are. So the chemical properties of a substance depend
only on a number, the number of electrons. (The whole list of el-
ements of the chemists really could have been called 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
etc. Instead of saying “carbon,” we could say “element six,” meaning
six electrons, but of course, when the elements were ﬁrst discovered,
it was not known that they could be numbered that way, and sec-
ondly, it would make everything look rather complicated. It is bet-
ter to have names and symbols for these things, rather than to call
everything by number.)
More was discovered about the electrical force. The natural in-
terpretation of electrical interaction is that two objects simply at-
tract each other: plus against minus. However, this was discovered
to be an inadequate idea to represent it. A more adequate represen-
tation of the situation is to say that the existence of the positive
charge, in some sense, distorts, or creates a “condition” in space, so
that when we put the negative charge in, it feels a force. This po-
tentiality for producing a force is called an electric ﬁeld. When we
put an electron in an electric ﬁeld, we say it is “pulled.” We then
have two rules: (a) charges make a ﬁeld, and (b) charges in ﬁelds
have forces on them and move. The reason for this will become
clear when we discuss the following phenomena: If we were to
charge a body, say a comb, electrically, and then place a charged
piece of paper at a distance and move the comb back and forth, the
paper will respond by always pointing to the comb. If we shake it
faster, it will be discovered that the paper is a little behind, there is
a delay in the action. (At the ﬁrst stage, when we move the comb
rather slowly, we ﬁnd a complication which is magnetism. Magnetic
inﬂuences have to do with charges in relative motion, so magnetic
forces and electric forces can really be attributed to one ﬁeld, as two
30
Six Easy Pieces
