In plant cells, for example, there is machinery for picking up light
and generating sucrose, which is consumed in the dark to keep the
plant alive. When the plant is eaten the sucrose itself generates in
the animal a series of chemical reactions very closely related to pho-
tosynthesis (and its opposite effect in the dark) in plants.
In the cells of living systems there are many elaborate chemical
reactions, in which one compound is changed into another and
another. To give some impression of the enormous efforts that
have gone into the study of biochemistry, the chart in Fig. 3-1
summarizes our knowledge to date on just one small part of the
many series of reactions which occur in cells, perhaps a percent or
so of it.
Here we see a whole series of molecules which change from one
to another in a sequence or cycle of rather small steps. It is called
the Krebs cycle, the respiratory cycle. Each of the chemicals and
each of the steps is fairly simple, in terms of what change is made
in the molecule, but—and this is a centrally important discovery
in biochemistry—these changes are relatively difficult to accomplish
in a laboratory. If we have one substance and another very similar
substance, the one does not just turn into the other, because the
two forms are usually separated by an energy barrier or “hill.” Con-
sider this analogy: If we wanted to take an object from one place
to another, at the same level but on the other side of a hill, we could
push it over the top, but to do so requires the addition of some en-
ergy. Thus most chemical reactions do not occur, because there is
what is called an activation energy in the way. In order to add an
extra atom to our chemical requires that we get it close enough that
some rearrangement can occur; then it will stick. But if we cannot
give it enough energy to get it close enough, it will not go to com-
pletion it will just go partway up the “hill” and back down again.
However, if we could literally take the molecules in our hands and
push and pull the atoms around in such a way as to open a hole to
let the new atom in, and then let it snap back, we would have found
another way, around the hill, which would not require extra energy,
52
Six Easy Pieces
