in little blobs of a deﬁnite amount. It is not that way. However,
there are formulas for calculating some numerical quantity, and
when we add it all together it gives “28”—always the same number.
It is an abstract thing in that it does not tell us the mechanism or
the reasons for the various formulas.
Gravitational potential energy
Conservation of energy can be understood only if we have the for-
mula for all of its forms. I wish to discuss the formula for gravita-
tional energy near the surface of the earth, and I wish to derive this
formula in a way which has nothing to do with history but is simply
a line of reasoning invented for this particular lecture to give you
an illustration of the remarkable fact that a great deal about nature
can be extracted from a few facts and close reasoning. It is an illus-
tration of the kind of work theoretical physicists become involved
in. It is patterned after a most excellent argument by Mr. Carnot
on the efficiency of steam engines.*
Consider weight-lifting machines—machines which have the
property that they lift one weight by lowering another. Let us also
make a hypothesis: that there is no such thing as perpetual motion with
these weight-lifting machines. (In fact, that there is no perpetual mo-
tion at all is a general statement of the law of conservation of energy.)
We must be careful to deﬁne perpetual motion. First, let us do it for
weight-lifting machines. If, when we have lifted and lowered a lot of
weights and restored the machine to the original condition, we ﬁnd
that the net result is to have lifted a weight, then we have a perpetual
motion machine because we can use that lifted weight to run some-
thing else. That is, provided the machine which lifted the weight is
brought back to its exact original condition, and furthermore that it
is completely self-contained—that it has not received the energy to
lift that weight from some external source—like Bruce’s blocks.
A very simple weight-lifting machine is shown in Fig. 4-1. This
72
Six Easy Pieces
* Our point here is not so much the result, (4.3), which in fact you may already
know, as the possibility of arriving at it by theoretical reasoning.
