machine lifts weights three units “strong.” We place three units on
one balance pan, and one unit on the other. However, in order to
get it actually to work, we must lift a little weight off the left pan.
On the other hand, we could lift a one-unit weight by lowering the
three-unit weight, if we cheat a little by lifting a little weight off
the other pan. Of course, we realize that with any actual lifting ma-
chine, we must add a little extra to get it to run. This we disregard,
temporarily. Ideal machines, although they do not exist, do not re-
quire anything extra. A machine that we actually use can be, in a
sense, almost reversible: that is, if it will lift the weight of three by
lowering a weight of one, then it will also lift nearly the weight of
one the same amount by lowering the weight of three.
We imagine that there are two classes of machines, those that are
not reversible, which includes all real machines, and those that are
reversible, which of course are actually not attainable no matter how
careful we may be in our design of bearings, levers, etc. We suppose,
however, that there is such a thing—a reversible machine—which
lowers one unit of weight (a pound or any other unit) by one unit
of distance, and at the same time lifts a three-unit weight. Call this
reversible machine Machine A. Suppose this particular reversible
machine lifts the three-unit weight a distance X. Then suppose we
have another machine, Machine B, which is not necessarily re-
versible, which also lowers a unit weight a unit distance, but which
lifts three units a distance Y. We can now prove that Y is not higher
than X; that is, it is impossible to build a machine that will lift a
weight any higher than it will be lifted by a reversible machine. Let
us see why. Let us suppose that Y was higher than X. We take a one-
unit weight and lower it one unit height with Machine B, and that
lifts the three-unit weight up a distance Y. Then we could lower
73
Conservation of Energy
Figure 4-1
Simple weight-lifting machine.
