lowing trouble: the earth, in moving around the sun, would im-
pinge on more particles which are coming from its forward side
than from its hind side (when you run in the rain, the rain in your
face is stronger than that on the back of your head!). Therefore
there would be more impulse given the earth from the front, and
the earth would feel a resistance to motion and would be slowing up
in its orbit. One can calculate how long it would take for the earth
to stop as a result of this resistance, and it would not take long
enough for the earth to still be in its orbit, so this mechanism does
not work. No machinery has ever been invented that “explains”
gravity without also predicting some other phenomenon that does
not exist.
Next we shall discuss the possible relation of gravitation to other
forces. There is no explanation of gravitation in terms of other
forces at the present time. It is not an aspect of electricity or any-
thing like that, so we have no explanation. However, gravitation
and other forces are very similar, and it is interesting to note analo-
gies. For example, the force of electricity between two charged ob-
jects looks just like the law of gravitation: the force of electricity is
a constant, with a minus sign, times the product of the charges,
and varies inversely as the square of the distance. It is in the oppo-
site direction—likes repel. But is it still not very remarkable that
the two laws involve the same function of distance? Perhaps gravi-
tation and electricity are much more closely related than we think.
Many attempts have been made to unify them; the so-called uniﬁed
ﬁeld theory is only a very elegant attempt to combine electricity
and gravitation; but, in comparing gravitation and electricity, the
most interesting thing is the relative strengths of the forces. Any
theory that contains them both must also deduce how strong the
gravity is.
If we take, in some natural units, the repulsion of two electrons
(nature’s universal charge) due to electricity, and the attraction of
two electrons due to their masses, we can measure the ratio of elec-
trical repulsion to the gravitational attraction. The ratio is indepen-
dent of the distance and is a fundamental constant of nature. The
109
The Theory of Gravitation
