worked out by the physicist. “Well,” you say, “there is nothing
but air, and we know the equations of the motions of air.” Yes we
do. “So if we know the condition of air today, why can’t we ﬁgure
out the condition of the air tomorrow?” First, we do not really
know what the condition is today, because the air is swirling and
twisting everywhere. It turns out to be very sensitive, and even
unstable. If you have ever seen water run smoothly over a dam,
and then turn into a large number of blobs and drops as it falls,
you will understand what I mean by unstable. You know the con-
dition of the water before it goes over the spillway; it is perfectly
smooth; but the moment it begins to fall, where do the drops
begin? What determines how big the lumps are going to be and
where they will be? That is not known, because the water is un-
stable. Even a smooth moving mass of air going over a mountain
turns into complex whirlpools and eddies. In many ﬁelds we ﬁnd
this situation of turbulent ﬂow that we cannot analyze today.
Quickly we leave the subject of weather, and discuss geology!
The question basic to geology is, what makes the earth the
way it is? The most obvious processes are in front of your very
eyes, the erosion processes of the rivers, the winds, etc. It is easy
enough to understand these, but for every bit of erosion there is
an equal amount of something else going on. Mountains are no
lower today, on the average, than they were in the past. There
must be mountain-forming processes. You will ﬁnd, if you study
geology, that there are mountain-forming processes and volcan-
ism, which nobody understands but which is half of geology. The
phenomenon of volcanoes is really not understood. What makes
an earthquake is, ultimately, not understood. It is understood
that if something is pushing something else, it snaps and will
slide—that is all right. But what pushes, and why? The theory is
that there are currents inside the earth—circulating currents, due
to the difference in temperature inside and outside—which, in
their motion, push the surface slightly. Thus if there are two op-
posite circulations next to each other, the matter will collect in
62
Six Easy Pieces
