amount, then there is just a little bit of wave motion at the detector.
When there is more motion at the source, there is more intensity at
the detector. The intensity of the wave can have any value at all. We
would not say that there was any “lumpiness” in the wave intensity.
Now let us measure the wave intensity for various values of x
(keeping the wave source operating always in the same way). We get
the interesting-looking curve marked I12 in part (c) of the ﬁgure.
We have already worked out how such patterns can come about
when we studied the interference of electric waves. In this case we
would observe that the original wave is diffracted at the holes, and
new circular waves spread out from each hole. If we cover one hole
at a time and measure the intensity distribution at the absorber we
ﬁnd the rather simple intensity curves shown in part (b) of the ﬁg-
ure. I1 is the intensity of the wave from hole 1 (which we ﬁnd by
measuring when hole 2 is blocked off) and I2 is the intensity of the
wave from hole 2 (seen when hole 1 is blocked).
The intensity I12 observed when both holes are open is certainly
not the sum of I1 and I2. We say that there is “interference” of the
two waves. At some places (where the curve I12 has its maxima) the
waves are “in phase” and the wave peaks add together to give a large
amplitude and, therefore, a large intensity. We say that the two
waves are “interfering constructively” at such places. There will be
such constructive interference wherever the distance from the de-
tector to one hole is a whole number of wavelengths larger (or
shorter) than the distance from the detector to the other hole.
At those places where the two waves arrive at the detector with
a phase difference of π (where they are “out of phase”) the resulting
wave motion at the detector will be the difference of the two am-
plitudes. The waves “interfere destructively,” and we get a low value
for the wave intensity. We expect such low values wherever the dis-
tance between hole 1 and the detector is different from the distance
between hole 2 and the detector by an odd number of half-wave-
lengths. The low values of I12 in Fig. 6-2 correspond to the places
where the two waves interfere destructively.
You will remember that the quantitative relationship between
121
Quantum Behavior
