in fact, it is an enormously complicated arrangement. Unfortu-
nately, we cannot picture all that is really known about it chemi-
cally, because the precise arrangement of all the atoms is actually
known in three dimensions, while our picture is in only two di-
mensions. The six carbons which form a ring do not form a ﬂat
ring, but a kind of “puckered” ring. All of the angles and distances
are known. So a chemical formula is merely a picture of such a mol-
ecule. When the chemist writes such a thing on the blackboard, he
is trying to “draw,” roughly speaking, in two dimensions. For ex-
ample, we see a “ring” of six carbons, and a “chain” of carbons hang-
ing on the end, with an oxygen second from the end, three
hydrogens tied to that carbon, two carbons and three hydrogens
sticking up here, etc.
How does the chemist ﬁnd what the arrangement is? He mixes
bottles full of stuff together, and if it turns red, it tells him that it
consists of one hydrogen and two carbons tied on here; if it turns
blue, on the other hand, that is not the way it is at all. This is one
of the most fantastic pieces of detective work that has ever been
done—organic chemistry. To discover the arrangement of the atoms
in these enormously complicated arrays the chemist looks at what
happens when he mixes two different substances together. The
physicist could never quite believe that the chemist knew what he
was talking about when he described the arrangement of the atoms.
For about twenty years it has been possible, in some cases, to look
at such molecules (not quite as complicated as this one, but some
which contain parts of it) by a physical method, and it has been
possible to locate every atom, not by looking at colors, but by mea-
suring where they are. And lo and behold!, the chemists are almost
always correct.
It turns out, in fact, that in the odor of violets there are three
slightly different molecules, which differ only in the arrangement
of the hydrogen atoms.
One problem of chemistry is to name a substance, so that we will
know what it is. Find a name for this shape! Not only must the name
18
Six Easy Pieces
