Because atomic behavior is so unlike ordinary experience, it is
very difficult to get used to and it appears peculiar and mysterious
to everyone, both to the novice and to the experienced physicist.
Even the experts do not understand it the way they would like to,
and it is perfectly reasonable that they should not, because all of
direct, human experience and human intuition applies to large ob-
jects. We know how large objects will act, but things on a small
scale just do not act that way. So we have to learn about them in a
sort of abstract or imaginative fashion and not by connection with
our direct experience.
In this chapter we shall tackle immediately the basic element of
the mysterious behavior in its most strange form. We choose to ex-
amine a phenomenon which is impossible, absolutely impossible,
to explain in any classical way, and which has in it the heart of
quantum mechanics. In reality, it contains the only mystery. We
cannot explain the mystery in the sense of “explaining” how it
works. We will tell you how it works. In telling you how it works
we will have told you about the basic peculiarities of all quantum
mechanics.
An experiment with bullets
To try to understand the quantum behavior of electrons, we shall
compare and contrast their behavior, in a particular experimental
setup, with the more familiar behavior of particles like bullets, and
with the behavior of waves like water waves. We consider ﬁrst the
behavior of bullets in the experimental setup shown diagrammati-
cally in Fig. 6-1. We have a machine gun that shoots a stream of
bullets. It is not a very good gun, in that it sprays the bullets (ran-
domly) over a fairly large angular spread, as indicated in the ﬁgure.
In front of the gun we have a wall (made of armor plate) that has
in it two holes just about big enough to let a bullet through. Be-
yond the wall is a backstop (say a thick wall of wood) which will
“absorb” the bullets when they hit it. In front of the wall we have
an object which we shall call a “detector” of bullets. It might be a
117
Quantum Behavior
