quantum mechanics, once remarked that anybody who is not
shocked by the theory hasn’t understood it.
The problem is that quantum ideas strike at the very heart of
what we might call commonsense reality. In particular, the idea that
physical objects such as electrons or atoms enjoy an independent
existence, with a complete set of physical properties at all times, is
called into question. For example, an electron cannot have a posi-
tion in space and a well-deﬁned speed at the same moment. If you
look for where an electron is located, you will ﬁnd it at a place, and
if you measure its speed you will obtain a deﬁnite answer, but you
cannot make both observations at once. Nor is it meaningful to at-
tribute deﬁnite yet unknown values for the position and speed to
an electron in the absence of a complete set of observations.
This indeterminism in the very nature of atomic particles is en-
capsulated by Heisenberg’s celebrated uncertainty principle. This
puts strict limits on the precision with which properties such as po-
sition and speed can be simultaneously known. A sharp value for
position smears the range of possible values of speed and vice versa.
Quantum fuzziness shows up in the way electrons, photons, and
other particles move. Certain experiments can reveal them taking
deﬁnite paths through space, after the fashion of bullets following
trajectories toward a target. But other experimental arrangements
reveal that these entities can also behave like waves, showing char-
acteristic patterns of diffraction and interference.
Feynman’s masterly analysis of the famous “two-slit” experiment,
which teases out the “shocking” wave-particle duality in its starkest
form, has become a classic in the history of scientiﬁc exposition.
With a few very simple ideas, Feynman manages to take the reader
to the very heart of the quantum mystery, and leaves us dazzled by
the paradoxical nature of reality that it exposes.
Although quantum mechanics had made the textbooks by the
early 1930s, it is typical of Feynman that, as a young man, he pre-
ferred to refashion the theory for himself in an entirely new guise.
The Feynman method has the virtue that it provides us with a vivid
picture of nature’s quantum trickery at work. The idea is that the
xvi
Introduction
