a physicist’s language. They can say “why does a frog jump?,” and
the physicist cannot answer. If they tell him what a frog is, that
there are so many molecules, there is a nerve here, etc., that is dif-
ferent. If they will tell us, more or less, what the earth or the stars
are like, then we can ﬁgure it out. In order for physical theory to
be of any use, we must know where the atoms are located. In order
to understand the chemistry, we must know exactly what atoms are
present, for otherwise we cannot analyze it. That is but one limita-
tion, of course.
There is another kind of problem in the sister sciences which
does not exist in physics; we might call it, for lack of a better term,
the historical question. How did it get that way? If we understand
all about biology, we will want to know how all the things which
are on the earth got there. There is the theory of evolution, an im-
portant part of biology. In geology, we not only want to know how
the mountains are forming, but how the entire earth was formed
in the beginning, the origin of the solar system, etc. That, of course,
leads us to want to know what kind of matter there was in the
world. How did the stars evolve? What were the initial conditions?
That is the problem of astronomical history. A great deal has been
found out about the formation of stars, the formation of elements
from which we were made, and even a little about the origin of the
universe.
There is no historical question being studied in physics at the
present time. We do not have a question, “Here are the laws of
physics, how did they get that way?” We do not imagine, at the
moment, that the laws of physics are somehow changing with time,
that they were different in the past than they are at present. Of
course they may be, and the moment we ﬁnd they are, the historical
question of physics will be wrapped up with the rest of the history
of the universe, and then the physicist will be talking about the
same problems as astronomers, geologists, and biologists.
Finally, there is a physical problem that is common to many
ﬁelds, that is very old, and that has not been solved. It is not the
65
The Relation of Physics to Other Sciences
