His other passions included playing the bongo drums, painting,
frequenting strip clubs, and deciphering Mayan texts.
Feynman himself did much to cultivate his distinctive persona.
Although reluctant to put pen to paper, he was voluble in conver-
sation, and loved to tell stories about his ideas and escapades. These
anecdotes, accumulated over the years, helped add to his mystique
and made him a proverbial legend in his own lifetime. His engaging
manner endeared him greatly to students, especially the younger
ones, many of whom idolized him. When Feynman died of cancer
in 1988 the students at Caltech, where he had worked for most of
his career, unfurled a banner with the simple message: “We love
you Dick.”
It was Feynman’s happy-go-lucky approach to life in general and
physics in particular that made him such a superb communicator.
He had little time for formal lecturing or even for supervising
Ph.D. students. Nevertheless he could give brilliant lectures when
it suited him, deploying all the sparkling wit, penetrating insight,
and irreverence that he brought to bear on his research work.
In the early 1960s Feynman was persuaded to teach an introduc-
tory physics course to Caltech freshmen and sophomores. He did so
with characteristic panache and his inimitable blend of informality,
zest, and offbeat humor. Fortunately, these priceless lectures were
saved for posterity in book form. Though far removed in style and
presentation from more conventional teaching texts, The Feynman
Lectures on Physics were a huge success, and they excited and inspired
a generation of students across the world. Three decades on, these vol-
umes have lost nothing of their sparkle and lucidity. Six Easy Pieces
is culled directly from The Feynman Lectures on Physics. It is intended
to give general readers a substantive taste of Feynman the Educator
by drawing on the early, nontechnical chapters from that landmark
work. The result is a delightful volume—it serves both as a primer
on physics for nonscientists and as a primer on Feynman himself.
What is most impressive about Feynman’s carefully crafted ex-
position is the way that he can develop far-reaching physical no-
tions from the most slender investment in concepts, and a
xiii
Introduction
