minimum in the way of mathematics and technical jargon. He has
the knack of ﬁnding just the right analogy or everyday illustration
to bring out the essence of a deep principle, without obscuring it
in incidental or irrelevant details.
The selection of topics contained in this volume is not intended as
a comprehensive survey of modern physics, but as a tantalizing taste
of the Feynman approach. We soon discover how he can illuminate
even mundane topics like force and motion with new insights. Key
concepts are illustrated by examples drawn from daily life or antiq-
uity. Physics is continually linked to other sciences while leaving the
reader in no doubt about which is the fundamental discipline.
Right at the beginning of Six Easy Pieces we learn how all physics
is rooted in the notion of law—the existence of an ordered universe
that can be understood by the application of rational reasoning.
However, the laws of physics are not transparent to us in our direct
observations of nature. They are frustratingly hidden, subtly en-
coded in the phenomena we study. The arcane procedures of the
physicist—a mixture of carefully designed experimentation and
mathematical theorizing—are needed to unveil the underlying law-
like reality.
Possibly the best-known law of physics is Newton’s inverse
square law of gravitation, discussed here in Chapter Five. The topic
is introduced in the context of the solar system and Kepler’s laws
of planetary motion. But gravitation is universal, applying across
the cosmos, enabling Feynman to spice his account with examples
from astronomy and cosmology. Commenting on a picture of a
globular cluster somehow held together by unseen forces, he waxes
lyrical: “If one cannot see gravitation acting here, he has no soul.”
Other laws are known that refer to the various nongravitational
forces of nature that describe how particles of matter interact with
each other. There is but a handful of these forces, and Feynman
himself holds the considerable distinction of being one of the few
scientists in history to discover a new law of physics, pertaining to
the way that a weak nuclear force affects the behavior of certain
subatomic particles.
xiv
Introduction
