The other branches of psychology, which involve things like the
physiology of sensation—what happens in the eye, and what hap-
pens in the brain—are, if you wish, less interesting. But some small
but real progress has been made in studying them. One of the most
interesting technical problems may or may not be called psychol-
ogy. The central problem of the mind, if you will, or the nervous
system, is this: when an animal learns something, it can do some-
thing different than it could before, and its brain cell must have
changed too, if it is made out of atoms. In what way is it different?
We do not know where to look, or what to look for, when some-
thing is memorized. We do not know what it means, or what
change there is in the nervous system, when a fact is learned. This
is a very important problem which has not been solved at all. As-
suming, however, that there is some kind of memory thing, the
brain is such an enormous mass of interconnecting wires and nerves
that it probably cannot be analyzed in a straightforward manner.
There is an analog of this to computing machines and computing
elements, in that they also have a lot of lines, and they have some
kind of element, analogous, perhaps, to the synapse, or connection
of one nerve to another. This is a very interesting subject which we
have not the time to discuss further—the relationship between
thinking and computing machines. It must be appreciated, of
course, that this subject will tell us very little about the real com-
plexities of ordinary human behavior. All human beings are so dif-
ferent. It will be a long time before we get there. We must start
much further back. If we could even ﬁgure out how a dog works,
we would have gone pretty far. Dogs are easier to understand, but
nobody yet knows how dogs work.
How did it get that way?
In order for physics to be useful to other sciences in a theoretical
way, other than in the invention of instruments, the science in
question must supply to the physicist a description of the object in
64
Six Easy Pieces
