difference, with the result that when proline is in the chain, there
is a kink in the chain. If we wished to manufacture a particular pro-
tein, we would give these instructions: put one of those sulfur hooks
here; next, add something to take up space; then attach something
to put a kink in the chain. In this way, we will get a complicated-
looking chain, hooked together and having some complex struc-
ture; this is presumably just the manner in which all the various
enzymes are made. One of the great triumphs in recent times (since
1960) was at last to discover the exact spatial atomic arrangement
of certain proteins, which involve some ﬁfty-six or sixty amino acids
in a row. Over a thousand atoms (more nearly two thousand, if we
count the hydrogen atoms) have been located in a complex pattern
in two proteins. The ﬁrst was hemoglobin. One of the sad aspects
of this discovery is that we cannot see anything from the pattern;
we do not understand why it works the way it does. Of course, that
is the next problem to be attacked.
Another problem is how do the enzymes know what to be? A
red-eyed ﬂy makes a red-eyed ﬂy baby, and so the information for
the whole pattern of enzymes to make red pigment must be passed
from one ﬂy to the next. This is done by a substance in the nucleus
of the cell, not a protein, called DNA (short for deoxyribonucleic
acid). This is the key substance which is passed from one cell to an-
other (for instance, sperm cells consist mostly of DNA) and carries
the information as to how to make the enzymes. DNA is the “blue-
print.” What does the blueprint look like and how does it work?
First, the blueprint must be able to reproduce itself. Secondly, it
must be able to instruct the protein. Concerning the reproduction,
we might think that this proceeds like cell reproduction. Cells sim-
ply grow bigger and then divide in half. Must it be thus with DNA
molecules, then, that they too grow bigger and divide in half? Every
atom certainly does not grow bigger and divide in half! No, it is
impossible to reproduce a molecule except by some more clever
way.
The structure of the substance DNA was studied for a long
time, ﬁrst chemically to ﬁnd the composition, and then with x-rays
56
Six Easy Pieces
