sciences on the periphery), so that when we later concentrate on
some particular point we will have some idea of the background,
why that particular point is interesting, and how it ﬁts into the big
structure. So, what is our overall picture of the world?
Matter is made of atoms
If, in some cataclysm, all of scientiﬁc knowledge were to be de-
stroyed, and only one sentence passed on to the next generations
of creatures, what statement would contain the most information
in the fewest words? I believe it is the atomic hypothesis (or the
atomic fact, or whatever you wish to call it) that all things are made
of atoms—little particles that move around in perpetual motion, at-
tracting each other when they are a little distance apart, but repelling
upon being squeezed into one another. In that one sentence, you will
see, there is an enormous amount of information about the world,
if just a little imagination and thinking are applied.
To illustrate the power of the atomic idea, suppose that we have
a drop of water a quarter of an inch on the side. If we look at it
very closely we see nothing but water—smooth, continuous water.
Even if we magnify it with the best optical microscope available—
roughly two thousand times—then the water drop will be roughly
forty feet across, about as big as a large room, and if we looked
rather closely, we would still see relatively smooth water—but here
and there small football-shaped things swimming back and forth.
Very interesting. These are paramecia. You may stop at this point
and get so curious about the paramecia with their wiggling cilia
and twisting bodies that you go no further, except perhaps to mag-
nify the paramecia still more and see inside. This, of course, is a
subject for biology, but for the present we pass on and look still
more closely at the water material itself, magnifying it two thousand
times again. Now the drop of water extends about ﬁfteen miles
across, and if we look very closely at it we see a kind of teeming,
something which no longer has a smooth appearance—it looks
something like a crowd at a football game as seen from a very great
4
Six Easy Pieces
