snatching at such minor things, how can the results of an experi-
ment be wrong? Only by being inaccurate. For example, the mass
of an object never seems to change: a spinning top has the same
weight as a still one. So a “law” was invented: mass is constant, in-
dependent of speed. That “law” is now found to be incorrect. Mass
is found to increase with velocity, but appreciable increases require
velocities near that of light. A true law is: if an object moves with a
speed of less than one hundred miles a second the mass is constant
to within one part in a million. In some such approximate form
this is a correct law. So in practice one might think that the new
law makes no signiﬁcant difference. Well, yes and no. For ordinary
speeds we can certainly forget it and use the simple constant-mass
law as a good approximation. But for high speeds we are wrong,
and the higher the speed, the more wrong we are.
Finally, and most interesting, philosophically we are completely
wrong with the approximate law. Our entire picture of the world
has to be altered even though the mass changes only by a little bit.
This is a very peculiar thing about the philosophy, or the ideas, be-
hind the laws. Even a very small effect sometimes requires profound
changes in our ideas.
Now, what should we teach ﬁrst? Should we teach the correct but
unfamiliar law with its strange and difficult conceptual ideas, for
example the theory of relativity, four-dimensional space-time, and
so on? Or should we ﬁrst teach the simple “constant-mass” law,
which is only approximate, but does not involve such difficult
ideas? The ﬁrst is more exciting, more wonderful, and more fun,
but the second is easier to get at ﬁrst, and is a ﬁrst step to a real un-
derstanding of the ﬁrst idea. This point arises again and again in
teaching physics. At different times we shall have to resolve it in
different ways, but at each stage it is worth learning what is now
known, how accurate it is, how it ﬁts into everything else, and how
it may be changed when we learn more.
Let us now proceed with our outline, or general map, of our un-
derstanding of science today (in particular, physics, but also of other
3
Atoms in Motion
