High-energy particle physics was the jewel in the crown of post-
war science, at once awesome and glamorous, with its huge accel-
erator machines and seemingly unending list of newly discovered
subatomic particles. Feynman’s research was directed mostly toward
making sense of the results of this enterprise. A great unifying
theme among particle physicists has been the role of symmetry and
conservation laws in bringing order to the subatomic zoo.
As it happens, many of the symmetries known to particle physi-
cists were familiar already in classical physics. Chief among these
are the symmetries that arise from the homogeneity of space and
time. Take time: apart from cosmology, where the big bang marked
the beginning of time, there is nothing in physics to distinguish
one moment of time from the next. Physicists say that the world is
“invariant under time translations,” meaning that whether you take
midnight or midday to be the zero of time in your measurements,
it makes no difference to the description of physical phenomena.
Physical processes do not depend on an absolute zero of time. It
turns out that this symmetry under time translation directly implies
one of the most basic, and also most useful, laws of physics: the
law of conservation of energy. This law says that you can move en-
ergy around and change its form but you can’t create or destroy it.
Feynman makes this law crystal clear with his amusing story of
Dennis the Menace who is always mischievously hiding his toy
building blocks from his mother (Chapter Four).
The most challenging lecture in this volume is the last, which is
an exposition on quantum physics. It is no exaggeration to say that
quantum mechanics had dominated twentieth-century physics and
is far and away the most successful scientiﬁc theory in existence. It
is indispensable for understanding subatomic particles, atoms and
nuclei, molecules and chemical bonding, the structure of solids, su-
perconductors and superﬂuids, the electrical and thermal conduc-
tivity of metals and semiconductors, the structure of stars, and
much else. It has practical applications ranging from the laser to
the microchip. All this from a theory that at ﬁrst sight—and second
sight—looks absolutely crazy! Niels Bohr, one of the founders of
xv
Introduction
