twenty years—really contains a dynamic and interesting phenom-
enon which is going on all the time. To our eyes, our crude eyes,
nothing is changing, but if we could see it a billion times magniﬁed,
we would see that from its own point of view it is always changing:
molecules are leaving the surface, molecules are coming back.
Why do we see no change? Because just as many molecules are
leaving as are coming back! In the long run “nothing happens.” If
we then take the top of the vessel off and blow the moist air away,
replacing it with dry air, then the number of molecules leaving is
just the same as it was before, because this depends on the jiggling
of the water, but the number coming back is greatly reduced be-
cause there are so many fewer water molecules above the water.
Therefore there are more going out than coming in, and the water
evaporates. Hence, if you wish to evaporate water turn on the fan!
Here is something else: Which molecules leave? When a mole-
cule leaves it is due to an accidental, extra accumulation of a little
bit more than ordinary energy, which it needs if it is to break away
from the attractions of its neighbors. Therefore, since those that
leave have more energy than the average, the ones that are left have
less average motion than they had before. So the liquid gradually
cools if it evaporates. Of course, when a molecule of vapor comes
from the air to the water below there is a sudden great attraction as
the molecule approaches the surface. This speeds up the incoming
molecule and results in generation of heat. So when they leave they
take away heat; when they come back they generate heat. Of course
when there is no net evaporation the result is nothing—the water
is not changing temperature. If we blow on the water so as to main-
tain a continuous preponderance in the number evaporating, then
the water is cooled. Hence, blow on soup to cool it!
Of course you should realize that the processes just described are
more complicated than we have indicated. Not only does the water
go into the air, but also, from time to time, one of the oxygen or
nitrogen molecules will come in and “get lost” in the mass of water
molecules, and work its way into the water. Thus the air dissolves
in the water; oxygen and nitrogen molecules will work their way
12
Six Easy Pieces
