force when they are separated by appreciable distance (aside from
gravity). When they come close together, they can “see inside” each
other and rearrange their charges, with the result that they have a
very strong interaction. The ultimate basis of an interaction be-
tween the atoms is electrical. Since this force is so enormous, all
the plusses and all minuses will normally come together in as in-
timate a combination as they can. All things, even ourselves, are
made of ﬁne-grained, enormously strongly interacting plus and
minus parts, all neatly balanced out. Once in a while, by accident,
we may rub off a few minuses or a few plusses (usually it is easier
to rub off minuses), and in those circumstances we ﬁnd the force
of electricity unbalanced, and we can then see the effects of these
electrical attractions.
To give an idea of how much stronger electricity is than gravita-
tion, consider two grains of sand, a millimeter across, thirty meters
apart. If the force between them were not balanced, if everything
attracted everything else instead of likes repelling, so that there were
no cancellations, how much force would there be? There would be
a force of three million tons between the two! You see, there is very,
very little excess or deﬁcit of the number of negative or positive
charges necessary to produce appreciable electrical effects. This is,
of course, the reason why you cannot see the difference between
an electrically charged and an uncharged thing—so few particles
are involved that they hardly make a difference in the weight or
size of an object.
With this picture the atoms were easier to understand. They
were thought to have a “nucleus” at the center, which is positively
electrically charged and very massive, and the nucleus is surrounded
by a certain number of “electrons” which are very light and nega-
tively charged. Now we go a little ahead in our story to remark that
in the nucleus itself there were found two kinds of particles, protons
and neutrons, almost of the same weight and very heavy. The pro-
tons are electrically charged and the neutrons are neutral. If we have
an atom with six protons inside its nucleus, and this is surrounded
29
Basic Physics
