being able to see what every little piece is doing, in terms of our un-
derstanding of the game.
At ﬁrst the phenomena of nature were roughly divided into
classes, like heat, electricity, mechanics, magnetism, properties of
substances, chemical phenomena, light or optics, x-rays, nuclear
physics, gravitation, meson phenomena, etc. However, the aim is
to see complete nature as different aspects of one set of phenomena.
That is the problem in basic theoretical physics today—to ﬁnd the
laws behind experiment; to amalgamate these classes. Historically, we
have always been able to amalgamate them, but as time goes on
new things are found. We were amalgamating very well, when all
of a sudden x-rays were found. Then we amalgamated some more,
and mesons were found. Therefore, at any stage of the game, it al-
ways looks rather messy. A great deal is amalgamated, but there are
always many wires or threads hanging out in all directions. That is
the situation today, which we shall try to describe.
Some historic examples of amalgamation are the following. First,
take heat and mechanics. When atoms are in motion, the more mo-
tion, the more heat the system contains, and so heat and all tem-
perature effects can be represented by the laws of mechanics. Another
tremendous amalgamation was the discovery of the relation be-
tween electricity, magnetism, and light, which were found to be
different aspects of the same thing, which we call today the electro-
magnetic ﬁeld. Another amalgamation is the uniﬁcation of chemical
phenomena, the various properties of various substances, and the
behavior of atomic particles, which is in the quantum mechanics of
chemistry.
The question is, of course, is it going to be possible to amalga-
mate everything, and merely discover that this world represents dif-
ferent aspects of one thing? Nobody knows. All we know is that as
we go along, we ﬁnd that we can amalgamate pieces, and then we
ﬁnd some pieces that do not ﬁt, and we keep trying to put the jig-
saw puzzle together. Whether there are a ﬁnite number of pieces,
and whether there is even a border to the puzzle, are of course un-
26
Six Easy Pieces
