change; they merely let an atom go from one place to another. Hav-
ing done so, the enzyme is ready to do it to the next molecule, like
a machine in a factory. Of course, there must be a supply of certain
atoms and a way of disposing of other atoms. Take hydrogen, for
example: there are enzymes which have special units on them which
carry the hydrogen for all chemical reactions. For example, there
are three or four hydrogen-reducing enzymes which are used all
over our cycle in different places. It is interesting that the machinery
which liberates some hydrogen at one place will take that hydrogen
and use it somewhere else.
The most important feature of the cycle of Fig. 3-1 is the transfor-
mation from GDP to GTP (guanosine-di-phosphate to guanosine-
tri-phosphate) because the one substance has much more energy in
it than the other. Just as there is a “box” in certain enzymes for car-
rying hydrogen atoms around, there are special energy-carrying
“boxes” which involve the triphosphate group. So, GTP has more
energy than GDP and if the cycle is going one way, we are produc-
ing molecules which have extra energy and which can go drive some
other cycle which requires energy, for example the contraction of
muscle. The muscle will not contract unless there is GTP. We can
take muscle ﬁber, put it in water, and add GTP, and the ﬁbers con-
tract, changing GTP to GDP if the right enzymes are present. So
the real system is in the GDP-GTP transformation; in the dark the
GTP which has been stored up during the day is used to run the
whole cycle around the other way. An enzyme, you see, does not
care in which direction the reaction goes, for if it did it would vi-
olate one of the laws of physics.
Physics is of great importance in biology and other sciences for
still another reason, that has to do with experimental techniques.
In fact, if it were not for the great development of experimental
physics, these biochemistry charts would not be known today.
The reason is that the most useful tool of all for analyzing this
fantastically complex system is to label the atoms which are used
in the reactions. Thus, if we could introduce into the cycle some
54
Six Easy Pieces
