of the rules of the game. If we know the rules, we consider that we
“understand” the world.
How can we tell whether the rules which we “guess” at are really
right if we cannot analyze the game very well? There are, roughly
speaking, three ways. First, there may be situations where nature
has arranged, or we arrange nature, to be simple and to have so
few parts that we can predict exactly what will happen, and thus
we can check how our rules work. (In one corner of the board
there may be only a few chess pieces at work, and that we can ﬁg-
ure out exactly.)
A second good way to check rules is in terms of less speciﬁc rules
derived from them. For example, the rule on the move of a bishop
on a chessboard is that it moves only on the diagonal. One can de-
duce, no matter how many moves may be made, that a certain
bishop will always be on a red square. So, without being able to
follow the details, we can always check our idea about the bishop’s
motion by ﬁnding out whether it is always on a red square. Of
course it will be, for a long time, until all of a sudden we ﬁnd that
it is on a black square (what happened, of course, is that in the
meantime it was captured, another pawn crossed for queening, and
it turned into a bishop on a black square). That is the way it is in
physics. For a long time we will have a rule that works excellently
in an overall way, even when we cannot follow the details, and then
sometime we may discover a new rule. From the point of view of
basic physics, the most interesting phenomena are of course in the
new places, the places where the rules do not work—not the places
where they do work! That is the way in which we discover new
rules.
The third way to tell whether our ideas are right is relatively
crude but probably the most powerful of them all. That is, by rough
approximation. While we may not be able to tell why Alekhine
moves this particular piece, perhaps we can roughly understand that
he is gathering his pieces around the king to protect it, more or less,
since that is the sensible thing to do in the circumstances. In the
same way, we can often understand nature, more or less, without
25
Basic Physics
