temperature. Then, to a close approximation, the number of colli-
sions will be doubled, and since each will be just as “energetic” as
before, the pressure is proportional to the density. If we consider
the true nature of the forces between the atoms, we would expect
a slight decrease in pressure because of the attraction between the
atoms, and a slight increase because of the ﬁnite volume they oc-
cupy. Nevertheless, to an excellent approximation, if the density is
low enough that there are not many atoms, the pressure is propor-
tional to the density.
We can also see something else: If we increase the temperature
without changing the density of the gas, i.e., if we increase the
speed of the atoms, what is going to happen to the pressure? Well,
the atoms hit harder because they are moving faster, and in addition
they hit more often, so the pressure increases. You see how simple
the ideas of atomic theory are.
Let us consider another situation. Suppose that the piston moves
inward, so that the atoms are slowly compressed into a smaller
space. What happens when an atom hits the moving piston? Evi-
dently it picks up speed from the collision. You can try it by bounc-
ing a ping-pong ball from a forward-moving paddle, for example,
and you will ﬁnd that it comes off with more speed than that with
which it struck. (Special example: if an atom happens to be stand-
ing still and the piston hits it, it will certainly move.) So the atoms
are “hotter” when they come away from the piston than they were
before they struck it. Therefore all the atoms which are in the vessel
will have picked up speed. This means that when we compress a gas
slowly, the temperature of the gas increases. So, under slow compression,
a gas will increase in temperature, and under slow expansion it will
decrease in temperature.
We now return to our drop of water and look in another direc-
tion. Suppose that we decrease the temperature of our drop of
water. Suppose that the jiggling of the molecules of the atoms in
the water is steadily decreasing. We know that there are forces of
attraction between the atoms, so that after a while they will not be
able to jiggle so well. What will happen at very low temperatures is
8
Six Easy Pieces
