the weight from Y to X, obtaining free power, and use the reversible
Machine A, running backwards, to lower the three-unit weight a
distance X and lift the one-unit weight by one unit height. This
will put the one-unit weight back where it was before, and leave
both machines ready to be used again! We would therefore have
perpetual motion if Y were higher than X, which we assumed was
impossible. With those assumptions, we thus deduce that Y is not
higher than X, so that of all machines that can be designed, the re-
versible machine is the best.
We can also see that all reversible machines must lift to exactly
the same height. Suppose that B was really reversible also. The argu-
ment that Y is not higher than X is, of course, just as good as it was
before, but we can also make our argument the other way around,
using the machines in the opposite order, and prove that X is not
higher than Y. This, then, is a very remarkable observation because
it permits us to analyze the height to which different machines are
going to lift something without looking at the interior mechanism.
We know at once that if somebody makes an enormously elaborate
series of levers that lift three units a certain distance by lowering
one unit by one unit distance, and we compare it with a simple
lever which does the same thing and is fundamentally reversible,
his machine will lift it no higher, but perhaps less high. If his ma-
chine is reversible, we also know exactly how high it will lift. To
summarize: every reversible machine, no matter how it operates,
which drops one pound one foot and lifts a three-pound weight al-
ways lifts it the same distance, X. This is clearly a universal law of
great utility. The next question is, of course, what is X?
Suppose we have a reversible machine which is going to lift this
distance X, three for one. We set up three balls in a rack which does
not move, as shown in Fig. 4-2. One ball is held on a stage at a dis-
tance one foot above the ground. The machine can lift three balls,
lowering one by a distance 1. Now, we have arranged that the plat-
form which holds three balls has a ﬂoor and two shelves, exactly
spaced at distance X, and further, that the rack which holds the
balls is spaced at distance X, (a). First we roll the balls horizontally
74
Six Easy Pieces
