existing formalisms and developing his own highly intuitive ap-
proach. Whereas most theoretical physicists rely on careful mathe-
matical calculation to provide a guide and a crutch to take them
into unfamiliar territory, Feynman’s attitude was almost cavalier.
You get the impression that he could read nature like a book and
simply report on what he found, without the tedium of complex
analysis.
Indeed, in pursuing his interests in this manner Feynman dis-
played a healthy contempt for rigorous formalisms. It is hard to
convey the depth of genius that is necessary to work like this. The-
oretical physics is one of the toughest intellectual exercises, com-
bining abstract concepts that defy visualization with extreme
mathematical complexity. Only by adopting the highest standards
of mental discipline can most physicists make progress. Yet Feyn-
man appeared to ride roughshod over this strict code of practice
and pluck new results like ready-made fruit from the Tree of
Knowledge.
The Feynman style owed a great deal to the personality of the
man. In his professional and private life he seemed to treat the
world as a hugely entertaining game. The physical universe pre-
sented him with a fascinating series of puzzles and challenges, and
so did his social environment. A lifelong prankster, he treated au-
thority and the academic establishment with the same sort of dis-
respect he showed for stuffy mathematical formalism. Never one
to suffer fools gladly, he broke the rules whenever he found them
arbitrary or absurd. His autobiographical writings contain amusing
stories of Feynman outwitting the atom-bomb security services
during the war, Feynman cracking safes, Feynman disarming
women with outrageously bold behavior. He treated his Nobel
Prize, awarded for his work on QED, in a similar take-it-or-leave-
it manner.
Alongside this distaste for formality, Feynman had a fascination
with the quirky and obscure. Many will remember his obsession
with the long-lost country of Tuva in Central Asia, captured so de-
lightfully in a documentary ﬁlm made near the time of his death.
xii
Introduction
