Newton’s law of gravitation
From his better understanding of the theory of motion, Newton
appreciated that the sun could be the seat or organization of forces
that govern the motion of the planets. Newton proved to himself
(and perhaps we shall be able to prove it soon) that the very fact
that equal areas are swept out in equal times is a precise signpost of
the proposition that all deviations are precisely radial—that the law
of areas is a direct consequence of the idea that all of the forces are
directed exactly toward the sun.
Next, by analyzing Kepler’s third law it is possible to show that
the farther away the planet, the weaker the forces. If two planets at
different distances from the sun are compared, the analysis shows
that the forces are inversely proportional to the squares of the re-
spective distances. With the combination of the two laws, Newton
concluded that there must be a force, inversely as the square of the
distance, directed in a line between the two objects.
Being a man of considerable feeling for generalities, Newton
supposed, of course, that this relationship applied more generally
than just to the sun holding the planets. It was already known, for
example, that the planet Jupiter had moons going around it as the
moon of the earth goes around the earth, and Newton felt certain
that each planet held its moons with a force. He already knew of
the force holding us on the earth, so he proposed that this was a
universal force—that everything pulls everything else.
The next problem was whether the pull of the earth on its people
was the “same” as its pull on the moon, i.e., inversely as the square
of the distance. If an object on the surface of the earth falls 16 feet
in the ﬁrst second after it is released from rest, how far does the
moon fall in the same time? We might say that the moon does not
fall at all. But if there were no force on the moon, it would go off
in a straight line, whereas it goes in a circle instead, so it really falls
in from where it would have been if there were no force at all. We
can calculate from the radius of the moon’s orbit (which is about
240,000 miles) and how long it takes to go around the earth (ap-
94
Six Easy Pieces
