intelligent student was unable to completely encompass everything
that was in the lectures—by putting in suggestions of applications
of the ideas and concepts in various directions outside the main
line of attack. For this reason, though, I tried very hard to make all
the statements as accurate as possible, to point out in every case
where the equations and ideas ﬁtted into the body of physics, and
how—when they learned more—things would be modiﬁed. I also
felt that for such students it is important to indicate what it is that
they should—if they are sufficiently clever—be able to understand
by deduction from what has been said before, and what is being
put in as something new. When new ideas came in, I would try
either to deduce them if they were deducible, or to explain that it
was a new idea which hadn’t any basis in terms of things they had
already learned and which was not supposed to be provable—but
was just added in.
At the start of these lectures, I assumed that the students knew
something when they came out of high school—such things as
geometrical optics, simple chemistry ideas, and so on. I also didn’t
see that there was any reason to make the lectures in a deﬁnite
order, in the sense that I would not be allowed to mention some-
thing until I was ready to discuss it in detail. There was a great deal
of mention of things to come, without complete discussions. These
more complete discussions would come later when the preparation
became more advanced. Examples are the discussions of induc-
tance, and of energy levels, which are at ﬁrst brought in in a very
qualitative way and are later developed more completely.
At the same time that I was aiming at the more active student,
I also wanted to take care of the fellow for whom the extra ﬁreworks
and side applications are merely disquieting and who cannot be ex-
pected to learn most of the material in the lecture at all. For such
students, I wanted there to be at least a central core or backbone of
material which he could get. Even if he didn’t understand everything
in a lecture, I hoped he wouldn’t get nervous. I didn’t expect him
to understand everything, but only the central and most direct fea-
xxvi
Feynman’s Preface
