weights times heights, it would not check out—we must add some-
thing else to account for the fact that the spring is under tension.
Elastic energy is the formula for a spring when it is stretched. How
much energy is it? If we let go, the elastic energy, as the spring passes
through the equilibrium point, is converted to kinetic energy and
it goes back and forth between compressing or stretching the spring
and kinetic energy of motion. (There is also some gravitational en-
ergy going in and out, but we can do this experiment “sideways” if
we like.) It keeps going until the losses—Aha! We have cheated all
the way through by putting on little weights to move things or say-
ing that the machines are reversible, or that they go on forever, but
we can see that things do stop, eventually. Where is the energy
when the spring has ﬁnished moving up and down? This brings in
another form of energy: heat energy.
Inside a spring or a lever there are crystals which are made up of
lots of atoms, and with great care and delicacy in the arrangement
of the parts one can try to adjust things so that as something rolls
on something else, none of the atoms do any jiggling at all. But
one must be very careful. Ordinarily when things roll, there is
bumping and jiggling because of the irregularities of the material,
and the atoms start to wiggle inside. So we lose track of that energy;
we ﬁnd the atoms are wiggling inside in a random and confused
manner after the motion slows down. There is still kinetic energy,
all right, but it is not associated with visible motion. What a dream!
How do we know there is still kinetic energy? It turns out that with
thermometers you can ﬁnd out that, in fact, the spring or the lever
is warmer, and that there is really an increase of kinetic energy by
a deﬁnite amount. We call this form of energy heat energy, but we
know that it is not really a new form, it is just kinetic energy—
internal motion. (One of the difficulties with all these experiments
with matter that we do on a large scale is that we cannot really dem-
onstrate the conservation of energy and we cannot really make our
reversible machines, because every time we move a large clump of
stuff, the atoms do not remain absolutely undisturbed, and so a
82
Six Easy Pieces
