(After all, light and gamma rays are all the same; they are just dif-
ferent points on a frequency scale.) The generalization of this, that
for each particle there is an antiparticle, turns out to be true. In
the case of electrons, the antiparticle has another name—it is called
a positron, but for most other particles, it is called anti-so-and-so,
like antiproton or antineutron. In quantum electrodynamics, two
numbers are put in and most of the other numbers in the world
are supposed to come out. The two numbers that are put in are
called the mass of the electron and the charge of the electron. Ac-
tually, that is not quite true, for we have a whole set of numbers
for chemistry which tells how heavy the nuclei are. That leads us
to the next part.
Nuclei and particles
What are the nuclei made of, and how are they held together? It is
found that the nuclei are held together by enormous forces. When
these are released, the energy released is tremendous compared with
chemical energy, in the same ratio as the atomic bomb explosion is
to a TNT explosion, because, of course, the atomic bomb has to
do with changes inside the nucleus, while the explosion of TNT
has to do with the changes of the electrons on the outside of the
atoms. The question is, what are the forces which hold the protons
and neutrons together in the nucleus? Just as the electrical interac-
tion can be connected to a particle, a photon, Yukawa suggested
that the forces between neutrons and protons also have a ﬁeld of
some kind, and that when this ﬁeld jiggles it behaves like a particle.
Thus there could be some other particles in the world besides pro-
tons and neutrons, and he was able to deduce the properties of
these particles from the already known characteristics of nuclear
forces. For example, he predicted they should have a mass of two
or three hundred times that of an electron; and lo and behold, in
cosmic rays there was discovered a particle of the right mass! But it
later turned out to be the wrong particle. It was called a μ-meson,
or muon.
38
Six Easy Pieces
