path of a particle through space is not generally well deﬁned in
quantum mechanics. We can imagine a freely moving electron, say,
not merely traveling in a straight line between A and B as common
sense would suggest, but taking a variety of wiggly routes. Feynman
invites us to imagine that somehow the electron explores all possible
routes, and in the absence of an observation about which path is
taken we must suppose that all these alternative paths somehow
contribute to the reality. So when an electron arrives at a point in
space—say a target screen—many different histories must be inte-
grated together to create this one event.
Feynman’s so-called path-integral, or sum-over-histories approach
to quantum mechanics, set this remarkable concept out as a math-
ematical procedure. It remained more or less a curiosity for many
years, but as physicists pushed quantum mechanics to its limits—
applying it to gravitation and even cosmology—so the Feynman
approach turned out to offer the best calculational tool for describ-
ing a quantum universe. History may well judge that, among his
many outstanding contributions to physics, the path-integral for-
mulation of quantum mechanics is the most signiﬁcant.
Many of the ideas discussed in this volume are deeply philosoph-
ical. Yet Feynman had an abiding suspicion of philosophers. I once
had occasion to tackle him about the nature of mathematics and
the laws of physics, and whether abstract mathematical laws could
be considered to enjoy an independent Platonic existence. He gave
a spirited and skillful description of why this indeed appears so but
soon backed off when I pressed him to take a speciﬁc philosophical
position. He was similarly wary when I attempted to draw him out
on the subject of reductionism. With hindsight, I believe that Feyn-
man was not, after all, contemptuous of philosophical problems.
But, just as he was able to do ﬁne mathematical physics without
systematic mathematics, so he produced some ﬁne philosophical
insights without systematic philosophy. It was formalism he dis-
liked, not content.
It is unlikely that the world will see another Richard Feynman.
He was very much a man of his time. The Feynman style worked
xvii
Introduction
