is related to the conservation of angular momentum. Besides these,
there are three other conservation laws, that are exact so far as we
can tell today, which are much simpler to understand because they
are in the nature of counting blocks.
The ﬁrst of the three is the conservation of charge, and that merely
means that you count how many positive, minus how many nega-
tive electrical charges you have, and the number is never changed.
You may get rid of a positive with a negative, but you do not create
any net excess of positives over negatives. Two other laws are anal-
ogous to this one—one is called the conservation of baryons. There
are a number of strange particles, a neutron and a proton are ex-
amples, which are called baryons. In any reaction whatever in na-
ture, if we count how many baryons are coming into a process, the
number of baryons* which come out will be exactly the same.
There is another law, the conservation of leptons. We can say that
the group of particles called leptons are electron, mu meson, and
neutrino. There is an antielectron which is a positron, that is, a –1
lepton. Counting the total number of leptons in a reaction reveals
that the number in and out never changes, at least so far as we know
at present.
These are the six conservation laws, three of them subtle, involv-
ing space and time, and three of them simple, in the sense of count-
ing something.
With regard to the conservation of energy, we should note that
available energy is another matter—there is a lot of jiggling around
in the atoms of the water of the sea, because the sea has a certain
temperature, but it is impossible to get them herded into a deﬁnite
motion without taking energy from somewhere else. That is, al-
though we know for a fact that energy is conserved, the energy
available for human utility is not conserved so easily. The laws
which govern how much energy is available are called the laws of
thermodynamics and involve a concept called entropy for irreversible
thermodynamic processes.
85
Conservation of Energy
* Counting antibaryons as –1 baryon.
