click-click . . . . . . click . . . , etc., just as you have, no doubt, heard
a geiger counter operating. If we count the clicks which arrive in a
sufficiently long time—say, for many minutes—and then count
again for another equal period, we ﬁnd that the two numbers are
very nearly the same. So we can speak of the average rate at which
the clicks are heard (so-and-so-many clicks per minute on the
average).
As we move the detector around, the rate at which the clicks ap-
pear is faster or slower, but the size (loudness) of each click is always
the same. If we lower the temperature of the wire in the gun the
rate of clicking slows down, but still each click sounds the same.
We would notice also that if we put two separate detectors at the
backstop, one or the other would click, but never both at once. (Ex-
cept that once in a while, if there were two clicks very close together
in time, our ear might not sense the separation.) We conclude,
therefore, that whatever arrives at the backstop arrives in “lumps.”
All the “lumps” are the same size: only whole “lumps” arrive, and
they arrive one at a time at the backstop. We shall say: “Electrons
always arrive in identical lumps.”
Just as for our experiment with bullets, we can now proceed to
ﬁnd experimentally the answer to the question: “What is the rel-
ative probability that an electron ‘lump’ will arrive at the backstop
at various distances x from the center?” As before, we obtain the
relative probability by observing the rate of clicks, holding the
operation of the gun constant. The probability that lumps will ar-
rive at a particular x is proportional to the average rate of clicks at
that x.
The result of our experiment is the interesting curve marked P12
in part (c) of Fig. 6-3. Yes! That is the way electrons go.
The interference of electron waves
Now let us try to analyze the curve of Fig. 6-3 to see whether we can
understand the behavior of the electrons. The ﬁrst thing we would
say is that since they come in lumps, each lump, which we may as
124
Six Easy Pieces
