students because they have to take so long to learn it. Yet, in its real
applications—especially in its more complex applications, such as
in electrical engineering and chemistry—the full machinery of the
differential equation approach is not actually used. So I tried to de-
scribe the principles of quantum mechanics in a way which
wouldn’t require that one ﬁrst know the mathematics of partial dif-
ferential equations. Even for a physicist I think that is an interesting
thing to try to do—to present quantum mechanics in this reverse
fashion—for several reasons which may be apparent in the lectures
themselves. However, I think that the experiment in the quantum
mechanics part was not completely successful—in large part because
I really did not have enough time at the end (I should, for instance,
have had three or four more lectures in order to deal more com-
pletely with such matters as energy bands and the spatial dependence
of amplitudes). Also, I had never presented the subject this way be-
fore, so the lack of feedback was particularly serious. I now believe
the quantum mechanics should be given at a later time. Maybe I’ll
have a chance to do it again someday. Then I’ll do it right.
The reason there are no lectures on how to solve problems is be-
cause there were recitation sections. Although I did put in three
lectures in the ﬁrst year on how to solve problems, they are not in-
cluded here. Also there was a lecture on inertial guidance which
certainly belongs after the lecture on rotating systems, but which
was, unfortunately, omitted. The ﬁfth and sixth lectures are actually
due to Matthew Sands, as I was out of town.
The question, of course, is how well this experiment has suc-
ceeded. My own point of view—which, however, does not seem to
be shared by most of the people who worked with the students—
is pessimistic. I don’t think I did very well by the students. When
I look at the way the majority of the students handled the problems
on the examinations, I think that the system is a failure. Of course,
my friends point out to me that there were one or two dozen stu-
dents who—very surprisingly—understood almost everything in
all of the lectures, and who were quite active in working with the
material and worrying about the many points in an excited and in-
xxviii
Feynman’s Preface
