real parts alone will not do. That is a technical point, for the mo-
ment, because the formulas look just the same.
Since the probability of arrival through both holes is given so
simply, although it is not equal to (P1 + P2), that is really all there
is to say. But there are a large number of subtleties involved in the
fact that nature does work this way. We would like to illustrate
some of these subtleties for you now. First, since the number that
arrives at a particular point is not equal to the number that arrives
through 1 plus the number that arrives through 2, as we would
have concluded from Proposition A, undoubtedly we should con-
clude that Proposition A is false. It is not true that the electrons go
either through hole 1 or hole 2. But that conclusion can be tested
by another experiment.
Watching the electrons
We shall now try the following experiment. To our electron apparatus
we add a very strong light source, placed behind the wall and between
the two holes, as shown in Fig. 6-4. We know that electric charges
scatter light. So when an electron passes, however it does pass, on its
way to the detector, it will scatter some light to our eye, and we can
see where the electron goes. If, for instance, an electron were to take
the path via hole 2 that is sketched in Fig. 6-4, we should see a ﬂash
of light coming from the vicinity of the place marked A in the ﬁg-
ure. If an electron passes through hole 1 we would expect to see a
ﬂash from the vicinity of the upper hole. If it should happen that
we get light from both places at the same time, because the electron
divides in half . . . Let us just do the experiment!
Here is what we see: every time that we hear a “click” from our
electron detector (at the backstop), we also see a ﬂash of light either
near hole 1 or near hole 2, but never both at once! And we observe
the same result no matter where we put the detector. From this ob-
servation we conclude that when we look at the electrons we ﬁnd
that the electrons go either through one hole or the other. Experi-
mentally, Proposition A is necessarily true.
127
Quantum Behavior
