The carbon atoms are supposed to be in a solid crystal (which
could be graphite or diamond*). Now, for example, one of the oxy-
gen molecules can come over to the carbon, and each atom can
pick up a carbon atom and go ﬂying off in a new combination—
“carbon-oxygen”—which is a molecule of the gas called carbon
monoxide. It is given the chemical name CO. It is very simple: the
letters “CO” are practically a picture of that molecule. But carbon
attracts oxygen much more than oxygen attracts oxygen or carbon
attracts carbon. Therefore in this process the oxygen may arrive
with only a little energy, but the oxygen and carbon will snap to-
gether with a tremendous vengeance and commotion, and every-
thing near them will pick up the energy. A large amount of motion
energy, kinetic energy, is thus generated. This of course is burning;
we are getting heat from the combination of oxygen and carbon.
The heat is ordinarily in the form of the molecular motion of the
hot gas, but in certain circumstances it can be so enormous that it
generates light. That is how one gets ﬂames.
In addition, the carbon monoxide is not quite satisﬁed. It is pos-
sible for it to attach another oxygen, so that we might have a much
more complicated reaction in which the oxygen is combining with
the carbon, while at the same time there happens to be a collision
with a carbon monoxide molecule. One oxygen atom could attach
itself to the CO and ultimately form a molecule, composed of one
carbon and two oxygens, which is designated CO2 and called car-
bon dioxide. If we burn the carbon with very little oxygen in a very
rapid reaction (for example, in an automobile engine, where the
explosion is so fast that there is not time for it to make carbon diox-
ide) a considerable amount of carbon monoxide is formed. In many
such rearrangements, a very large amount of energy is released,
forming explosions, ﬂames, etc., depending on the reactions.
Chemists have studied these arrangements of the atoms, and found
that every substance is some type of arrangement of atoms.
16
Six Easy Pieces
* One can burn a diamond in air.
