registered graduate students and most of the Caltech physics fac-
ulty. During one lecture, Feynman started explaining how to rep-
resent certain complicated integrals diagrammatically: time on this
axis, space on that axis, wiggly line for this straight line, etc. Having
described what is known to the world of physics as a Feynman di-
agram, he turned around to face the class, grinning wickedly. “And
this is called THE diagram!” Feynman had reached the denoue-
ment, and the lecture hall erupted with spontaneous applause.
For many years after the lectures that make up this book were
given, Feynman was an occasional guest lecturer for Caltech’s fresh-
man physics course. Naturally, his appearances had to be kept secret
so there would be room left in the hall for the registered students.
At one such lecture the subject was curved-space time, and Feyn-
man was characteristically brilliant. But the unforgettable moment
came at the beginning of the lecture. The supernova of 1987 had
just been discovered, and Feynman was very excited about it. He
said, “Tycho Brahe had his supernova, and Kepler had his. Then
there weren’t any for 400 years. But now I have mine.” The class
fell silent, and Feynman continued on. “There are 1011 stars in the
galaxy. That used to be a huge number. But it’s only a hundred bil-
lion. It’s less than the national deﬁcit! We used to call them astro-
nomical numbers. Now we should call them economical numbers.”
The class dissolved in laughter, and Feynman, having captured his
audience, went on with his lecture.
Showmanship aside, Feynman’s pedagogical technique was
simple. A summation of his teaching philosophy was found among
his papers in the Caltech archives, in a note he had scribbled to
himself while in Brazil in 1952:
First ﬁgure out why you want the students to learn the subject
and what you want them to know, and the method will result
more or less by common sense.
What came to Feynman by “common sense” were often brilliant
twists that perfectly captured the essence of his point. Once, during
xx
Special Preface
