which assumes that the particle-wave idea of quantum mechanics
is valid.
Thus we have a new view of electromagnetic interaction. We
have a new kind of particle to add to the electron, the proton, and
the neutron. That new particle is called a photon. The new view of
the interaction of electrons and photons that is electromagnetic
theory, but with everything quantum-mechanically correct, is called
quantum electrodynamics. This fundamental theory of the interac-
tion of light and matter, or electric ﬁeld and charges, is our greatest
success so far in physics. In this one theory we have the basic rules
for all ordinary phenomena except for gravitation and nuclear pro-
cesses. For example, out of quantum electrodynamics come all
known electrical, mechanical, and chemical laws: the laws for the
collision of billiard balls, the motions of wires in magnetic ﬁelds,
the speciﬁc heat of carbon monoxide, the color of neon signs, the
density of salt, and the reactions of hydrogen and oxygen to make
water are all consequences of this one law. All these details can be
worked out if the situation is simple enough for us to make an ap-
proximation, which is almost never, but often we can understand
more or less what is happening. At the present time no exceptions
are found to the quantum-electrodynamic laws outside the nucleus,
and there we do not know whether there is an exception because
we simply do not know what is going on in the nucleus.
In principle, then, quantum electrodynamics is the theory of
all chemistry, and of life, if life is ultimately reduced to chemistry
and therefore just to physics because chemistry is already reduced
(the part of physics which is involved in chemistry being already
known). Furthermore, the same quantum electrodynamics, this
great thing, predicts a lot of new things. In the ﬁrst place, it tells
the properties of very high-energy photons, gamma rays, etc. It
predicted another very remarkable thing: besides the electron,
there should be another particle of the same mass, but of opposite
charge, called a positron, and these two, coming together, could
annihilate each other with the emission of light or gamma rays.
37
Basic Physics
