How was this done? Atoms liberate light which has deﬁnite frequen-
cies, something like the timbre of a musical instrument, which has
deﬁnite pitches or frequencies of sound. When we are listening to
several different tones we can tell them apart, but when we look
with our eyes at a mixture of colors we cannot tell the parts from
which it was made, because the eye is nowhere near as discerning
as the ear in this connection. However, with a spectroscope we can
analyze the frequencies of the light waves and in this way we can
see the very tunes of the atoms that are in the different stars. As a
matter of fact, two of the chemical elements were discovered on a
star before they were discovered on the earth. Helium was discov-
ered on the sun, whence its name, and technetium was discovered
in certain cool stars. This, of course, permits us to make headway
in understanding the stars, because they are made of the same kinds
of atoms which are on the earth. Now we know a great deal about
the atoms, especially concerning their behavior under conditions
of high temperature but not very great density, so that we can an-
alyze by statistical mechanics the behavior of the stellar substance.
Even though we cannot reproduce the conditions on the earth,
using the basic physical laws we often can tell precisely, or very
closely, what will happen. So it is that physics aids astronomy.
Strange as it may seem, we understand the distribution of matter
in the interior of the sun far better than we understand the interior
of the earth. What goes on inside a star is better understood than
one might guess from the difficulty of having to look at a little dot
of light through a telescope, because we can calculate what the
atoms in the stars should do in most circumstances.
One of the most impressive discoveries was the origin of the en-
60
Six Easy Pieces
marvelous is the truth than any artists of the past imagined! Why do the poets of
the present not speak of it? What men are poets who can speak of Jupiter if he
were like a man, but if he is an immense spinning sphere of methane and ammonia
must be silent?
