does not get weaker. It is always the same-sized ﬂash. The only thing
that happens as the light is made dimmer is that sometimes we hear
a “click” from the detector but see no ﬂash at all. The electron has
gone by without being “seen.” What we are observing is that light
also acts like electrons; we knew that it was “wavy,” but now we
ﬁnd that it is also “lumpy.” It always arrives—or is scattered— in
lumps that we call “photons.” As we turn down the intensity of the
light source we do not change the size of the photons, only the
rate at which they are emitted. That explains why, when our source
is dim, some electrons get by without being seen. There did not
happen to be a photon around at the time the electron went
through.
This is all a little discouraging. If it is true that whenever we
“see” the electron we see the same-sized ﬂash, then those electrons
we see are always the disturbed ones. Let us try the experiment with
a dim light anyway. Now whenever we hear a click in the detector
we will keep a count in three columns: in Column 1 those electrons
seen by hole 1, in Column 2 those electrons seen by hole 2, and in
Column 3 those electrons not seen at all. When we work up our
data (computing the probabilities) we ﬁnd these results: Those
“seen by hole 1” have a distribution like P'1; those “seen by hole 2”
have a distribution like P'2 (so that those “seen by either hole 1 or
2” have a distribution like P'12); and those “not seen at all” have a
“wavy” distribution just like P12 of Fig. 6-3! If the electrons are not
seen, we have interference!
That is understandable. When we do not see the electron, no
photon disturbs it, and when we do see it, a photon has disturbed
it. There is always the same amount of disturbance because the
light photons all produce the same-sized effects and the effect of
the photons being scattered is enough to smear out any interference
effect.
Is there not some way we can see the electrons without disturbing
them? We learned in an earlier chapter that the momentum carried
by a “photon” is inversely proportional to its wavelength (p = h/l).
Certainly the jolt given to the electron when the photon is scattered
130
Six Easy Pieces
