of this nature.) Since it is an abstract idea, we shall illustrate the
meaning of it by an analogy.
Imagine a child, perhaps “Dennis the Menace,” who has blocks
which are absolutely indestructible, and cannot be divided into
pieces. Each is the same as the other. Let us suppose that he has 28
blocks. His mother puts him with his 28 blocks into a room at the
beginning of the day. At the end of the day, being curious, she
counts the blocks very carefully, and discovers a phenomenal law—
no matter what he does with the blocks, there are always 28 re-
maining! This continues for a number of days, until one day there
are only 27 blocks, but a little investigating shows that there is one
under the rug—she must look everywhere to be sure that the num-
ber of blocks has not changed. One day, however, the number ap-
pears to change—there are only 26 blocks. Careful investigation
indicates that the window was open, and upon looking outside, the
other two blocks are found. Another day, careful count indicates
that there are 30 blocks! This causes considerable consternation,
until it is realized that Bruce came to visit, bringing his blocks with
him, and he left a few at Dennis’s house. After she has disposed of
the extra blocks, she closes the window, does not let Bruce in, and
then everything is going along all right, until one time she counts
and ﬁnds only 25 blocks. However, there is a box in the room, a
toy box, and the mother goes to open the toy box, but the boy says,
“No, do not open my toy box,” and screams. Mother is not allowed
to open the toy box. Being extremely curious, and somewhat in-
genious, she invents a scheme! She knows that a block weighs three
ounces, so she weighs the box at a time when she sees 28 blocks,
and it weighs 16 ounces. The next time she wishes to check, she
weighs the box again, subtracts 16 ounces, and divides by 3. She
discovers the following:
(4.1)
number of
blocks seen
3 ounces
(weight of box)
16 ounces
constant.
=
+
-
c
m
70
Six Easy Pieces
