sand and the moon? Is the wind a sloshing of the air analogous to
the sloshing motion of the water in the sea? What common features
do different movements have? What is common to different kinds
of sound? How many different colors are there? And so on. In this
way we try gradually to analyze all things, to put together things
which at ﬁrst sight look different, with the hope that we may be
able to reduce the number of different things and thereby under-
stand them better.
A few hundred years ago, a method was devised to ﬁnd partial
answers to such questions. Observation, reason, and experiment
make up what we call the scientiﬁc method. We shall have to limit
ourselves to a bare description of our basic view of what is some-
times called fundamental physics, or fundamental ideas which have
arisen from the application of the scientiﬁc method.
What do we mean by “understanding” something? We can imag-
ine that this complicated array of moving things which constitutes
“the world” is something like a great chess game being played by
the gods, and we are observers of the game. We do not know what
the rules of the game are; all we are allowed to do is to watch the
playing. Of course, if we watch long enough, we may eventually
catch on to a few of the rules. The rules of the game are what we
mean by fundamental physics. Even if we knew every rule, however,
we might not be able to understand why a particular move is made
in the game, merely because it is too complicated and our minds
are limited. If you play chess you must know that it is easy to learn
all the rules, and yet it is often very hard to select the best move or
to understand why a player moves as he does. So it is in nature,
only much more so; but we may be able at least to ﬁnd all the rules.
Actually, we do not have all the rules now. (Every once in a while
something like castling is going on that we still do not understand.)
Aside from not knowing all of the rules, what we really can explain
in terms of those rules is very limited, because almost all situations
are so enormously complicated that we cannot follow the plays of
the game using the rules, much less tell what is going to happen
next. We must, therefore, limit ourselves to the more basic question
24
Six Easy Pieces
