since the earth spins underneath, that makes the tide at one station
go up and down every 24 hours. Actually the tide goes up and
down in 12 hours. Another school of thought claimed that the high
tide should be on the other side of the earth because, so they ar-
gued, the moon pulls the earth away from the water! Both of these
theories are wrong. It actually works like this: The pull of the moon
for the earth and for the water is “balanced” at the center. But the
water which is closer to the moon is pulled more than the average
and the water which is farther away from it is pulled less than the
average. Furthermore, the water can ﬂow while the more rigid earth
cannot. The true picture is a combination of these two things.
What do we mean by “balanced”? What balances? If the moon
pulls the whole earth toward it, why doesn’t the earth fall right “up”
to the moon? Because the earth does the same trick as the moon: it
goes in a circle around a point which is inside the earth but not at
its center. The moon does not just go around the earth, the earth
and the moon both go around a central position, each falling to-
ward this common position, as shown in Fig. 5-5. This motion
around the common center is what balances the fall of each. So the
earth is not going in a straight line either; it travels in a circle. The
water on the far side is “unbalanced” because the moon’s attraction
there is weaker than it is at the center of the earth, where it just
balances the “centrifugal force.” The result of this imbalance is that
the water rises up, away from the center of the earth. On the near
side, the attraction from the moon is stronger, and the imbalance
is in the opposite direction in space, but again away from the center
of the earth. The net result is that we get two tidal bulges.
Universal gravitation
What else can we understand when we understand gravity? Everyone
knows the earth is round. Why is the earth round? That is easy; it is
due to gravitation. The earth can be understood to be round merely
because everything attracts everything else and so it has attracted it-
98
Six Easy Pieces
