carbon dioxide which has a “green mark” on it, and then measure
after three seconds where the green mark is, and again measure
after ten seconds, etc., we could trace out the course of the reac-
tions. What are the “green marks”? They are different isotopes. We
recall that the chemical properties of atoms are determined by the
number of electrons, not by the mass of the nucleus. But there can
be, for example in carbon, six neutrons or seven neutrons, to-
gether with the six protons which all carbon nuclei have. Chem-
ically, the two atoms C12 and C13 are the same, but they differ in
weight and they have different nuclear properties, and so they are
distinguishable. By using these isotopes of different weights, or
even radioactive isotopes like C14, which provide a more sensitive
means for tracing very small quantities, it is possible to trace the
reactions.
Now, we return to the description of enzymes and proteins. All
proteins are not enzymes, but all enzymes are proteins. There are
many proteins, such as the proteins in muscle, the structural pro-
teins which are, for example, in cartilage and hair, skin, etc., that
are not themselves enzymes. However, proteins are a very charac-
teristic substance of life: ﬁrst of all they make up all the enzymes,
and second, they make up much of the rest of living material. Pro-
teins have a very interesting and simple structure. They are a series,
or chain, of different amino acids. There are twenty different amino
acids, and they all can combine with each other to form chains in
which the backbone is CO-NH, etc. Proteins are nothing but
chains of various ones of these twenty amino acids. Each of the
amino acids probably serves some special purpose. Some, for ex-
ample, have a sulfur atom at a certain place; when two sulfur atoms
are in the same protein, they form a bond, that is, they tie the chain
together at two points and form a loop. Another has extra oxygen
atoms which make it an acidic substance; another has a basic char-
acteristic. Some of them have big groups hanging out to one side,
so that they take up a lot of space. One of the amino acids, called
proline, is not really an amino acid, but imino acid. There is a slight
55
The Relation of Physics to Other Sciences
