toward our eye depends on the momentum that photon carries.
Aha! If we want to disturb the electrons only slightly we should not
have lowered the intensity of the light; we should have lowered its
frequency (the same as increasing its wavelength). Let us use light
of a redder color. We could even use infrared light, or radiowaves
(like radar), and “see” where the electron went with the help of
some equipment that can “see” light of these longer wavelengths.
If we use “gentler” light perhaps we can avoid disturbing the elec-
trons so much.
Let us try the experiment with longer waves. We shall keep re-
peating our experiment, each time with light of a longer wave-
length. At ﬁrst, nothing seems to change. The results are the same.
Then a terrible thing happens. You remember that when we dis-
cussed the microscope we pointed out that, due to the wave nature
of the light, there is a limitation on how close two spots can be and
still be seen as two separate spots. This distance is of the order of
the wavelength of light. So now, when we make the wavelength
longer than the distance between our holes, we see a big fuzzy ﬂash
when the light is scattered by the electrons. We can no longer tell
which hole the electron went through! We just know it went some-
where! And it is just with light of this color that we ﬁnd that the
jolts given to the electron are small enough so that P'12 begins to
look like P12—that we begin to get some interference effect. And
it is only for wavelengths much longer than the separation of the
two holes (when we have no chance at all of telling where the elec-
tron went) that the disturbance due to the light gets sufficiently
small that we again get the curve P12 shown in Fig. 6-3.
In our experiment we ﬁnd that it is impossible to arrange the
light in such a way that one can tell which hole the electron went
through, and at the same time not disturb the pattern. It was sug-
gested by Heisenberg that the then-new laws of nature could only
be consistent if there were some basic limitation on our experimen-
tal capabilities not previously recognized. He proposed, as a general
principle, his uncertainty principle, which we can state in terms of
our experiment as follows: “It is impossible to design an apparatus
131
Quantum Behavior
