of science brought about by quantum mechanics is this: it is not
possible to predict exactly what will happen in any circumstance.
For example, it is possible to arrange an atom which is ready to
emit light, and we can measure when it has emitted light by pick-
ing up a photon particle, which we shall describe shortly. We can-
not, however, predict when it is going to emit the light or, with
several atoms, which one is going to. You may say that this is be-
cause there are some internal “wheels” which we have not looked
at closely enough. No, there are no internal wheels; nature, as we
understand it today, behaves in such a way that it is fundamentally
impossible to make a precise prediction of exactly what will happen
in a given experiment. This is a horrible thing; in fact, philosophers
have said before that one of the fundamental requisites of science
is that whenever you set up the same conditions, the same thing
must happen. This is simply not true; it is not a fundamental con-
dition of science. The fact is that the same thing does not happen,
that we can ﬁnd only an average, statistically, as to what happens.
Nevertheless, science has not completely collapsed. Philosophers,
incidentally, say a great deal about what is absolutely necessary for
science, and it is always, so far as one can see, rather naive, and
probably wrong. For example, some philosopher or other said it
is fundamental to the scientiﬁc effort that if an experiment is per-
formed in, say, Stockholm, and then the same experiment is done
in, say, Quito, the same results must occur. That is quite false. It is
not necessary that science do that; it may be a fact of experience, but
it is not necessary. For example, if one of the experiments is to
look out at the sky and see the aurora borealis in Stockholm, you
do not see it in Quito; that is a different phenomenon. “But,” you
say, “that is something that has to do with the outside; can you
close yourself up in a box in Stockholm and pull down the shade
and get any difference?” Surely. If we take a pendulum on a uni-
versal joint, and pull it out and let go, then the pendulum will
swing almost in a plane, but not quite. Slowly the plane keeps
changing in Stockholm, but not in Quito. The blinds are down,
35
Basic Physics
