this nerve impulse can be picked up with electrical instruments,
and because there are electrical effects, obviously the physics of
electrical effects has had a great deal of inﬂuence on understand-
ing the phenomenon.
The opposite effect is that, from somewhere in the brain, a mes-
sage is sent out along a nerve. What happens at the end of the
nerve? There the nerve branches out into ﬁne little things, con-
nected to a structure near a muscle, called an endplate. For reasons
which are not exactly understood, when the impulse reaches the
end of the nerve, little packets of a chemical called acetylcholine
are shot off (ﬁve or ten molecules at a time) and they affect the
muscle ﬁber and make it contract—how simple! What makes a
muscle contract? A muscle is a very large number of ﬁbers close to-
gether, containing two different substances, myosin and acto-
myosin, but the machinery by which the chemical reaction induced
by acetylcholine can modify the dimensions of the muscle is not
yet known. Thus the fundamental processes in the muscle that
make mechanical motions are not known.
Biology is such an enormously wide ﬁeld that there are hosts of
other problems that we cannot mention at all—problems on how
vision works (what the light does in the eye), how hearing works,
etc. (The way in which thinking works we shall discuss later under
psychology.) Now, these things concerning biology which we have
just discussed are, from a biological standpoint, really not funda-
mental, at the bottom of life, in the sense that even if we under-
stood them we still would not understand life itself. To illustrate:
the men who study nerves feel their work is very important, because
after all you cannot have animals without nerves. But you can have
life without nerves. Plants have neither nerves nor muscles, but they
are working, they are alive, just the same. So for the fundamental
problems of biology we must look deeper; when we do, we discover
that all living things have a great many characteristics in common.
The most common feature is that they are made of cells, within
each of which is complex machinery for doing things chemically.
51
The Relation of Physics to Other Sciences
