problem of ﬁnding new fundamental particles, but something left
over from a long time ago—over a hundred years. Nobody in
physics has really been able to analyze it mathematically satisfacto-
rily in spite of its importance to the sister sciences. It is the analysis
of circulating or turbulent ﬂuids. If we watch the evolution of a star,
there comes a point where we can deduce that it is going to start
convection, and thereafter we can no longer deduce what should
happen. A few million years later the star explodes, but we cannot
ﬁgure out the reason. We cannot analyze the weather. We do not
know the patterns of motions that there should be inside the earth.
The simplest form of the problem is to take a pipe that is very long
and push water through it at high speed. We ask: to push a given
amount of water through that pipe, how much pressure is needed?
No one can analyze it from ﬁrst principles and the properties of
water. If the water ﬂows very slowly, or if we use a thick goo like
honey, then we can do it nicely. You will ﬁnd that in your textbook.
What we really cannot do is deal with actual, wet water running
through a pipe. That is the central problem which we ought to solve
someday, and we have not.
A poet once said, “The whole universe is in a glass of wine.” We
will probably never know in what sense he meant that, for poets
do not write to be understood. But it is true that if we look at a
glass of wine closely enough we see the entire universe. There are
the things of physics: the twisting liquid which evaporates depend-
ing on the wind and weather, the reﬂections in the glass, and our
imagination adds the atoms. The glass is a distillation of the earth’s
rocks, and in its composition we see the secrets of the universe’s
age, and the evolution of stars. What strange array of chemicals are
in the wine? How did they come to be? There are the ferments, the
enzymes, the substrates, and the products. There in wine is found
the great generalization: all life is fermentation. Nobody can dis-
cover the chemistry of wine without discovering, as did Louis Pas-
teur, the cause of much disease. How vivid is the claret, pressing
its existence into the consciousness that watches it! If our small
66
Six Easy Pieces
