It was to the problem of constructing a consistent theory of QED
that the young Feynman turned his attention in the late 1940s.
To place QED on a sound basis it was necessary to make the
theory consistent not only with the principles of quantum mechan-
ics but with those of the special theory of relativity too. These two
theories come with their own distinctive mathematical machinery,
complicated systems of equations that can indeed be combined and
reconciled to yield a satisfactory description of QED. Doing this
was a tough undertaking, requiring a high degree of mathematical
skill, and was the approach followed by Feynman’s contemporaries.
Feynman himself, however, took a radically different route—so rad-
ical, in fact, that he was more or less able to write down the answers
straightaway without using any mathematics!
To aid this extraordinary feat of intuition, Feynman invented a
simple system of eponymous diagrams. Feynman diagrams are a
symbolic but powerfully heuristic way of picturing what is going
on when electrons, photons, and other particles interact with each
other. These days Feynman diagrams are a routine aid to calcula-
tion, but in the early 1950s they marked a startling departure from
the traditional way of doing theoretical physics.
The particular problem of constructing a consistent theory of
quantum electrodynamics, although it was a milestone in the de-
velopment of physics, was just the start. It was to deﬁne a distinctive
Feynman style, a style destined to produce a string of important
results from a broad range of topics in physical science. The Feyn-
man style can best be described as a mixture of reverence and dis-
respect for received wisdom.
Physics is an exact science, and the existing body of knowledge,
while incomplete, can’t simply be shrugged aside. Feynman ac-
quired a formidable grasp of the accepted principles of physics at a
very young age, and he chose to work almost entirely on conven-
tional problems. He was not the sort of genius to beaver away in
isolation in a backwater of the discipline and to stumble across the
profoundly new. His special talent was to approach essentially
mainstream topics in an idiosyncratic way. This meant eschewing
xi
Introduction
