a public lecture, he was trying to explain why one must not verify
an idea using the same data that suggested the idea in the ﬁrst place.
Seeming to wander off the subject, Feynman began talking about
license plates. “You know, the most amazing thing happened to me
tonight. I was coming here, on the way to the lecture, and I came
in through the parking lot. And you won’t believe what happened.
I saw a car with the license plate ARW 357. Can you imagine? Of
all the millions of license plates in the state, what was the chance
that I would see that particular one tonight? Amazing!” A point
that even many scientists fail to grasp was made clear through Feyn-
man’s remarkable “common sense.”
In 35 years at Caltech (from 1952 to 1987), Feynman was listed
as teacher of record for 34 courses. Twenty-ﬁve of them were ad-
vanced graduate courses, strictly limited to graduate students, un-
less undergraduates asked permission to take them (they often did,
and permission was nearly always granted). The rest were mainly
introductory graduate courses. Only once did Feynman teach
courses purely for undergraduates, and that was the celebrated oc-
casion in the academic years 1961 to 1962 and 1962 to 1963, with
a brief reprise in 1964, when he gave the lectures that were to be-
come The Feynman Lectures on Physics.
At the time there was a consensus at Caltech that freshman and
sophomore students were getting turned off rather than spurred on
by their two years of compulsory physics. To remedy the situation,
Feynman was asked to design a series of lectures to be given to the
students over the course of two years, ﬁrst to freshmen, and then
to the same class as sophomores. When he agreed, it was immedi-
ately decided that the lectures should be transcribed for publication.
That job turned out to be far more difficult than anyone had imag-
ined. Turning out publishable books required a tremendous
amount of work on the part of his colleagues, as well as Feynman
himself, who did the ﬁnal editing of every chapter.
And the nuts and bolts of running a course had to be addressed.
This task was greatly complicated by the fact that Feynman had
only a vague outline of what he wanted to cover. This meant that
xxi
Special Preface
