to determine which hole the electron passes through, that will not
at the same time disturb the electrons enough to destroy the inter-
ference pattern.” If an apparatus is capable of determining which
hole the electron goes through, it cannot be so delicate that it does
not disturb the pattern in an essential way. No one has ever found
(or even thought of) a way around the uncertainty principle. So
we must assume that it describes a basic characteristic of nature.
The complete theory of quantum mechanics which we now use
to describe atoms and, in fact, all matter depends on the correctness
of the uncertainty principle. Since quantum mechanics is such a
successful theory, our belief in the uncertainty principle is rein-
forced. But if a way to “beat” the uncertainty principle were ever
discovered, quantum mechanics would give inconsistent results and
would have to be discarded as a valid theory of nature.
“Well,” you say, “what about Proposition A? It is true, or is it
not true, that the electron either goes through hole 1 or it goes
through hole 2?” The only answer that can be given is that we have
found from experiment that there is a certain special way that we
have to think in order that we do not get into inconsistencies. What
we must say (to avoid making wrong predictions) is the following:
If one looks at the holes or, more accurately, if one has a piece of
apparatus which is capable of determining whether the electrons
go through hole 1 or hole 2, then one can say that it goes either
through hole 1 or hole 2. But, when one does not try to tell which
way the electron goes, when there is nothing in the experiment to
disturb the electrons, then one may not say that an electron goes
either through hole 1 or hole 2. If one does say that, and starts to
make any deductions from the statement, he will make errors in
the analysis. This is the logical tightrope on which we must walk if
we wish to describe nature successfully.
If the motion of all matter—as well as electrons—must be de-
scribed in terms of waves, what about the bullets in our ﬁrst exper-
iment? Why didn’t we see an interference pattern there? It turns
132
Six Easy Pieces
