However, a little while later, in 1947 or 1948, another particle
was found, the π-meson, or pion, which satisﬁed Yukawa’s criterion.
Besides the proton and the neutron, then, in order to get nuclear
forces we must add the pion. Now, you say, “Oh great!, with this
theory we make quantum nucleodynamics using the pions just like
Yukawa wanted to do, and see if it works, and everything will be
explained.” Bad luck. It turns out that the calculations that are in-
volved in this theory are so difficult that no one has ever been able
to ﬁgure out what the consequences of the theory are, or to check
it against experiment, and this has been going on now for almost
twenty years!
So we are stuck with a theory, and we do not know whether it is
right or wrong, but we do know that it is a little wrong, or at least
incomplete. While we have been dawdling around theoretically,
trying to calculate the consequences of this theory, the experimen-
talists have been discovering some things. For example, they had
already discovered this m-meson or muon, and we do not yet know
where it ﬁts. Also, in cosmic rays, a large number of other “extra”
particles were found. It turns out that today we have approximately
thirty particles, and it is very difficult to understand the relation-
ships of all these particles, and what nature wants them for, or what
the connections are from one to another. We do not today under-
stand these various particles as different aspects of the same thing,
and the fact that we have so many unconnected particles is a rep-
resentation of the fact that we have so much unconnected infor-
mation without a good theory. After the great successes of quantum
electrodynamics, there is a certain amount of knowledge of nuclear
physics which is rough knowledge, sort of half experience and half
theory, assuming a type of force between protons and neutrons and
seeing what will happen, but not really understanding where the
force comes from. Aside from that, we have made very little
progress. We have collected an enormous number of chemical ele-
ments. In the chemical case, there suddenly appeared a relationship
among these elements which was unexpected, and which is embod-
ied in the periodic table of Mendeléev. For example, sodium and
39
Basic Physics
