ergy of the stars, that makes them continue to burn. One of the
men who discovered this was out with his girlfriend the night after
he realized that nuclear reactions must be going on in the stars in
order to make them shine. She said, “Look at how pretty the stars
shine!” He said, “Yes, and right now I am the only man in the world
who knows why they shine.” She merely laughed at him. She was
not impressed with being out with the only man who, at that mo-
ment, knew why stars shine. Well, it is sad to be alone, but that is
the way it is in this world.
It is the nuclear “burning” of hydrogen which supplies the en-
ergy of the sun; the hydrogen is converted into helium. Further-
more, ultimately, the manufacture of various chemical elements
proceeds in the centers of the stars, from hydrogen. The stuff of
which we are made was “cooked” once, in a star, and spit out. How
do we know? Because there is a clue. The proportion of the different
isotopes—how much C12, how much C13, etc., is something which
is never changed by chemical reactions, because the chemical reac-
tions are so much the same for the two. The proportions are purely
the result of nuclear reactions. By looking at the proportions of the
isotopes in the cold, dead ember which we are, we can discover
what the furnace was like in which the stuff of which we are made
was formed. That furnace was like the stars, and so it is very likely
that our elements were “made” in the stars and spit out in the ex-
plosions which we call novae and supernovae. Astronomy is so close
to physics that we shall study many astronomical things as we go
along.
Geology
We turn now to what are called earth sciences, or geology. First, me-
teorology and the weather. Of course the instruments of meteorol-
ogy are physical instruments, and the development of experimental
physics made these instruments possible, as was explained before.
However, the theory of meteorology has never been satisfactorily
61
The Relation of Physics to Other Sciences
