potassium are about the same in their chemical properties and are
found in the same column in the Mendeléev chart. We have been
seeking a Mendeléev-type chart for the new particles. One such
chart of the new particles was made independently by Gell-Mann
in the USA and Nishijima in Japan. The basis of their classiﬁcation
is a new number, like the electric charge, which can be assigned to
each particle, called its “strangeness,” S. This number is conserved,
like the electric charge, in reactions which take place by nuclear
forces.
In Table 2-2 are listed all the particles. We cannot discuss them
much at this stage, but the table will at least show you how much
we do not know. Underneath each particle its mass is given in a cer-
tain unit, called the Mev. One Mev is equal to 1.782 ¥ 10–27 gram.
The reason this unit was chosen is historical, and we shall not go
into it now. More massive particles are put higher up on the chart;
we see that a neutron and a proton have almost the same mass. In
vertical columns we have put the particles with the same electrical
charge, all neutral objects in one column, all positively charged ones
to the right of this one, and all negatively charged objects to the left.
Particles are shown with a solid line and “resonances” with a
dashed one. Several particles have been omitted from the table.
These include the important zero-mass, zero-charge particles, the
photon and the graviton, which do not fall into the baryon-meson-
lepton classiﬁcation scheme, and also some of the newer resonances
(K*, φ, η). The antiparticles of the mesons are listed in the table,
but the antiparticles of the leptons and baryons would have to be
listed in another table which would look exactly like this one re-
ﬂected on the zero-charge column. Although all of the particles ex-
cept the electron, neutrino, photon, graviton, and proton are
unstable, decay products have been shown only for the resonances.
Strangeness assignments are not applicable for leptons, since they
do not interact strongly with nuclei.
All particles which are together with the neutrons and protons
are called baryons, and the following ones exist: There is a “lambda,”
with a mass of 1115 Mev, and three others, called sigmas, minus,
40
Six Easy Pieces
