ries a message as to what kind of protein to make goes over to the
ribosome; that is known. When it gets there, protein is synthesized
at the ribosome. That is also known. However, the details of how
the amino acids come in and are arranged in accordance with a
code that is on the RNA are, as yet, still unknown. We do not know
how to read it. If we knew, for example, the “lineup” A, B, C, C, A,
we could not tell you what protein is to be made.
Certainly no subject or ﬁeld is making more progress on so many
fronts at the present moment than biology, and if we were to name
the most powerful assumption of all, which leads one on and on
in an attempt to understand life, it is that all things are made of
atoms, and that everything that living things do can be understood
in terms of the jigglings and wigglings of atoms.
Astronomy
In this rapid-ﬁre explanation of the whole world, we must now turn
to astronomy. Astronomy is older than physics. In fact, it got physics
started by showing the beautiful simplicity of the motion of the stars
and planets, the understanding of which was the beginning of
physics. But the most remarkable discovery in all of astronomy is
that the stars are made of atoms of the same kind as those on the earth.*
59
The Relation of Physics to Other Sciences
* How I’m rushing through this! How much each sentence in this brief story con-
tains. “The stars are made of the same atoms as the earth.” I usually pick one small
topic like this to give a lecture on. Poets say science takes away from the beauty of
the stars—mere globs of gas atoms. Nothing is “mere.” I too can see the stars on a
desert night, and feel them. But do I see less or more? The vastness of the heavens
stretches my imagination—stuck on this carousel my little eye can catch one-
million-year-old light. A vast pattern—of which I am a part—perhaps my stuff
was belched from some forgotten star, as one is belching there. Or see them with
the greater eye of Palomar, rushing all apart from some common starting point
when they were perhaps all together. What is the pattern, or the meaning, or the
why? It does not do harm to the mystery to know a little about it. For far more
