cle nature. Figure 38-11, for example, shows the tracks of particles (rather than
waves) revealed in a bubble chamber. When a charged particle passes through
the liquid hydrogen that fills such a chamber, the particle causes the liquid to va-
porize along the particle’s path.A series of bubbles thus marks the path, which is
usually curved due to a magnetic field set up perpendicular to the plane of the
chamber.
In Fig. 38-11, a gamma ray left no track when it entered at the top because
the ray is electrically neutral and thus caused no vapor bubbles as it passed
through the liquid hydrogen. However, it collided with one of the hydrogen
atoms, kicking an electron out of that atom; the curved path taken by the electron
to the bottom of the photograph has been color coded green. Simultaneous with
the collision, the gamma ray transformed into an electron and a positron in a pair
production event (see Eq. 21-15).Those two particles then moved in tight spirals
(color coded green for the electron and red for the positron) as they gradually
lost energy in repeated collisions with hydrogen atoms. Surely these tracks are
evidence of the particle nature of the electron and positron, but is there any evi-
dence of waves in Fig. 38-11?
To simplify the situation, let us turn off the magnetic field so that the strings of
bubbles will be straight.We can view each bubble as a detection point for the electron.
Matter waves traveling between detection points such as I and F in Fig. 38-12 will
explore all possible paths,a few of which are shown.
In general, for every path connecting I and F (except the straight-line path),
there will be a neighboring path such that matter waves following the two paths
cancel each other by interference. For the straight-line path joining I and F, mat-
ter waves traversing all neighboring paths reinforce the wave following the direct
path. You can think of the bubbles that form the track as a series of detection
points at which the matter wave undergoes constructive interference.
1169
38-5 ELECTRONS AND MATTER WAVES
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory/Science Photo Library/
Photo Researchers, Inc.
Figure 38-11 A bubble-chamber image show-
ing where two electrons (paths color coded
green) and one positron (red) moved after a
gamma ray entered the chamber.
Checkpoint 4
For an electron and a proton that have the same (a) kinetic energy, (b) momentum, or
(c) speed, which particle has the shorter de Broglie wavelength?
momentum equation, finding 
From Eq. 38-17 then
(Answer)
This wavelength associated with the electron is about the
size of a typical atom. If we increase the electron’s kinetic
energy, the wavelength becomes even smaller.
! 1.12 " 10 #10 m ! 112 pm.
!
6.63 " 10 #34 J$s
5.91 " 10 #24 kg$m/s
% ! h
p
! 5.91 " 10 #24 kg$m/s.
! 2(2)(9.11 " 10 #31 kg)(120 eV)(1.60 " 10 #19 J/eV)
p ! 22mK
Sample Problem 38.04
de Broglie wavelength of an electron
What is the de Broglie wavelength of an electron with a
kinetic energy of 120 eV?
KEY IDEAS
(1) We can find the electron’s de Broglie wavelength l
from Eq. 38-17 (l ! h/p) if we first find the magnitude of
its momentum p. (2) We find p from the given kinetic en-
ergy K of the electron. That kinetic energy is much less
than the rest energy of an electron (0.511 MeV, from
Table 37-3). Thus, we can get by with the classical approxi-
mations for momentum p (! mv) and kinetic energy
.
Calculations: We are given the value of the kinetic energy.
So, in order to use the de Broglie relation, we first solve the
kinetic energy equation for v and then substitute into the
K (! 1
2 mv2)
Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
I
F
Figure 38-12 A few of the many paths that
connect two particle detection points I and
F. Only matter waves that follow paths
close to the straight line between these
points interfere constructively. For all other
paths, the waves following any pair of
neighboring paths interfere destructively.
