P
R
E
F
A
C
E
WHY I WROTE THIS BOOK
Fun with a big challenge.That is how I have regarded physics since the day when Sharon, one of the
students in a class I taught as a graduate student, suddenly demanded of me, “What has any of this
got to do with my life?” Of course I immediately responded, “Sharon, this has everything to do with
your life—this is physics.”
She asked me for an example. I thought and thought but could not come up
with a single one.That night I began writing the book The Flying Circus of Physics
(John Wiley & Sons Inc., 1975) for Sharon but also for me because I realized her
complaint was mine. I had spent six years slugging my way through many dozens of
physics textbooks that were carefully written with the best of pedagogical plans, but
there was something missing. Physics is the most interesting subject in the world
because it is about how the world works, and yet the textbooks had been thor-
oughly wrung of any connection with the real world.The fun was missing.
I have packed a lot of real-world physics into Fundamentals of Physics, con-
necting it with the new edition of The Flying Circus of Physics. Much of the mate-
rial comes from the introductory physics classes I teach, where I can judge from the
faces and blunt comments what material and presentations work and what do not.
The notes I make on my successes and failures there help form the basis of this
book. My message here is the same as I had with every student I’ve met since
Sharon so long ago:“Yes, you can reason from basic physics concepts all the way to
valid conclusions about the real world, and that understanding of the real world is
where the fun is.”
I have many goals in writing this book but the overriding one is to provide in-
structors with tools by which they can teach students how to effectively read scientific material, iden-
tify fundamental concepts, reason through scientific questions, and solve quantitative problems. This
process is not easy for either students or instructors. Indeed, the course associated with this book may
be one of the most challenging of all the courses taken by a student. However, it can also be one of
the most rewarding because it reveals the world’s fundamental clockwork from which all scientific
and engineering applications spring.
Many users of the ninth edition (both instructors and students) sent in comments and
suggestions to improve the book. These improvements are now incorporated into the narrative
and problems throughout the book. The publisher John Wiley & Sons and I regard the book as
an ongoing project and encourage more input from users. You can send suggestions, corrections,
and positive or negative comments to John Wiley & Sons or Jearl Walker (mail address:
Physics Department, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, OH 44115 USA; or the blog site at
www.flyingcircusofphysics.com). We may not be able to respond to all suggestions, but we keep
and study each of them.
WHAT’S NEW?
Modules and Learning Objectives
“What was I supposed to learn from this section?” Students have
asked me this question for decades, from the weakest student to the strongest. The problem is that
even a thoughtful student may not feel confident that the important points were captured while read-
ing a section. I felt the same way back when I was using the first edition of Halliday and Resnick
while taking first-year physics.
To ease the problem in this edition, I restructured the chapters into concept modules based on a
primary theme and begin each module with a list of the module’s learning objectives. The list is an
explicit statement of the skills and learning points that should be gathered in reading the module.
Each list is following by a brief summary of the key ideas that should also be gathered. For example,
check out the first module in Chapter 16, where a student faces a truck load of concepts and terms.
Rather than depending on the student’s ability to gather and sort those ideas, I now provide an
explicit checklist that functions somewhat like the checklist a pilot works through before taxiing out
to the runway for takeoff.
xvii
