Measurement in Physics
Physics is based on measurement
of physical quantities. Certain physical quantities have been cho-
sen as base quantities (such as length, time, and mass); each has
been defined in terms of a standard and given a unit of measure
(such as meter, second, and kilogram). Other physical quantities
are defined in terms of the base quantities and their standards
and units.
SI Units
The unit system emphasized in this book is the
International System of Units (SI). The three physical quantities
displayed in Table 1-1 are used in the early chapters. Standards,
which must be both accessible and invariable, have been estab-
lished for these base quantities by international agreement.
These standards are used in all physical measurement, for both
the base quantities and the quantities derived from them.
Scientific notation and the prefixes of Table 1-2 are used to sim-
plify measurement notation.
Changing Units
Conversion of units may be performed by us-
ing chain-link conversions in which the original data are multiplied
successively by conversion factors written as unity and the units
are manipulated like algebraic quantities until only the desired
units remain.
Length
The meter is defined as the distance traveled by light
during a precisely specified time interval.
Time
The second is defined in terms of the oscillations of light
emitted by an atomic (cesium-133) source. Accurate time signals
are sent worldwide by radio signals keyed to atomic clocks in stan-
dardizing laboratories.
Mass
The kilogram is defined in terms of a platinum–
iridium standard mass kept near Paris. For measurements on an
atomic scale, the atomic mass unit, defined in terms of the atom
carbon-12, is usually used.
Density
The density r of a material is the mass per unit volume:
(1-8)
* " m
V .
Review & Summary
8
CHAPTER 1
MEASUREMENT
Tutoring problem available (at instructor’s discretion) in WileyPLUS and WebAssign
SSM
Worked-out solution available in Student Solutions Manual      
• – •••
Number of dots indicates level of problem difficulty
Additional information available in The Flying Circus of Physics and at flyingcircusofphysics.com
WWW Worked-out solution is at
ILW
Interactive solution is at 
http://www.wiley.com/college/halliday
Problems
Module 1-1
Measuring Things, Including Lengths
•1
Earth is approximately a sphere of radius 6.37 ' 106 m.
What are (a) its circumference in kilometers, (b) its surface area in
square kilometers, and (c) its volume in cubic kilometers?
•2
A gry is an old English measure for length, defined as 1/10 of a
line, where line is another old English measure for length, defined
as 1/12 inch. A common measure for length in the publishing busi-
ness is a point, defined as 1/72 inch. What is an area of 0.50 gry2 in
points squared (points2)?
•3
The micrometer (1 mm) is often called the micron. (a) How
SSM
many microns make up 1.0 km? (b) What fraction of a centimeter
equals 1.0 mm? (c) How many microns are in 1.0 yd?
•4
Spacing in this book was generally done in units of points and
picas: 12 points " 1 pica, and 6 picas " 1 inch. If a figure was mis-
placed in the page proofs by 0.80 cm, what was the misplacement
in (a) picas and (b) points?
•5
Horses are to race over a certain English meadow
for a distance of 4.0 furlongs. What is the race distance in (a) rods
and (b)
chains? (1 furlong " 201.168 m,
1 rod " 5.0292 m,
and 1 chain " 20.117 m.)
WWW
SSM
Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
From Eq. 1-8, the total mass msand of the sand grains is the
product of the density of silicon dioxide and the total vol-
ume of the sand grains:
(1-12)
Substituting this expression into Eq. 1-10 and then substitut-
ing for Vgrains from Eq. 1-11 lead to
(1-13)
*sand "
*SiO2
Vtotal
Vtotal
1 # e "
*SiO2
1 # e .
msand " *SiO2Vgrains.
Substituting
" 2.600 ' 10 3 kg/m3 and the critical value
of e
0.80, we find that liquefaction occurs when the sand
density is less than
(Answer)
A building can sink several meters in such liquefaction.
*sand " 2.600 ' 10 3 kg/m3
1.80
" 1.4 ' 103 kg/m3.
"
*SiO2
