Multiloop Circuits
Figure 27-9 shows a circuit containing more than one loop. For simplicity, we
assume the batteries are ideal. There are two junctions in this circuit, at b and d,
and there are three branches connecting these junctions.The branches are the left
branch (bad), the right branch (bcd), and the central branch (bd). What are the
currents in the three branches?
We arbitrarily label the currents, using a different subscript for each branch.
Current i1 has the same value everywhere in branch bad, i2 has the same value
everywhere in branch bcd, and i3 is the current through branch bd.The directions
of the currents are assumed arbitrarily.
Consider junction d for a moment: Charge comes into that junction via
incoming currents i1 and i3, and it leaves via outgoing current i2. Because there is
no variation in the charge at the junction, the total incoming current must equal
the total outgoing current:
i1 % i3 ! i2.
(27-18)
You can easily check that applying this condition to junction b leads to exactly
the same equation. Equation 27-18 thus suggests a general principle:
781
27-2 MULTILOOP CIRCUITS
27-2 MULTILOOP CIRCUITS
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
27.17 Apply the junction rule.
27.18 Draw a schematic diagram for a battery and three
parallel resistors and distinguish it from a diagram with a
battery and three series resistors.
27.19 Identify that resistors in parallel have the same potential
difference, which is the same value that their equivalent
resistor has.
27.20 Calculate the resistance of the equivalent resistor of
several resistors in parallel.
27.21 Identify that the total current through parallel resistors
is the sum of the currents through the individual resistors.
27.22 For a circuit with a battery and some resistors in parallel
and some in series, simplify the circuit in steps by finding
equivalent resistors, until the current through the battery
can be determined, and then reverse the steps to find
the currents and potential differences of the individual
resistors.
27.23 If a circuit cannot be simplified by using equivalent
resistors, identify the several loops in the circuit, choose
names and directions for the currents in the branches, set
up loop equations for the various loops, and solve these
simultaneous equations for the unknown currents.
27.24 In a circuit with identical real batteries in series, replace
them with a single ideal battery and a single resistor.
27.25 In a circuit with identical real batteries in parallel, re-
place them with a single ideal battery and a single resistor.
Learning Objectives
●When resistances are in parallel, they have the same potential difference. The equivalent resistance that can replace a parallel
combination of resistances is given by
(n resistances in parallel).
1
Req
! '
n
j!1
1
Rj
Key Idea
Figure 27-9 A multiloop circuit consisting of
three branches: left-hand branch bad, right-
hand branch bcd, and central branch bd.
The circuit also consists of three loops: left-
hand loop badb, right-hand loop bcdb, and
big loop badcb.
R 2
R3
R1
a
b 
c 
d
 i 1
 i 3
 i 2
+ – 
1 
2 
– + 
The current into the junction
must equal the current out
(charge is conserved).
JUNCTION RULE: The sum of the currents entering any junction must be
equal to the sum of the currents leaving that junction.
This rule is often called Kirchhoff’s junction rule (or Kirchhoff’s current law). It is
simply a statement of the conservation of charge for a steady flow of charge—
there is neither a buildup nor a depletion of charge at a junction. Thus, our basic
tools for solving complex circuits are the loop rule (based on the conservation of
energy) and the junction rule (based on the conservation of charge).
