Schrödinger’s Equation
A simple traveling wave of any kind, be it a wave on a string, a sound wave, or a
light wave, is described in terms of some quantity that varies in a wave-like
fashion. For light waves, for example, this quantity is (x, y, z, t), the electric field
component of the wave. Its observed value at any point depends on the location
of that point and on the time at which the observation is made.
What varying quantity should we use to describe a matter wave? We should
expect this quantity, which we call the wave function &(x, y, z, t), to be more
complicated than the corresponding quantity for a light wave because a matter
wave, in addition to energy and momentum, transports mass and (often) electric
charge. It turns out that &, the uppercase Greek letter psi, usually represents a
function that is complex in the mathematical sense; that is, we can always write its
values in the form a ' ib, in which a and b are real numbers and i 2 ! #1.
In all the situations you will meet here, the space and time variables can be
grouped separately and & can be written in the form
&(x, y, z, t) ! c(x, y, z) e#ivt,
(38-18)
where v (! 2pf ) is the angular frequency of the matter wave. Note that c, the
lowercase Greek letter psi, represents only the space-dependent part of the
complete, time-dependent wave function &. We shall focus on c. Two questions
arise: What is meant by the wave function? How do we find it?
What does the wave function mean? It has to do with the fact that a matter
wave, like a light wave, is a probability wave. Suppose that a matter wave
reaches a particle detector that is small; then the probability that a particle will
be detected in a specified time interval is proportional to |c|2, where |c| is the
absolute value of the wave function at the location of the detector. Although c
E
:
1170
CHAPTER 38
PHOTONS AND MATTER WAVES
38-6 SCHRÖDINGER’S EQUATION
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
38.25 Identify that matter waves are described by
Schrödinger’s equation.
38.26 For a nonrelativistic particle moving along an x axis,
write the Schrödinger equation and its general solution for
the spatial part of the wave function.
38.27 For a nonrelativistic particle, apply the relationships
between angular wave number, energy, potential energy,
kinetic energy, momentum, and de Broglie wavelength.
38.28 Given the spatial solution to the Schrödinger equa-
tion, write the full solution by including the time
dependence.
38.29 Given a complex number, find the complex conjugate.
38.30 Given a wave function, calculate the probability
density.
Learning Objectives
●A matter wave (such as for an electron) is described by a wave
function & (x, y, z, t), which can be separated into a space-
dependent part c (x, y, z) and a time-dependent part e#ivt, where
v is the angular frequency associated with the wave.
●For a nonrelativistic particle of mass m traveling along an x axis,
with energy E and potential energy U, the space-dependent part
can be found by solving Schrödinger’s equation,
where k is the angular wave number, which is related to the de
d2c
dx2 ' k2c ! 0,
Broglie wavelength l, the momentum p, and the kinetic en-
ergy E 2 U by
●A particle does not have a specific location until its location
is actually measured.
●The probability of detecting a particle in a small volume
centered on a given point is proportional to the probability
density
of the matter wave at that point.
!c!2
k ! 2p
l
! 2pp
h
! 2p22m(E # U)
h
.
Key Ideas
