xxi
PREFACE
INSTRUCTOR SUPPLEMENTS
Instructor’s Solutions Manual by Sen-Ben Liao, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.This man-
ual provides worked-out solutions for all problems found at the end of each chapter. It is available
in both MSWord and PDF.
Instructor Companion Site http://www.wiley.com/college/halliday
• Instructor’s Manual This resource contains lecture notes outlining the most important topics of
each chapter; demonstration experiments; laboratory and computer projects; film and video sources;
answers to all Questions, Exercises, Problems, and Checkpoints; and a correlation guide to the
Questions, Exercises, and Problems in the previous edition. It also contains a complete list of all
problems for which solutions are available to students (SSM,WWW, and ILW).
• Lecture PowerPoint Slides These PowerPoint slides serve as a helpful starter pack for instructors,
outlining key concepts and incorporating figures and equations from the text.
• Classroom Response Systems (“Clicker”) Questions by David Marx, Illinois State University.
There are two sets of questions available: Reading Quiz questions and Interactive Lecture ques-
tions.The Reading Quiz questions are intended to be relatively straightforward for any student who
reads the assigned material.The Interactive Lecture questions are intended for use in an interactive
lecture setting.
• Wiley Physics Simulations by Andrew Duffy, Boston University and John Gastineau, Vernier
Software. This is a collection of 50 interactive simulations (Java applets) that can be used for class-
room demonstrations.
• Wiley Physics Demonstrations by David Maiullo, Rutgers University. This is a collection of digital
videos of 80 standard physics demonstrations. They can be shown in class or accessed from
WileyPLUS.There is an accompanying Instructor’s Guide that includes “clicker” questions.
• Test Bank For the 10th edition, the Test Bank has been completely over-hauled by Suzanne Willis,
Northern Illinois University. The Test Bank includes more than 2200 multiple-choice questions.
These items are also available in the Computerized Test Bank which provides full editing features to
help you customize tests (available in both IBM and Macintosh versions).
• All text illustrations suitable for both classroom projection and printing.
Online Homework and Quizzing.
In addition to WileyPLUS, Fundamentals of Physics, tenth edition,
also supports WebAssignPLUS and LON-CAPA, which are other programs that give instructors the
ability to deliver and grade homework and quizzes online. WebAssign PLUS also offers students an
online version of the text.
STUDENT SUPPLEMENTS
Student Companion Site. The web site http://www.wiley.com/college/halliday was developed specifi-
cally for Fundamentals of Physics, tenth edition, and is designed to further assist students in the study
of physics. It includes solutions to selected end-of-chapter problems (which are identified with a
www icon in the text); simulation exercises; tips on how to make best use of a programmable calcu-
lator; and the Interactive LearningWare tutorials that are described below.
Student Study Guide (ISBN 9781118230787) by Thomas Barrett of Ohio State University.The Student
Study Guide consists of an overview of the chapter’s important concepts, problem solving techniques
and detailed examples.
Student Solutions Manual (ISBN 9781118230664) by Sen-Ben Liao, Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory. This manual provides students with complete worked-out solutions to 15 percent of the
problems found at the end of each chapter within the text. The Student Solutions Manual for the
10th edition is written using an innovative approach called TEAL which stands for Think, Express,
Analyze, and Learn.This learning strategy was originally developed at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and has proven to be an effective learning tool for students.These problems with TEAL
solutions are indicated with an SSM icon in the text.
