Transverse and Longitudinal Waves
Mechanical waves
can exist only in material media and are governed by Newton’s
laws. Transverse mechanical waves, like those on a stretched string,
are waves in which the particles of the medium oscillate perpendi-
cular to the wave’s direction of travel.Waves in which the particles
of the medium oscillate parallel to the wave’s direction of travel
are longitudinal waves.
Sinusoidal Waves
A sinusoidal wave moving in the positive
direction of an x axis has the mathematical form
y(x, t) # ym sin(kx $ vt),
(16-2)
where ym is the amplitude of the wave, k is the angular wave number,
v is the angular frequency, and kx $ vt is the phase. The wavelength
l is related to k by
(16-5)
The period T and frequency f of the wave are related to v by
(16-9)
Finally,the wave speed v is related to these other parameters by
(16-13)
Equation of a Traveling Wave
Any function of the form
y(x, t) # h(kx ! vt)
(16-17)
can represent a traveling wave with a wave speed given by Eq. 16-13
and a wave shape given by the mathematical form of h.The plus sign
denotes a wave traveling in the negative direction of the x axis, and
the minus sign a wave traveling in the positive direction.
Wave Speed on Stretched String
The speed of a wave on
a stretched string is set by properties of the string. The speed on a
string with tension t and linear density m is
(16-26)
Power
The average power of, or average rate at which energy is
transmitted by, a sinusoidal wave on a stretched string is given by
Pavg #
(16-33)
1
2mvv2y2
m.
v # A
t
m .
v # *
k # .
T # .f.
*
2/ # f # 1
T .
k # 2/
. .
Review & Summary
Superposition of Waves
When two or more waves traverse
the same medium, the displacement of any particle of the medium is
the sum of the displacements that the individual waves would give it.
Interference of Waves
Two sinusoidal waves on the same
string exhibit interference, adding or canceling according to the prin-
ciple of superposition. If the two are traveling in the same direction
and have the same amplitude ym and frequency (hence the same
wavelength) but differ in phase by a phase constant f, the result is a
single wave with this same frequency:
y,(x, t) # [2ym cos f] sin(kx $ vt " f).
(16-51)
If f # 0, the waves are exactly in phase and their interference is
fully constructive; if f # p rad, they are exactly out of phase and
their interference is fully destructive.
Phasors
A wave y(x, t) can be represented with a phasor. This
is a vector that has a magnitude equal to the amplitude ym of the
wave and that rotates about an origin with an angular speed equal
to the angular frequency v of the wave.The projection of the rotat-
ing phasor on a vertical axis gives the displacement y of a point
along the wave’s travel.
Standing Waves
The interference of two identical sinusoidal
waves moving in opposite directions produces standing waves. For
a string with fixed ends, the standing wave is given by
y,(x, t) # [2ym sin kx] cos vt.
(16-60)
Standing waves are characterized by fixed locations of zero dis-
placement called nodes and fixed locations of maximum displace-
ment called antinodes.
Resonance
Standing waves on a string can be set up by
reflection of traveling waves from the ends of the string. If an end
is fixed, it must be the position of a node. This limits the frequen-
cies at which standing waves will occur on a given string. Each pos-
sible frequency is a resonant frequency, and the corresponding
standing wave pattern is an oscillation mode. For a stretched string
of length L with fixed ends, the resonant frequencies are
for n # 1, 2, 3, . . . .
(16-66)
The oscillation mode corresponding to n # 1 is called the funda-
mental mode or the first harmonic; the mode corresponding to 
n # 2 is the second harmonic; and so on.
f # v
. # n
v
2L ,
1
2
1
2
470
CHAPTER 16
WAVES—I
(Answer)
# 6.26 m/s.
' sin#
2p
0.400 m  (0.180 m)$!
um # !$2(2.00 ' 10$3 m)(2p)(806.2 Hz) 
Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
To determine when the string element has this maxi-
mum speed, we could investigate Eq. 16-69. However, a little
thought can save a lot of work. The element is undergoing
SHM and must come to a momentary stop at its extreme 
upward position and extreme downward position. It has the
greatest speed as it zips through the midpoint of its oscilla-
tion, just as a block does in a block–spring oscillator.
