622
CHAPTER 21
COULOMB’S LAW
the parent nucleus 238U contains 92 protons (a charge of "92e), the daughter
nucleus 234Th contains 90 protons (a charge of "90e), and the emitted alpha parti-
cle 4He contains 2 protons (a charge of "2e).We see that the total charge is "92e
before and after the decay; thus, charge is conserved. (The total number of pro-
tons and neutrons is also conserved: 238 before the decay and 234 " 4 # 238
after the decay.)
Another example of charge conservation occurs when an electron e$ (charge
$e) and its antiparticle, the positron e" (charge "e), undergo an annihilation
process, transforming into two gamma rays (high-energy light):
e$ " e" : g " g
(annihilation).
(21-14)
In applying the conservation-of-charge principle, we must add the charges alge-
braically, with due regard for their signs. In the annihilation process of Eq. 21-14
then, the net charge of the system is zero both before and after the event. Charge
is conserved.
In pair production, the converse of annihilation, charge is also conserved. In
this process a gamma ray transforms into an electron and a positron:
g : e$ " e"
(pair production).
(21-15)
Figure 21-10 shows such a pair-production event that occurred in a bubble cham-
ber. (This is a device in which a liquid is suddenly made hotter than its boiling
point. If a charged particle passes through it, tiny vapor bubbles form along the
particle’s trail.) A gamma ray entered the chamber from the bottom and at one
point transformed into an electron and a positron. Because those new particles
were charged and moving, each left a trail of bubbles. (The trails were curved
because a magnetic field had been set up in the chamber.) The gamma ray, being
electrically neutral, left no trail. Still, you can tell exactly where it underwent pair
production—at the tip of the curved V, which is where the trails of the electron
and positron begin.
Figure 21-10 A photograph of trails of bub-
bles left in a bubble chamber by an electron
and a positron.The pair of particles was
produced by a gamma ray that entered the
chamber directly from the bottom. Being
electrically neutral, the gamma ray did not
generate a telltale trail of bubbles along its
path, as the electron and positron did.
e
e
Courtesy Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory
Electric Charge
The strength of a particle’s electrical interaction
with objects around it depends on its electric charge (usually repre-
sented as q), which can be either positive or negative. Particles with
the same sign of charge repel each other, and particles with opposite
signs of charge attract each other. An object with equal amounts of
the two kinds of charge is electrically neutral, whereas one with an
imbalance is electrically charged and has an excess charge.
Conductors are materials in which a significant number of
electrons are free to move.The charged particles in nonconductors
(insulators) are not free to move.
Electric current i is the rate dq/dt at which charge passes a point:
(electric current).
(21-3)
Coulomb’s Law
Coulomb’s law describes the electrostatic
force (or electric force) between two charged particles. If the parti-
cles have charges q1 and q2, are separated by distance r, and are at
rest (or moving only slowly) relative to each other, then the magni-
tude of the force acting on each due to the other is given by
(Coulomb’s law),
(21-4)
where 
is the permittivity constant. The
ratio 1/4p´0 is often replaced with the electrostatic constant (or
Coulomb constant) 
.
k # 8.99 ' 109 N9m2/C2
´0 # 8.85 ' 10$12 C2/N9m2
F #
1
4p´0
!q1! !q2!
r2
i # dq
dt
Review & Summary
The electrostatic force vector acting on a charged particle due
to a second charged particle is either directly toward the second
particle (opposite signs of charge) or directly away from it (same
sign of charge).As with other types of forces, if multiple electrostatic
forces act on a particle, the net force is the vector sum (not scalar
sum) of the individual forces.
The two shell theories for electrostatics are 
Shell theorem 1: A charged particle outside a shell with charge
uniformly distributed on its surface is attracted or repelled as if
the shell’s charge were concentrated as a particle at its center.
Shell theorem 2: A charged particle inside a shell with charge
uniformly distributed on its surface has no net force acting on it
due to the shell.
Charge on a conducting spherical shell spreads uniformly over the
(external) surface.
The Elementary Charge
Electric charge is quantized (re-
stricted to certain values). The charge of a particle can be written
as ne, where n is a positive or negative integer and e is the elemen-
tary charge, which is the magnitude of the charge of the electron
and proton (% 1.602 ' 10 $19 C).
Conservation of Charge
The net electric charge of any iso-
lated system is always conserved.
