391
14-2 FLUIDS AT REST
Checkpoint 1
The figure shows four
containers of olive oil.
Rank them according
to the pressure at
depth h, greatest first.
h
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
ascends, the external pressure on him decreases, until it is
atmospheric pressure p0 at the surface. His blood pressure
also decreases, until it is normal. However, because he does
not exhale, the air pressure in his lungs remains at the value it
had at depth L.At the surface,the pressure difference 'p is
'p ! p % p0 ! rgL,
! 0.95 m.
(Answer)
This is not deep! Yet, the pressure difference of 9.3 kPa
(about 9% of atmospheric pressure) is sufficient to rupture
the diver’s lungs and force air from them into the depres-
surized blood, which then carries the air to the heart,
killing the diver. If the diver follows instructions and grad-
ually exhales as he ascends, he allows the pressure in his
lungs to equalize with the external pressure, and then there
is no danger.
L ! 'p
6g !
9300 Pa
(998 kg/m3)(9.8 m/s2)
Sample Problem 14.02
Gauge pressure on a scuba diver
A novice scuba diver practicing in a swimming pool takes
enough air from his tank to fully expand his lungs before
abandoning the tank at depth L and swimming to the sur-
face, failing to exhale during his ascent. At the surface, the
difference 'p between the external pressure on him and the
air pressure in his lungs is 9.3 kPa. From what depth does he
start? What potentially lethal danger does he face?
KEY IDEA
The pressure at depth h in a liquid of density r is given by 
Eq. 14-8 (p ! p0 # rgh), where the gauge pressure rgh is
added to the atmospheric pressure p0.
Calculations: Here, when the diver fills his lungs at depth L,
the external pressure on him (and thus the air pressure within
his lungs) is greater than normal and given by Eq.14-8 as
p ! p0 # rgL,
where r is the water’s density (998 kg/m3,Table 14-1).As he
Equating these two expressions and solving for the un-
known density yield
! 915 kg/m3.
(Answer)
Note that the answer does not depend on the atmospheric
pressure p0 or the free-fall acceleration g.
rx ! rw
l
l # d ! (998 kg/m3)
135 mm
135 mm # 12.3 mm
The U-tube in Fig. 14-4 contains two liquids in static equilib-
rium: Water of density rw (! 998 kg/m3) is in the right arm,
and oil of unknown density rx is in the left.Measurement gives
l ! 135 mm and d ! 12.3 mm. What is the density of the oil?
KEY IDEAS
(1) The pressure pint at the level of the oil–water interface in
the left arm depends on the density rx and height of the oil
above the interface. (2) The water in the right arm at the
same level must be at the same pressure pint. The reason is
that, because the water is in static equilibrium, pressures at
points in the water at the same level must be the same.
Calculations: In the right arm, the interface is a distance l
below the free surface of the water, and we have,from Eq.14-8,
pint ! p0 # rwgl
(right arm).
In the left arm, the interface is a distance l # d below the free
surface of the oil, and we have,again from Eq.14-8,
pint ! p0 # rxg(l # d)
(left arm).
Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
Figure 14-4 The oil in the left arm stands higher than the water.
Interface
Water
Oil
l
d
This much oil
balances...
... this much
water.
Sample Problem 14.03
Balancing of pressure in a U-tube
so
