1022
CHAPTER 34
IMAGES
When the object faces a convex refracting surface, the radius of curvature r is
positive. When it faces a concave surface, r is negative.
In Module 34-6, we shall show that (for light rays making only small angles
with the central axis)
(34-8)
Just as with mirrors, the object distance p is positive, and the image distance i is
positive for a real image and negative for a virtual image. However, to keep all
the signs correct in Eq. 34-8, we must use the following rule for the sign of the
radius of curvature r:
n1
p ' n2
i
! n2 & n1
r
.
Calculations: Making these substitutions in Eq. 34-8,
yields
and
p ! 4.0 mm.
(Answer)
1.6
p
'
1.0
&5.0 mm ! 1.0 & 1.6
&3.0 mm
n1
p ' n2
i
! n2 & n1
r
,
Sample Problem 34.02
Image produced by a refracting surface
A Jurassic mosquito is discovered embedded in a chunk of
amber, which has index of refraction 1.6. One surface of
the amber is spherically convex with radius of curvature
3.0 mm (Fig. 34-13). The mosquito’s head happens to be on
the central axis of that surface and, when viewed along the
axis, appears to be buried 5.0 mm into the amber. How
deep is it really?
KEY IDEAS
The head appears to be 5.0 mm into the amber only because
the light rays that the observer intercepts are bent by refrac-
tion at the convex amber surface. The image distance i dif-
fers from the object distance p according to Eq. 34-8. To use
that equation to find the object distance, we first note:
1. Because the object (the head) and its image are on the
same side of the refracting surface, the image must be
virtual and so i ! &5.0 mm.
2. Because the object is always taken to be in the medium
of index of refraction n1, we must have n1 ! 1.6 and 
n2 ! 1.0.
3. Because the object faces a concave refracting surface, the
radius of curvature r is negative, and so r ! &3.0 mm.
Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
Checkpoint 3
A bee is hovering in front of the concave spherical refracting surface of a glass sculp-
ture. (a) Which part of Fig. 34-12 is like this situation? (b) Is the image produced by
the surface real or virtual,and (c) is it on the same side as the bee or the opposite side?
Figure 34-13 A piece of amber with a mosquito from the Jurassic
period, with the head buried at point O. The spherical refracting
surface at the right end, with center of curvature C, provides an
image I to an observer intercepting rays from the object at O.
I 
O C 
r
p
i
Be careful: This is just the reverse of the sign convention we have for mirrors,
which can be a slippery point in the heat of an exam.
