447
16-1 TRANSVERSE WAVES
The names of the quantities in Eq. 16-2 are displayed in Fig. 16-3 and defined
next. Before we discuss them, however, let us examine Fig. 16-4, which shows five
“snapshots” of a sinusoidal wave traveling in the positive direction of an x axis.
The movement of the wave is indicated by the rightward progress of the short
arrow pointing to a high point of the wave. From snapshot to snapshot, the short
arrow moves to the right with the wave shape, but the string moves only parallel
to the y axis.To see that, let us follow the motion of the red-dyed string element at
x # 0. In the first snapshot (Fig. 16-4a), this element is at displacement y # 0.
In the next snapshot, it is at its extreme downward displacement because a valley
(or extreme low point) of the wave is passing through it. It then moves back up
through y # 0. In the fourth snapshot, it is at its extreme upward displacement
because a peak (or extreme high point) of the wave is passing through it. In the
fifth snapshot, it is again at y # 0, having completed one full oscillation.
Amplitude and Phase
The amplitude ym of a wave, such as that in Fig. 16-4 , is the magnitude of the
maximum displacement of the elements from their equilibrium positions as the
wave passes through them. (The subscript m stands for maximum.) Because ym is
a magnitude, it is always a positive quantity, even if it is measured downward
instead of upward as drawn in Fig. 16-4a.
The phase of the wave is the argument kx $ vt of the sine in Eq. 16-2.As the
wave sweeps through a string element at a particular position x, the phase
changes linearly with time t. This means that the sine also changes, oscillating
between "1 and $1. Its extreme positive value ("1) corresponds to a peak of the
wave moving through the element; at that instant the value of y at position x is ym.
Its extreme negative value ($1) corresponds to a valley of the wave moving
through the element; at that instant the value of y at position x is $ym. Thus, the
sine function and the time-dependent phase of a wave correspond to the oscilla-
tion of a string element, and the amplitude of the wave determines the extremes
of the element’s displacement.
Caution: When evaluating the phase, rounding off the numbers before you
evaluate the sine function can throw of the calculation considerably.
Wavelength and Angular Wave Number
The wavelength l of a wave is the distance (parallel to the direction of the wave’s
travel) between repetitions of the shape of the wave (or wave shape). A typical
wavelength is marked in Fig. 16-4a, which is a snapshot of the wave at time t # 0.
At that time, Eq. 16-2 gives, for the description of the wave shape,
y(x, 0) # ym sin kx.
(16-3)
By definition, the displacement y is the same at both ends of this wave-
length—that is, at x # x1 and x # x1 " l.Thus, by Eq. 16-3,
ym sin kx1 # ym sin k(x1 " l)
# ym sin(kx1 " kl).
(16-4)
A sine function begins to repeat itself when its angle (or argument) is increased
by 2p rad, so in Eq. 16-4 we must have kl # 2p, or
(angular wave number).
(16-5)
We call k the angular wave number of the wave; its SI unit is the radian per meter,
or the inverse meter. (Note that the symbol k here does not represent a spring
constant as previously.)
Notice that the wave in Fig. 16-4 moves to the right by l from one snapshot
to the next.Thus, by the fifth snapshot, it has moved to the right by 1l.
1
4
k # 2p
l
Figure 16-4 Five “snapshots” of a string wave
traveling in the positive direction of an
x axis.The amplitude ym is indicated.A
typical wavelength l, measured from an
arbitrary position x1, is also indicated.
x
y
ym
x1
λ 
(a)
x
y
(b)
x
y
(c)
x
y
(d)
x
y
(e)
Watch this spot in this
series of snapshots.
Figure 16-3 The names of the quantities in
Eq. 16-2, for a transverse sinusoidal wave.
Displacement
Amplitude
Angular
wave number 
Position
Time
Angular
frequency
Phase
Oscillating
term
y(x,t) = ym sin (kx –
t)
ω 
ω 
