393
The gauge pressure can be positive or negative, depending on whether 
p , p0 or p 0 p0. In inflated tires or the human circulatory system, the 
(absolute) pressure is greater than atmospheric pressure, so the gauge pressure is a
positive quantity, sometimes called the overpressure. If you suck on a straw to pull
fluid up the straw, the (absolute) pressure in your lungs is actually less than atmo-
spheric pressure.The gauge pressure in your lungs is then a negative quantity.
14-4 PASCAL’S PRINCIPLE
14-4 PASCAL’S PRINCIPLE
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
14.08 Identify Pascal’s principle.
14.09 For a hydraulic lift, apply the relationship between the
input area and displacement and the output area and 
displacement.
Learning Objectives
●Pascal’s principle states that a change in the pressure applied to an enclosed fluid is transmitted undiminished to every por-
tion of the fluid and to the walls of the containing vessel. 
Key Idea
Pascal’s Principle
When you squeeze one end of a tube to get toothpaste out the other end, you are
watching Pascal’s principle in action.This principle is also the basis for the Heimlich
maneuver, in which a sharp pressure increase properly applied to the abdomen is
transmitted to the throat, forcefully ejecting food lodged there. The principle was
first stated clearly in 1652 by Blaise Pascal (for whom the unit of pressure is named):
Figure 14-7 Lead shot (small balls of lead)
loaded onto the piston create a pressure pext
at the top of the enclosed (incompressible)
liquid. If pext is increased, by adding more
lead shot, the pressure increases by the same
amount at all points within the liquid.
Lead shot 
Piston
P
p
h
pext
Liquid
A change in the pressure applied to an enclosed incompressible fluid is transmit-
ted undiminished to every portion of the fluid and to the walls of its container.
Demonstrating Pascal’s Principle
Consider the case in which the incompressible fluid is a liquid contained in a tall
cylinder, as in Fig. 14-7.The cylinder is fitted with a piston on which a container of
lead shot rests.The atmosphere, container, and shot exert pressure pext on the pis-
ton and thus on the liquid.The pressure p at any point P in the liquid is then
p ! pext # rgh.
(14-11)
Let us add a little more lead shot to the container to increase pext by an amount
'pext. The quantities r, g, and h in Eq. 14-11 are unchanged, so the pressure
change at P is
'p ! 'pext.
(14-12)
This pressure change is independent of h, so it must hold for all points within the
liquid, as Pascal’s principle states.
Pascal’s Principle and the Hydraulic Lever
Figure 14-8 shows how Pascal’s principle can be made the basis of a hydraulic lever.
In operation,let an external force of magnitude Fi be directed downward on the left-
hand (or input) piston, whose surface area is Ai.An incompressible liquid in the de-
vice then produces an upward force of magnitude Fo on the right-hand (or output)
piston, whose surface area is Ao.To keep the system in equilibrium, there must be a
downward force of magnitude Fo on the output piston from an external load (not
di
Input
Ai
do
Oil
Ao
Output
Fi
Fo
A small input 
force produces ...
... a large output
force.
Figure 14-8 A hydraulic arrangement that
can be used to magnify a force .The work
done is,however,not magnified and is the
same for both the input and output forces.
F
:
i
