1134
CHAPTER 37
RELATIVITY
●When a light source and a light detector move relative to
each other, the wavelength of the light as measured in the
rest frame of the source is the proper wavelength l0. The de-
tected wavelength l is either longer (a red shift) or shorter (a
blue shift) depending on whether the source–detector sepa-
ration is increasing or decreasing.
●When the separation is increasing, the wavelengths are
related by
(source and detector separating),
where b ! v/c and v is the relative radial speed (along a
line through the source and detector). If the separation is
l ! l0 A
1 ' b
1 & b
decreasing, the signs in front of the b symbols are reversed.
●For speeds much less than c, the magnitude of the
Doppler wavelength shift 2l ! l & l0 is approximately
related to v by
(v 5 c).
●If the relative motion of the light source is perpendicular to a
line through the source and detector, the detected frequency
f is related to the proper frequency f0 by
This transverse Doppler effect is due to time dilation.
f ! f0 21 & b 2.
v ! !2l!
l0
c
Key Ideas
Dividing the numerator and denominator of the right side by 2t#, we find
However, in the differential limit, 2x/2t is u, the velocity of the particle as meas-
ured in S, and 2x#/2t# is u#, the velocity of the particle as measured in S#. Then
we have, finally,
(relativistic velocity transformation)
(37-29)
as the relativistic velocity transformation equation. (Caution: Be careful to sub-
stitute the correct signs for the velocities.) Equation 37-29 reduces to the classi-
cal, or Galilean, velocity transformation equation,
u ! u# ' v
(classical velocity transformation),
(37-30)
when we apply the formal test of letting c : 1. In other words, Eq. 37-29 is
correct for all physically possible speeds, but Eq. 37-30 is approximately correct
for speeds much less than c.
u !
u# ' v
1 ' u#v/c2
2x
2t !
2x#/2t# ' v
1 ' v(2x#/2t#)/c2 .
37-5 DOPPLER EFFECT FOR LIGHT
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
37.22 Identify that the frequency of light as measured in a
frame attached to the light source (the rest frame) is the
proper frequency.
37.23 For source–detector separations increasing and
decreasing, identify whether the detected frequency is
shifted up or down from the proper frequency, identify that
the shift increases with an increase in relative speed, and
apply the terms blue shift and red shift.
37.24 Identify radial speed.
37.25 For source–detector separations increasing and
decreasing, apply the relationships between proper
frequency f0, detected frequency f, and radial speed v.
37.26 Convert between equations for frequency shift and
wavelength shift.
37.27 When a radial speed is much less than light speed,
apply the approximation relating wavelength shift 2l,
proper wavelength l0, and radial speed v.
37.28 Identify that for light (not sound) there is a shift in the
frequency even when the velocity of the source is perpen-
dicular to the line between the source and the detector, an
effect due to time dilation.
37.29 Apply the relationship for the transverse Doppler effect
by relating detected frequency f, proper frequency f0, and
relative speed v.
Learning Objectives
