688
CHAPTER 24
ELECTRIC POTENTIAL
If we move a particle with charge q from i to f, then, from Eq. 24-3, the potential
energy of the system changes by
!U $ q !V $ q(Vf ' Vi).
(24-4)
The change can be positive or negative, depending on the signs of q and !V. It
can also be zero, if there is no change in potential from i to f (the points have the
same value of potential). Because the electric force is conservative, the change in
potential energy !U between i and f is the same for all paths between those
points (it is path independent).
Work by the Field. We can relate the potential energy change !U to the
work W done by the electric force as the particle moves from i to f by applying
the general relation for a conservative force (Eq. 8-1):
W $ '!U
(work, conservative force).
(24-5)
Next, we can relate that work to the change in the potential by substituting from
Eq. 24-4:
W $ '!U $ 'q !V $ 'q(Vf ' Vi).
(24-6)
Up until now, we have always attributed work to a force but here can also say
that W is the work done on the particle by the electric field (because it, of course,
produces the force). The work can be positive, negative, or zero. Because !U
between any two points is path independent, so is the work W done by the field.
(If you need to calculate work for a difficult path, switch to an easier path—you
get the same result.)
Conservation of Energy. If a charged particle moves through an electric
field with no force acting on it other than the electric force due to the field, then
the mechanical energy is conserved. Let’s assume that we can assign the electric
potential energy to the particle alone.Then we can write the conservation of me-
chanical energy of the particle that moves from point i to point f as
Ui " Ki $ Uf " Kf,
(24-7)
or
!K $ '!U.
(24-8)
Substituting Eq. 24-4, we find a very useful equation for the change in the particle’s
kinetic energy as a result of the particle moving through a potential difference:
!K $ 'q !V $ 'q(Vf ' Vi).
(24-9)
Work by an Applied Force. If some force in addition to the electric force
acts on the particle, we say that the additional force is an applied force or external
force, which is often attributed to an external agent. Such an applied force can do
work on the particle, but the force may not be conservative and thus, in general,
we cannot associate a potential energy with it. We account for that work Wapp by
modifying Eq. 24-7:
(initial energy) " (work by applied force) $ (final energy)
or
Ui " Ki " Wapp $ Uf " Kf .
(24-10)
Rearranging and substituting from Eq. 24-4, we can also write this as
!K $ '!U " Wapp $ 'q !V " Wapp.
(24-11)
The work by the applied force can be positive, negative, or zero, and thus the en-
ergy of the system can increase, decrease, or remain the same.
In the special case where the particle is stationary before and after the move,
the kinetic energy terms in Eqs. 24-10 and 24-11 are zero and we have
Wapp $ q !V
(for Ki $ Kf).
(24-12)
In this special case, the work Wapp involves the motion of the particle through
the potential difference !V and not a change in the particle’s kinetic energy.
