1135
37-5 DOPPLER EFFECT FOR LIGHT
Doppler Effect for Light
In Module 17-7 we discussed the Doppler effect (a shift in detected frequency)
for sound waves, finding that the effect depends on the source and detector veloc-
ities relative to the air.That is not the situation with light waves, which require no
medium (they can even travel through vacuum). The Doppler effect for light
waves depends on only the relative velocity 
between source and detector, as
measured from the reference frame of either. Let f0 represent the proper fre-
quency of the source—that is, the frequency that is measured by an observer in
the rest frame of the source. Let f represent the frequency detected by an ob-
server moving with velocity 
relative to that rest frame. Then, when the direc-
tion of 
is directly away from the source,
(source and detector separating),
(37-31)
where b ! v/c.
Because measurements involving light are usually done in wavelengths
rather than frequencies, let’s rewrite Eq. 37-31 by replacing f with c/l and f0 with
c/l0, where l is the measured wavelength and l0 is the proper wavelength (the
wavelength associated with f0).After canceling c from both sides, we then have
(source and detector separating).
(37-32)
When the direction of 
is directly toward the source, we must change the signs in
front of the b symbols in Eqs. 37-31 and 37-32.
For an increasing separation, we can see from Eq. 37-32 (with an addition in the
numerator and a subtraction in the denominator) that the measured wavelength is
greater than the proper wavelength. Such a Doppler shift is described as being a red
shift, where red does not mean the measured wavelength is red or even visible. The
term merely serves as a memory device because red is at the long-wavelength end of
the visible spectrum.Thus l is longer than l0.Similarly,for a decreasing separation, l
is shorter than l0,and the Doppler shift is described as being a blue shift.
Low-Speed Doppler Effect
For low speeds (b 5 1), Eq. 37-31 can be expanded in a power series in b and
approximated as
(source and detector separating, b 5 1).
(37-33)
The corresponding low-speed equation for the Doppler effect with sound waves
(or any waves except light waves) has the same first two terms but a different
coefficient in the third term. Thus, the relativistic effect for low-speed light
sources and detectors shows up only with the b2 term.
A police radar unit employs the Doppler effect with microwaves to measure
the speed v of a car.A source in the radar unit emits a microwave beam at a certain
(proper) frequency f0 along the road. A car that is moving toward the unit inter-
cepts that beam but at a frequency that is shifted upward by the Doppler effect due
to the car’s motion toward the radar unit. The car reflects the beam back toward
the radar unit. Because the car is moving toward the radar unit, the detector in the
unit intercepts a reflected beam that is further shifted up in frequency. The unit
compares that detected frequency with f0 and computes the speed v of the car.
Astronomical Doppler Effect
In astronomical observations of stars, galaxies, and other sources of light, we
can determine how fast the sources are moving, either directly away from us or
f ! f0(1 & b ' 1
2b2)
v
:
l ! l0 A
1 ' b
1 & b
f ! f0 A
1 & b
1 ' b
v
:
v
:
v
:
