xix
PREFACE
instead of just being flat on a printed page. Not only does this give life to the physics, but the anima-
tion can be repeated as many times as a student wants.
Videos
I have made well over 1500 instructional videos, with more coming each semester. Students
can watch me draw or type on the screen as they hear me talk about a solution, tutorial, sample prob-
lem, or review, very much as they would experience were they sitting next to me in my office while I
worked out something on a notepad. An instructor’s lectures and tutoring will always be the most
valuable learning tools, but my videos are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a
week, and can be repeated indefinitely.
• Video tutorials on subjects in the chapters. I chose the subjects that chal-
lenge the students the most, the ones that my students scratch their heads
about.
• Video reviews of high school math, such as basic algebraic manipulations,
trig functions, and simultaneous equations.
• Video introductions to math, such as vector multiplication, that will be new
to the students.
• Video presentations of every Sample Problem in the textbook chapters . My
intent is to work out the physics, starting with the Key Ideas instead of just
grabbing a formula. However, I also want to demonstrate how to read a sam-
ple problem, that is, how to read technical material to learn problem-solving
procedures that can be transferred to other types of problems.
• Video solutions to 20% of the end-of chapter problems. The availability and
timing of these solutions are controlled by the instructor. For example, they
might be available after a homework deadline or a quiz. Each solution is not
simply a plug-and-chug recipe. Rather I build a solution from the Key Ideas to
the first step of reasoning and to a final solution. The student learns not just
how to solve a particular problem but how to tackle any problem, even those
that require physics courage.
• Video examples of how to read data from graphs (more than simply reading
off a number with no comprehension of the physics).
Problem-Solving Help
I have written a large number of resources for
WileyPLUS designed to help build the students’ problem-solving skills.
• Every sample problem in the textbook is available online in both reading
and video formats.
• Hundreds of additional sample problems. These are available as stand-
alone resources but (at the discretion of the instructor) they are also linked
out of the homework problems. So, if a homework problem deals with, say,
forces on a block on a ramp, a link to a related sample problem is provided.
However, the sample problem is not just a replica of the homework problem
and thus does not provide a solution that can be merely duplicated without
comprehension.
• GO Tutorials for 15% of the end-of-chapter homework problems. In multi-
ple steps, I lead a student through a homework problem, starting with the Key
Ideas and giving hints when wrong answers are submitted. However, I pur-
posely leave the last step (for the final answer) to the student so that they are
responsible at the end. Some online tutorial systems trap a student when
wrong answers are given, which can generate a lot of frustration. My GO
Tutorials are not traps, because at any step along the way, a student can return
to the main problem.
• Hints on every end-of-chapter homework problem are available (at the
discretion of the instructor). I wrote these as true hints about the main ideas
and the general procedure for a solution, not as recipes that provide an answer without any
comprehension.
