452
CHAPTER 16
WAVES—I
16-2 WAVE SPEED ON A STRETCHED STRING
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
16.14 Calculate the linear density m of a uniform string in
terms of the total mass and total length.
l6.15 Apply the relationship between wave speed v, tension t,
and linear density m.
●The speed of a wave on a stretched string is set by
properties of the string, not properties of the wave such as
frequency or amplitude.
●The speed of a wave on a string with tension t and linear
density m is
v # A
t
m .
Learning Objectives
Key Ideas
Wave Speed on a Stretched String
The speed of a wave is related to the wave’s wavelength and frequency by Eq.
16-13, but it is set by the properties of the medium. If a wave is to travel through
a medium such as water, air, steel, or a stretched string, it must cause the particles
of that medium to oscillate as it passes, which requires both mass (for kinetic en-
ergy) and elasticity (for potential energy).Thus, the mass and elasticity determine
how fast the wave can travel. Here, we find that dependency in two ways.
Dimensional Analysis
In dimensional analysis we carefully examine the dimensions of all the physical
quantities that enter into a given situation to determine the quantities they pro-
duce. In this case, we examine mass and elasticity to find a speed v, which has the
dimension of length divided by time, or LT $1.
For the mass, we use the mass of a string element, which is the mass m of the
string divided by the length l of the string.We call this ratio the linear density m of
the string.Thus, m # m/l, its dimension being mass divided by length, ML$1.
You cannot send a wave along a string unless the string is under tension,
which means that it has been stretched and pulled taut by forces at its two ends.
The tension t in the string is equal to the common magnitude of those two forces.
As a wave travels along the string, it displaces elements of the string by causing
additional stretching, with adjacent sections of string pulling on each other
because of the tension. Thus, we can associate the tension in the string with the
stretching (elasticity) of the string. The tension and the stretching forces it pro-
duces have the dimension of a force—namely, MLT $2 (from F # ma).
We need to combine m (dimension ML$1) and t (dimension MLT $2) to get v
(dimension LT $1).A little juggling of various combinations suggests
(16-22)
in which C is a dimensionless constant that cannot be determined with dimen-
sional analysis. In our second approach to determining wave speed, you will see
that Eq. 16-22 is indeed correct and that C # 1.
v # C A
t
m ,
Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
From part (a) we learn that at t # 18.9 s our string element is
moving in the positive direction of y, and here we learn that
it is slowing because its acceleration is in the opposite
direction of u.
