or a particular time interval as
2.35 ' 10$9 s " 2.35 nanoseconds " 2.35 ns.
(1-5)
Some prefixes, as used in milliliter, centimeter, kilogram, and megabyte, are
probably familiar to you.
Changing Units
We often need to change the units in which a physical quantity is expressed. We
do so by a method called chain-link conversion. In this method, we multiply the
original measurement by a conversion factor (a ratio of units that is equal to
unity). For example, because 1 min and 60 s are identical time intervals, we have
Thus, the ratios (1 min)/(60 s) and (60 s)/(1 min) can be used as conversion
factors. This is not the same as writing 
or 60 " 1; each number and its unit
must be treated together.
Because multiplying any quantity by unity leaves the quantity unchanged, we
can introduce conversion factors wherever we find them useful. In chain-link
conversion, we use the factors to cancel unwanted units. For example, to convert
2 min to seconds, we have
(1-6)
If you introduce a conversion factor in such a way that unwanted units do not
cancel, invert the factor and try again. In conversions, the units obey the same
algebraic rules as variables and numbers.
Appendix D gives conversion factors between SI and other systems of units,
including non-SI units still used in the United States. However, the conversion
factors are written in the style of “1 min " 60 s” rather than as a ratio. So, you
need to decide on the numerator and denominator in any needed ratio.
Length
In 1792, the newborn Republic of France established a new system of weights
and measures. Its cornerstone was the meter, defined to be one ten-millionth of
the distance from the north pole to the equator. Later, for practical reasons, this
Earth standard was abandoned and the meter came to be defined as the distance
between two fine lines engraved near the ends of a platinum–iridium bar, the
standard meter bar, which was kept at the International Bureau of Weights and
Measures near Paris. Accurate copies of the bar were sent to standardizing labo-
ratories throughout the world. These secondary standards were used to produce
other, still more accessible standards, so that ultimately every measuring device
derived its authority from the standard meter bar through a complicated chain
of comparisons.
Eventually, a standard more precise than the distance between two fine
scratches on a metal bar was required. In 1960, a new standard for the meter,
based on the wavelength of light, was adopted. Specifically, the standard for the
meter was redefined to be 1 650 763.73 wavelengths of a particular orange-red
light emitted by atoms of krypton-86 (a particular isotope, or type, of krypton) in
a gas discharge tube that can be set up anywhere in the world. This awkward
number of wavelengths was chosen so that the new standard would be close to
the old meter-bar standard.
2 min " (2 min)(1) " (2 min)#
60 s
1 min$ " 120 s.
1
60 " 1
1 min
60 s
" 1  and  
60 s
1 min " 1.
3
1-1
MEASURING THINGS, INCLUDING LENGTHS
