replace the electric flux #E in that equation with EA.Then Eq. 32-10 becomes
(32-14)
Same Value. Comparing Eqs. 32-13 and 32-14, we see that the real current i
charging the capacitor and the fictitious displacement current id between the
plates have the same value:
id ! i
(displacement current in a capacitor).
(32-15)
Thus, we can consider the fictitious displacement current id to be simply a con-
tinuation of the real current i from one plate, across the capacitor gap, to the
other plate. Because the electric field is uniformly spread over the plates,
the same is true of this fictitious displacement current id, as suggested by the
spread of current arrows in Fig. 32-7b.Although no charge actually moves across
the gap between the plates, the idea of the fictitious current id can help us to
quickly find the direction and magnitude of an induced magnetic field, as follows.
Finding the Induced Magnetic Field
In Chapter 29 we found the direction of the magnetic field produced by a real
current i by using the right-hand rule of Fig. 29-5. We can apply the same rule to
find the direction of an induced magnetic field produced by a fictitious displace-
ment current id, as is shown in the center of Fig. 32-7c for a capacitor.
We can also use id to find the magnitude of the magnetic field induced by
a charging capacitor with parallel circular plates of radius R. We simply consider
the space between the plates to be an imaginary circular wire of radius R carrying
the imaginary current id. Then, from Eq. 29-20, the magnitude of the magnetic
field at a point inside the capacitor at radius r from the center is
(inside a circular capacitor).
(32-16)
Similarly, from Eq. 29-17, the magnitude of the magnetic field at a point outside
the capacitor at radius r is
(outside a circular capacitor).
(32-17)
B ! m0id
2pr
B !#
m0id
2pR2$r
id ! ´0
d#E
dt
! ´0
d(EA)
dt
! ´0A dE
dt .
948
CHAPTER 32
MAXWELL’S EQUATIONS; MAGNETISM OF MATTER
Checkpoint 3
The figure is a view of one plate of a parallel-plate
capacitor from within the capacitor.The dashed lines
show four integration paths (path b follows the edge of
the plate). Rank the paths according to the magnitude
of
along the paths during the discharging of
the capacitor, greatest first.
- B
: ! ds
:
a
b
c
d
KEY IDEA
A magnetic field can be set up by a current and by induction
due to a changing electric flux (Eq. 32-5). Between the
plates in Fig. 32-5, the current is zero and we can account for
Sample Problem 32.02
Treating a changing electric field as a displacement current
A circular parallel-plate capacitor with plate radius R is
being charged with a current i.
(a) Between the plates, what is the magnitude of 
, in
terms of m0 and i,at a radius r
R/5 from their center?
!
- B
: ! ds
:
