272
CHAPTER 10
ROTATION
Figure 10-11 A long rod is much easier to
rotate about (a) its central (longitudinal)
axis than about (b) an axis through its 
center and perpendicular to its length. The
reason for the difference is that the mass
is distributed closer to the rotation axis in
(a) than in (b).
Rotation
axis
(a)
(b)
Rod is easy to rotate
this way.
Harder this way.
Instead, we shall treat the table saw (and any other rotating rigid body) as a
collection of particles with different speeds. We can then add up the kinetic
energies of all the particles to find the kinetic energy of the body as a whole.
In this way we obtain, for the kinetic energy of a rotating body,
(10-31)
in which mi is the mass of the ith particle and vi is its speed.The sum is taken over
all the particles in the body.
The problem with Eq. 10-31 is that vi is not the same for all particles.We solve
this problem by substituting for v from Eq. 10-18 (v ! vr), so that we have
(10-32)
in which v is the same for all particles.
The quantity in parentheses on the right side of Eq. 10-32 tells us how
the mass of the rotating body is distributed about its axis of rotation. We call
that quantity the rotational inertia (or moment of inertia) I of the body with
respect to the axis of rotation. It is a constant for a particular rigid body and
a particular rotation axis. (Caution: That axis must always be specified if the
value of I is to be meaningful.)
We may now write
(rotational inertia)
(10-33)
and substitute into Eq. 10-32, obtaining
(radian measure)
(10-34)
as the expression we seek. Because we have used the relation v ! vr in deriving
Eq. 10-34, v must be expressed in radian measure. The SI unit for I is the
kilogram–square meter (kg)m2).
The Plan. If we have a few particles and a specified rotation axis, we find mr2
for each particle and then add the results as in Eq.10-33 to get the total rotational in-
ertia I. If we want the total rotational kinetic energy, we can then substitute that I
into Eq. 10-34.That is the plan for a few particles, but suppose we have a huge num-
ber of particles such as in a rod. In the next module we shall see how to handle such
continuous bodies and do the calculation in only a few minutes.
Equation 10-34, which gives the kinetic energy of a rigid body in pure rotation,
is the angular equivalent of the formula 
,which gives the kinetic energy
K ! 1
2Mvcom
2
K ! 1
2I12
I ! ' mir i
2
K ! '
1
2mi(vri)2 ! 1
2#' miri
2$v2,
! '
1
2mivi
2,
K ! 1
2m1v2
1 & 1
2m2v2
2 & 1
2m3v2
3 & ) ) )
of a rigid body in pure translation. In both formulas there is a factor of . Where
mass M appears in one equation, I (which involves both mass and its distribution)
appears in the other. Finally, each equation contains as a factor the square of a
speed—translational or rotational as appropriate. The kinetic energies of transla-
tion and of rotation are not different kinds of energy.They are both kinetic energy,
expressed in ways that are appropriate to the motion at hand.
We noted previously that the rotational inertia of a rotating body involves
not only its mass but also how that mass is distributed. Here is an example that
you can literally feel. Rotate a long, fairly heavy rod (a pole, a length of lumber,
or something similar), first around its central (longitudinal) axis (Fig. 10-11a)
and then around an axis perpendicular to the rod and through the center
(Fig. 10-11b). Both rotations involve the very same mass, but the first rotation is
much easier than the second. The reason is that the mass is distributed much
closer to the rotation axis in the first rotation. As a result, the rotational inertia
of the rod is much smaller in Fig. 10-11a than in Fig. 10-11b. In general, smaller
rotational inertia means easier rotation.
1
2
