want the average force Favg on the wall during the bombardment—that is, the av-
erage force during a large number of collisions.
In Fig. 9-10, a steady stream of projectile bodies, with identical mass m and
linear momenta 
moves along an x axis and collides with a target body that is
mv
:,
228
CHAPTER 9
CENTER OF MASS AND LINEAR MOMENTUM
Figure 9-10 A steady stream of projectiles,
with identical linear momenta, collides
with a target, which is fixed in place. The
average force Favg on the target is to the
right and has a magnitude that depends on
the rate at which the projectiles collide
with the target or, equivalently, the rate at
which mass collides with the target.
x
Target 
v
Projectiles
fixed in place. Let n be the number of projectiles that collide in a time interval "t.
Because the motion is along only the x axis, we can use the components of the
momenta along that axis. Thus, each projectile has initial momentum mv and
undergoes a change "p in linear momentum because of the collision. The total
change in linear momentum for n projectiles during interval "t is n "p. The
resulting impulse 
on the target during "t is along the x axis and has the same
magnitude of n "p but is in the opposite direction. We can write this relation in
component form as
J ! %n "p,
(9-36)
where the minus sign indicates that J and "p have opposite directions.
Average Force. By rearranging Eq. 9-35 and substituting Eq. 9-36, we find
the average force Favg acting on the target during the collisions:
(9-37)
This equation gives us Favg in terms of n/"t, the rate at which the projectiles
collide with the target, and "v, the change in the velocity of those projectiles.
Velocity Change. If the projectiles stop upon impact, then in Eq. 9-37 we can
substitute, for "v,
"v ! vf % vi ! 0 % v ! %v,
(9-38)
where vi (! v) and vf (! 0) are the velocities before and after the collision,
respectively. If, instead, the projectiles bounce (rebound) directly backward from
the target with no change in speed, then vf ! %v and we can substitute
"v ! vf % vi ! %v % v ! %2v.
(9-39)
In time interval "t, an amount of mass "m ! nm collides with the target.
With this result, we can rewrite Eq. 9-37 as
(9-40)
This equation gives the average force Favg in terms of "m/"t, the rate at which
mass collides with the target. Here again we can substitute for "v from Eq. 9-38
or 9-39 depending on what the projectiles do.
F avg ! % "m
"t "v.
F avg !
J
"t ! % n
"t "p ! % n
"t m "v.
J
:
Checkpoint 5
The figure shows an overhead view of a ball bouncing from a vertical wall without any
change in its speed. Consider the change 
in the ball’s linear momentum. (a) Is "px
positive, negative, or zero? (b) Is "py positive, negative, or zero? (c) What is the direc-
tion of 
?
"p
:
"p
:
θ 
θ 
y
x
