719
The circuit shown in Figs. 25-4a and b is said to be incomplete because
switch S is open; that is, the switch does not electrically connect the wires at-
tached to it. When the switch is closed, electrically connecting those wires, the
circuit is complete and charge can then flow through the switch and the wires.
As we discussed in Chapter 21, the charge that can flow through a conductor,
such as a wire, is that of electrons. When the circuit of Fig. 25-4 is completed,
electrons are driven through the wires by an electric field that the battery sets
up in the wires.The field drives electrons from capacitor plate h to the positive
terminal of the battery; thus, plate h, losing electrons, becomes positively
charged. The field drives just as many electrons from the negative terminal of
the battery to capacitor plate l; thus, plate l, gaining electrons, becomes nega-
tively charged just as much as plate h, losing electrons, becomes positively
charged.
Initially, when the plates are uncharged, the potential difference between
them is zero. As the plates become oppositely charged, that potential differ-
ence increases until it equals the potential difference V between the terminals
of the battery. Then plate h and the positive terminal of the battery are at the
same potential, and there is no longer an electric field in the wire between
them. Similarly, plate l and the negative terminal reach the same potential,
and there is then no electric field in the wire between them. Thus, with the
field zero, there is no further drive of electrons. The capacitor is then said to
be fully charged, with a potential difference V and charge q that are related
by Eq. 25-1.
In this book we assume that during the charging of a capacitor and after-
ward, charge cannot pass from one plate to the other across the gap separating
them. Also, we assume that a capacitor can retain (or store) charge indefinitely,
until it is put into a circuit where it can be discharged.
Checkpoint 1
Does the capacitance C of a capacitor increase,decrease,or remain the same (a) when
the charge q on it is doubled and (b) when the potential difference V across it is tripled?
25-2 CALCULATING THE CAPACITANCE
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
25.04 Explain how Gauss’ law is used to find the capacitance of a parallel-plate capacitor.
25.05 For a parallel-plate capacitor, a cylindrical capacitor, a spherical capacitor, and an isolated sphere, calculate the capacitance.
Learning Objectives
●We generally determine the capacitance of a particular
capacitor configuration by (1) assuming a charge q to have
been placed on the plates, (2) finding the electric field 
due
to this charge, (3) evaluating the potential difference V be-
tween the plates, and (4) calculating C from q ! CV. Some
results are the following:
●A parallel-plate capacitor with flat parallel plates of area A
and spacing d has capacitance
●A cylindrical capacitor (two long coaxial cylinders) of length
C ! ´0A
d .
E
:
L and radii a and b has capacitance
●A spherical capacitor with concentric spherical plates of
radii a and b has capacitance
●An isolated sphere of radius R has capacitance
C ! 4p´0R.
C ! 4p´0
ab
b # a .
C ! 2p´0
L
ln(b
a) .
Key Ideas
25-2 CALCULATING THE CAPACITANCE
