844
CHAPTER 29
MAGNETIC FIELDS DUE TO CURRENTS
29-3 AMPERE’S LAW
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
29.13 Apply Ampere’s law to a loop that encircles current.
29.14 With Ampere’s law, use a right-hand rule for determin-
ing the algebraic sign of an encircled current.
29.15 For more than one current within an Amperian loop, de-
termine the net current to be used in Ampere’s law.
29.16 Apply Ampere’s law to a long straight wire with current,
to find the magnetic field magnitude inside and outside the
wire, identifying that only the current encircled by the
Amperian loop matters.
●Ampere’s law states that
(Ampere’s law).
The line integral in this equation is evaluated around a closed loop called an Amperian loop. The current i on the right side is the
net current encircled by the loop.
, B
: !ds: ! m 0ienc
Learning Objectives
Key Idea
Ampere’s Law
We can find the net electric field due to any distribution of charges by first writ-
ing the differential electric field 
due to a charge element and then summing
the contributions of 
from all the elements. However, if the distribution is
complicated, we may have to use a computer. Recall, however, that if the distribu-
tion has planar, cylindrical, or spherical symmetry, we can apply Gauss’ law to
find the net electric field with considerably less effort.
Similarly, we can find the net magnetic field due to any distribution of currents
by first writing the differential magnetic field 
(Eq. 29-3) due to a current-length
element and then summing the contributions of 
from all the elements.Again we
may have to use a computer for a complicated distribution. However, if the distri-
bution has some symmetry, we may be able to apply Ampere’s law to find the mag-
netic field with considerably less effort. This law, which can be derived from the
Biot–Savart law, has traditionally been credited to André-Marie Ampère
(1775–1836), for whom the SI unit of current is named. However, the law actually
was advanced by English physicist James Clerk Maxwell.Ampere’s law is
(Ampere’s law).
(29-14)
The loop on the integral sign means that the scalar (dot) product 
is to be
integrated around a closed loop, called an Amperian loop. The current ienc is the
net current encircled by that closed loop.
To see the meaning of the scalar product 
and its integral,let us first apply
Ampere’s law to the general situation of Fig. 29-12.The figure shows cross sections
of three long straight wires that carry currents i1, i2, and i3 either directly into
or directly out of the page. An arbitrary Amperian loop lying in the plane of
the page encircles two of the currents but not the third. The counterclockwise
direction marked on the loop indicates the arbitrarily chosen direction of inte-
gration for Eq. 29-14.
To apply Ampere’s law, we mentally divide the loop into differential vec-
tor elements 
that are everywhere directed along the tangent to the loop in
the direction of integration. Assume that at the location of the element 
shown in Fig. 29-12, the net magnetic field due to the three currents is 
.
Because the wires are perpendicular to the page, we know that the magnetic
B
:
ds
:
ds
:
B
: !ds
:
B
: !ds
:
, B
: !ds
: ! m0ienc
dB
:
dB
:
dE
:
dE
:
