The resistance of the transmission line is about 0.220 "/km; thus, there is a total
resistance of about 220 " for the 1000 km stretch. Energy is dissipated due to that
resistance at a rate of about
Pavg ! I 2R ! (500 A)2(220 ") ! 55.0 MW,
which is nearly 15% of the supply rate.
Imagine what would happen if we doubled the current and halved the volt-
age. Energy would be supplied by the plant at the same average rate of 368 MW
as previously, but now energy would be dissipated at the rate of about
Pavg ! I 2R ! (1000 A)2(220 ") ! 220 MW,
which is almost 60% of the supply rate. Hence the general energy transmission
rule:Transmit at the highest possible voltage and the lowest possible current.
The Ideal Transformer
The transmission rule leads to a fundamental mismatch between the requirement
for efficient high-voltage transmission and the need for safe low-voltage gener-
ation and consumption. We need a device with which we can raise (for trans-
mission) and lower (for use) the ac voltage in a circuit, keeping the product
current
voltage essentially constant. The transformer is such a device. It has
no moving parts, operates by Faraday’s law of induction, and has no simple
direct-current counterpart.
The ideal transformer in Fig. 31-18 consists of two coils, with different num-
bers of turns, wound around an iron core. (The coils are insulated from the core.)
In use, the primary winding, of Np turns, is connected to an alternating-current
generator whose emf # at any time t is given by
# ! #m sin vt.
(31-78)
The secondary winding, of Ns turns, is connected to load resistance R, but its
circuit is an open circuit as long as switch S is open (which we assume for the
present). Thus, there can be no current through the secondary coil. We assume
further for this ideal transformer that the resistances of the primary and second-
ary windings are negligible. Well-designed, high-capacity transformers can have
energy losses as low as 1%; so our assumptions are reasonable.
For the assumed conditions, the primary winding (or primary) is a pure
inductance and the primary circuit is like that in Fig. 31-12.Thus, the (very small)
primary current, also called the magnetizing current Imag, lags the primary voltage
Vp by 90°; the primary’s power factor (! cos f in Eq. 31-76) is zero; so no power
is delivered from the generator to the transformer.
However, the small sinusoidally changing primary current Imag produces a
sinusoidally changing magnetic flux #B in the iron core. The core acts to
strengthen the flux and to bring it through the secondary winding (or secondary).
Because #B varies, it induces an emf #turn (! d#B/dt) in each turn of the
secondary. In fact, this emf per turn #turn is the same in the primary and the
secondary.Across the primary, the voltage Vp is the product of #turn and the num-
ber of turns Np; that is, Vp ! #turnNp. Similarly, across the secondary the voltage is
Vs ! #turnNs.Thus, we can write
or
(transformation of voltage).
(31-79)
If Ns - Np,the device is a step-up transformer because it steps the primary’s voltage
Vp up to a higher voltage Vs.Similarly,if Ns / Np,it is a step-down transformer.
Vs ! Vp
Ns
Np
#turn ! Vp
Np
! Vs
Ns
,
&
931
31-6 TRANSFORMERS
Figure 31-18 An ideal transformer (two coils
wound on an iron core) in a basic trans-
former circuit.An ac generator produces
current in the coil at the left (the primary).
The coil at the right (the secondary) is con-
nected to the resistive load R when switch S
is closed.
R
Vp
Vs
S
Np
Ns
Φ B
Primary 
Secondary 
