1313
43-1 NUCLEAR FISSION
nucleus and a charged liquid drop, to explain the main nuclear features. Figure
43-2 suggests how the fission process proceeds from this point of view. When a
high-mass nucleus—let us say 235U—absorbs a slow (thermal) neutron, as in
Fig. 43-2a, that neutron falls into the potential well associated with the strong
forces that act in the nuclear interior. The neutron’s potential energy is then
transformed into internal excitation energy of the nucleus, as Fig. 43-2b sug-
gests. The amount of excitation energy that a slow neutron carries into a
nucleus is equal to the binding energy En of the neutron in that nucleus, which
is the change in mass energy of the neutron–nucleus system due to the neu-
tron’s capture.
Figures 43-2c and d show that the nucleus, behaving like an energetically
oscillating charged liquid drop, will sooner or later develop a short “neck” and
will begin to separate into two charged “globs.” Two competing forces then act on
the globs: Because they are positively charged, the electric force attempts to sep-
arate them. Because they hold protons and neutrons, the strong force attempts
to pull them together. If the electric repulsion drives them far enough apart to
break the neck, the two fragments, each still carrying some residual excitation en-
ergy, will fly apart (Figs. 43-2e and f). Fission has occurred.
This model gave a good qualitative picture of the fission process. What
remained to be seen, however, was whether it could answer a hard question:Why
are some high-mass nuclides (235U and 239Pu, say) readily fissionable by thermal
neutrons when other, equally massive nuclides (238U and 243Am, say) are not?
A
Figure 43-2 The stages of a typical fission process, according to the collective model of Bohr and Wheeler.
(a)
(b)
Neutron
(c)
(f )
(g)
(e)
r
(h)
Neutrons
(d)
The 235U absorbs
a slow neutron
(with little
kinetic energy),
becoming 236U.
The strong force,
however, decreases
very quickly with
distance between
the globs.
This fission decreases
the mass energy,
thus releasing energy.
So, if the globs
move apart enough,
the electric repulsion
rips apart the nucleus.
The two fragments
eject neutrons, further
reducing mass energy.
Energy is transferred
from mass energy
to energy of the
oscillations caused
by the absorption.
Both globs contain
protons and are
positively charged
and thus they repel
each other.
But the protons and
neutrons also attract
one another by the
strong force that
binds the nucleus.
