1099
36-5 DIFFRACTION GRATINGS 
say, a helium–neon laser is shown in Fig. 36-19b.The maxima are now very narrow
(and so are called lines);they are separated by relatively wide dark regions.
Equation. We use a familiar procedure to find the locations of the bright lines
on the viewing screen.We first assume that the screen is far enough from the grat-
ing so that the rays reaching a particular point P on the screen are approximately
parallel when they leave the grating (Fig. 36-20). Then we apply to each pair of
adjacent rulings the same reasoning we used for double-slit interference.The sep-
aration d between rulings is called the grating spacing. (If N rulings occupy a total
width w, then d ! w/N.) The path length difference between adjacent rays is
again d sin u (Fig. 36-20), where u is the angle from the central axis of the grating
(and of the diffraction pattern) to point P. A line will be located at P if the path
length difference between adjacent rays is an integer number of wavelengths:
d sin u ! ml,
for m ! 0, 1, 2, . . .
(maxima—lines),
(36-25)
where l is the wavelength of the light. Each integer m represents a different line;
hence these integers can be used to label the lines, as in Fig. 36-19. The integers
are then called the order numbers, and the lines are called the zeroth-order line
(the central line, with m ! 0), the first-order line (m ! 1), the second-order line
(m ! 2), and so on.
Determining Wavelength. If we rewrite Eq. 36-25 as u ! sin&1(ml/d), we
see that, for a given diffraction grating, the angle from the central axis to any
line (say, the third-order line) depends on the wavelength of the light being
used. Thus, when light of an unknown wavelength is sent through a diffraction
grating, measurements of the angles to the higher-order lines can be used in
Eq. 36-25 to determine the wavelength. Even light of several unknown wave-
lengths can be distinguished and identified in this way. We cannot do that with
the double-slit arrangement of Module 35-2, even though the same equation
and wavelength dependence apply there. In double-slit interference, the bright
fringes due to different wavelengths overlap too much to be distinguished.
Width of the Lines
A grating’s ability to resolve (separate) lines of different wavelengths depends on
the width of the lines. We shall here derive an expression for the half-width of
the central line (the line for which m ! 0) and then state an expression for the
half-widths of the higher-order lines. We define the half-width of the central line
as being the angle 2uhw from the center of the line at u ! 0 outward to where
the line effectively ends and darkness effectively begins with the first minimum
(Fig. 36-21).At such a minimum, the N rays from the N slits of the grating cancel
one another. (The actual width of the central line is, of course, 2(2uhw), but line
widths are usually compared via half-widths.)
In Module 36-1 we were also concerned with the cancellation of a great many
rays, there due to diffraction through a single slit. We obtained Eq. 36-3, which,
because of the similarity of the two situations, we can use to find the first
minimum here. It tells us that the first minimum occurs where the path length
difference between the top and bottom rays equals l. For single-slit diffraction,
this difference is a sin u. For a grating of N rulings, each separated from the next
by distance d, the distance between the top and bottom rulings is Nd (Fig. 36-22),
and so the path length difference between the top and bottom rays here is
Nd sin 2uhw.Thus, the first minimum occurs where
Nd sin 2uhw ! l.
(36-26)
Because 2uhw is small, sin 2uhw ! 2uhw (in radian measure). Substituting this in
Eq. 36-26 gives the half-width of the central line as
(half-width of central line).
(36-27)
2uhw !
l
Nd
Figure 36-20 The rays from the rulings in a
diffraction grating to a distant point P are
approximately parallel.The path length dif-
ference between each two adjacent rays is 
d sin u, where u is measured as shown. (The
rulings extend into and out of the page.)
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
d
To point P
on viewing
screen
Path length
difference
between adjacent rays
This path length difference
between adjacent rays
determines the interference.
Figure 36-21 The half-width 
of the cen-
tral line is measured from the center of that
line to the adjacent minimum on a plot of 
I versus u like Fig. 36-19a.
2uhw
∆ θ 
Intensity
hw
0°
θ 
∆ θ hw
∆ θ hw
Path length
difference
Nd
To first
minimum
Top ray
Bottom ray
Figure 36-22 The top and bottom rulings of
a diffraction grating of N rulings are
separated by Nd.The top and bottom rays
passing through these rulings have a path
length difference of Nd sin 2uhw, where
2uhw is the angle to the first minimum.
(The angle is here greatly exaggerated
for clarity.)
