62
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
4
Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
4-1 POSITION AND DISPLACEMENT
Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
4.01 Draw  two-dimensional and three-dimensional position
vectors for a particle, indicating the components along the
axes of a coordinate system.
4.02 On a coordinate system, determine the direction and
magnitude of a particle’s position vector from its compo-
nents, and vice versa.
4.03 Apply the relationship between a particle’s displace-
ment vector and its initial and final position vectors.
Key Ideas
●The location of a particle relative to the origin of a coordi-
nate system is given by a position vector , which in unit-
vector notation is
Here x , y , and z are the vector components of position 
vector , and 
and z are its scalar components (as well
as the coordinates of the particle).
●A position vector is described either by a magnitude and
x, y,
r:
kˆ
jˆ
iˆ
r: " xiˆ # yjˆ # zkˆ .
r:
one or two angles for orientation, or by its vector or scalar
components.
●If a particle moves so that its position vector changes from
to 
, the particle’s displacement 
is
The displacement can also be written as
" -xiˆ # -yjˆ # -zkˆ .
-r: " (x2 $ x1)iˆ # (y2 $ y1)jˆ # (z2 $ z1)kˆ
-r: " r:
2 $ r:
1.
-r:
r:
2
r:
1
What Is Physics?
In this chapter we continue looking at the aspect of physics that analyzes
motion, but now the motion can be in two or three dimensions. For example,
medical researchers and aeronautical engineers might concentrate on the
physics of the two- and three-dimensional turns taken by fighter pilots in dog-
fights because a modern high-performance jet can take a tight turn so quickly
that the pilot immediately loses consciousness. A sports engineer might focus
on the physics of basketball. For example, in a free throw (where a player gets
an uncontested shot at the basket from about 4.3 m), a player might employ the
overhand push shot, in which the ball is pushed away from about shoulder
height and then released. Or the player might use an underhand loop shot, in
which the ball is brought upward from about the belt-line level and released.
The first technique is the overwhelming choice among professional players, but
the legendary Rick Barry set the record for free-throw shooting with the under-
hand technique.
Motion in three dimensions is not easy to understand. For example, you are
probably good at driving a car along a freeway (one-dimensional motion) but
would probably have a difficult time in landing an airplane on a runway (three-
dimensional motion) without a lot of training.
In our study of two- and three-dimensional motion, we start with position
and displacement.
