512
CHAPTER 17
WAVES—II
Figure 17-49 Problem 94.
Impact
Cylindrical
wave
Hemispherical wave 
d
what is the ratio %pr/%pm, where %pr is the pressure amplitude of
the resultant wave,if f is (a) 0,(b) p/2,(c) p/3,and (d) p/4?
89
Two sound waves with an amplitude of 12 nm and a wave-
length of 35 cm travel in the same direction through a long tube,
with a phase difference of p/3 rad.What are the (a) amplitude and
(b) wavelength of the net sound wave produced by their interfer-
ence? If, instead, the sound waves travel through the tube in oppo-
site directions, what are the (c) amplitude and (d) wavelength of
the net wave?
90
A sinusoidal sound wave moves at 343 m/s through air in the
positive direction of an x axis. At one instant during the oscilla-
tions, air molecule A is at its maximum displacement in the nega-
tive direction of the axis while air molecule B is at its equilibrium
position. The separation between those molecules is 15.0 cm, and
the molecules between A and B have intermediate displacements
in the negative direction of the axis. (a) What is the frequency of
the sound wave?
In a similar arrangement but for a different sinusoidal sound
wave, at one instant air molecule C is at its maximum displacement
in the positive direction while molecule D is at its maximum
displacement in the negative direction.The separation between the
molecules is again 15.0 cm, and the molecules between C and D
have intermediate displacements. (b) What is the frequency of the
sound wave?
91
Two identical tuning forks can oscillate at 440 Hz.A person is
located somewhere on the line between them. Calculate the beat
frequency as measured by this individual if (a) she is standing still
and the tuning forks move in the same direction along the line at
3.00 m/s, and (b) the tuning forks are stationary and the listener
moves along the line at 3.00 m/s.
92
You can estimate your distance from a lightning stroke by
counting the seconds between the flash you see and the thunder
you later hear. By what integer should you divide the number of
seconds to get the distance in kilometers?
93
Figure 17-48 shows an air-
filled, acoustic interferometer, used
to demonstrate the interference of
sound waves. Sound source S is an
oscillating diaphragm; D is a sound
detector, such as the ear or a micro-
phone. Path SBD can be varied in
length, but path SAD is fixed. At D,
the sound wave coming along path
SBD interferes with that coming along path SAD. In one demon-
stration, the sound intensity at D has a minimum value of
100 units at one position of the movable arm and continuously
climbs to a maximum value of 900 units when that arm is shifted
by 1.65 cm. Find (a) the frequency of the sound emitted by the
source and (b) the ratio of the amplitude at D of the SAD wave
to that of the SBD wave. (c) How can it happen that these waves
have different amplitudes, considering that they originate at the
same source?
94
On July 10, 1996, a granite block broke away from a wall in
Yosemite Valley and, as it began to slide down the wall, was
launched into projectile motion. Seismic waves produced by its
impact with the ground triggered seismographs as far away as
200 km. Later measurements indicated that the block had a mass
between 7.3 ' 107 kg and 1.7 ' 108 kg and that it landed 500 m
vertically below the launch point and 30 m horizontally from it.
SSM
(The launch angle is not known.) (a) Estimate the block’s kinetic
energy just before it landed.
Consider two types of seismic waves that spread from the im-
pact point—a hemispherical body wave traveled through the
ground in an expanding hemisphere and a cylindrical surface wave
traveled along the ground in an expanding shallow vertical cylin-
der (Fig. 17-49). Assume that the impact lasted 0.50 s, the vertical
cylinder had a depth d of 5.0 m, and each wave type received 20%
of the energy the block had just before impact. Neglecting any
mechanical energy loss the waves experienced as they traveled,
determine the intensities of (b) the body wave and (c) the surface
wave when they reached a seismograph 200 km away. (d) On the
basis of these results, which wave is more easily detected on a
distant seismograph?
S
A 
B 
D
Figure 17-48 Problem 93.
95
The sound intensity is 0.0080 W/m2 at a distance of 10 m
from an isotropic point source of sound. (a) What is the power of
the source? (b) What is the sound intensity 5.0 m from the source?
(c) What is the sound level 10 m from the source?
96
Four sound waves are to be sent through the same tube of air,
in the same direction:
s1(x, t) # (9.00 nm) cos(2px $ 700pt)
s2(x, t) # (9.00 nm) cos(2px $ 700pt " 0.7p)
s3(x, t) # (9.00 nm) cos(2px $ 700pt " p)
s4(x, t) # (9.00 nm) cos(2px $ 700pt " 1.7p).
What is the amplitude of the resultant wave? (Hint: Use a phasor
diagram to simplify the problem.)
97
Straight line AB connects two point sources that are 5.00 m
apart, emit 300 Hz sound waves of the same amplitude, and emit
exactly out of phase. (a) What is the shortest distance between the
midpoint of AB and a point on AB where the interfering waves
cause maximum oscillation of the air molecules? What are the
(b) second and (c) third shortest distances?
98
A point source that is stationary on an x axis emits a
sinusoidal sound wave at a frequency of 686 Hz and speed 343 m/s.
The wave travels radially outward from the source, causing air mol-
ecules to oscillate radially inward and outward. Let us define a
wavefront as a line that connects points where the air molecules
have the maximum, radially outward displacement. At any given
instant, the wavefronts are concentric circles that are centered on
the source. (a) Along x, what is the adjacent wavefront separation?
Next, the source moves along x at a speed of 110 m/s. Along x,
what are the wavefront separations (b) in front of and (c) behind
the source?
99
You are standing at a distance D from an isotropic point source
of sound. You walk 50.0 m toward the source and observe that the
intensity of the sound has doubled.Calculate the distance D.
SSM
