is measurable, unlike the result of (a)? At that quantum number,
(c) what multiple of the electron’s rest energy would give the elec-
tron’s total energy and (d) would the electron be relativistic?
61
(a) Show that the terms in Schrödinger’s equation (Eq. 39-18)
have the same dimensions. (b) What is the common SI unit for
each of these terms?
62
(a) What is the wavelength of light for the least energetic pho-
ton emitted in the Balmer series of the hydrogen atom spectrum
lines? (b) What is the wavelength of the series limit?
63
(a) For a given value of the principal quantum number n for a
hydrogen atom, how many values of the orbital quantum number 
are possible? (b) For a given value of , how many values of the or-
bital magnetic quantum number 
are possible? (c) For a given
value of n, how many values of 
are possible?
64
Verify that the combined value of the constants appearing in
Eq. 39-33 is 13.6 eV.
65
A diatomic gas molecule consists
of two atoms of mass m separated by a
fixed distance d rotating about an axis
as indicated in Fig. 39-32. Assuming
that its angular momentum is quan-
tized as in the Bohr model for the
hydrogen atom, find (a) the possible
angular velocities and (b) the possible
quantized rotational energies.
66
In atoms there is a finite, though very small, probability that,
at some instant, an orbital electron will actually be found inside the
nucleus. In fact, some unstable nuclei use this occasional appear-
ance of the electron to decay by electron capture. Assuming that
the proton itself is a sphere of radius 1.1 " 10#15 m and that the
wave function of the hydrogen atom’s electron holds all the way to
the proton’s center, use the ground-state wave function to calcu-
late the probability that the hydrogen atom’s electron is inside its
nucleus.
67
(a) What is the separation in energy between the lowest two
energy levels for a container 20 cm on a side containing argon
atoms? Assume, for simplicity, that the argon atoms are trapped in
a one-dimensional well 20 cm wide. The molar mass of argon is
39.9 g/mol. (b) At 300 K, to the nearest power of ten, what is the
ratio of the thermal energy of the atoms to this energy separation?
(c) At what temperature does the thermal energy equal the en-
ergy separation?
m!
m!
!
!
68
A muon of charge #e and mass m ! 207me (where me is the
mass of an electron) orbits the nucleus of a singly ionized helium
atom (He+). Assuming that the Bohr model of the hydrogen atom
can be applied to this muon–helium system, verify that the energy
levels of the system are given by
69
From the energy-level diagram for hydrogen, explain the ob-
servation that the frequency of the second Lyman-series line is the
sum of the frequencies of the first Lyman-series line and the first
Balmer-series line.This is an example of the empirically discovered
Ritz combination principle. Use the diagram to find some other
valid combinations.
70
A hydrogen atom can be considered as having a central point-
like proton of positive charge e and an electron of negative charge
#e that is distributed about the proton according to the volume
charge density r ! A exp(#2r/a0). Here A is a constant, a0 ! 0.53 "
10#10 m, and r is the distance from the center of the atom. (a) Using
the fact that the hydrogen is electrically neutral, find A. Then find
the (b) magnitude and (c) direction of the atom’s electric field at a0.
71
An old model of a hydrogen atom has the charge 'e of the pro-
ton uniformly distributed over a sphere of radius a0, with the electron
of charge #e and mass m at its center. (a) What would then be the
force on the electron if it were displaced from the center by a distance
r # a0? (b) What would be the angular frequency of oscillation of the
electron about the center of the atom once the electron was released?
72
In a simple model of a hydrogen atom, the single electron or-
bits the single proton (the nucleus) in a circular path. Calculate (a)
the electric potential set up by the proton at the orbital radius of
52.9 pm, (b) the electric potential energy of the atom, and (c) the
kinetic energy of the electron. (d) How much energy is required to
ionize the atom (that is, to remove the electron to an infinite dis-
tance with no kinetic energy)? Give the energies in electron-volts.
73
Consider a conduction electron in a cubical crystal of a con-
ducting material. Such an electron is free to move throughout the
volume of the crystal but cannot escape to the outside. It is trapped
in a three-dimensional infinite well.The electron can move in three
dimensions, so that its total energy is given by
in which n1, n2, and n3 are positive integer values. Calculate the en-
ergies of the lowest five distinct states for a conduction electron
moving in a cubical crystal of edge length L ! 0.25 mm.
E !
h2
8L2m  (n2
1 ' n2
2 ' n2
3),
E ! # 11.3 keV
n2
.
1218
CHAPTER 39
MORE ABOUT MATTER WAVES
m
Axis
v
m
d/2
d/2
Figure 39-32 Problem 65.
