1365
PROBLEMS
2970 K.What was the wavelength at which the background radiation
was then most intense?
••39
Will the universe continue to expand forever? To attack this
question, assume that the theory of dark energy is in error and that
the recessional speed v of a galaxy a distance r from us is determined
only by the gravitational interaction of the matter that lies inside 
a sphere of radius r centered on us. If the total mass inside this 
sphere is M, the escape speed ve from the sphere is 
(Eq. 13-28). (a) Show that to prevent unlimited expansion, the aver-
age density r inside the sphere must be at least equal to
(b) Evaluate this “critical density” numerically; express your an-
swer in terms of hydrogen atoms per cubic meter. Measurements
of the actual density are difficult and are complicated by the pres-
ence of dark matter.
••40
Because the apparent recessional speeds of galaxies and
quasars at great distances are close to the speed of light, the rela-
tivistic Doppler shift formula (Eq. 37-31) must be used.The shift is
reported as fractional red shift z ! )l/l0. (a) Show that, in terms of
z, the recessional speed parameter b ! v/c is given by
(b) A quasar detected in 1987 has z ! 4.43. Calculate its speed pa-
rameter. (c) Find the distance to the quasar, assuming that
Hubble’s law is valid to these distances.
••41
An electron jumps from n!3 to n!2 in a hydrogen atom
in a distant galaxy, emitting light. If we detect that light at a wave-
length of 3.00 mm, by what multiplication factor has the wavelength,
and thus the universe,expanded since the light was emitted?
••42
Due to the presence everywhere of the cosmic background
radiation, the minimum possible temperature of a gas in interstel-
lar or intergalactic space is not 0 K but 2.7 K. This implies that a
significant fraction of the molecules in space that can be in a low-
level excited state may, in fact, be so. Subsequent de-excitation
would lead to the emission of radiation that could be detected.
Consider a (hypothetical) molecule with just one possible excited
state. (a) What would the excitation energy have to be for 25% of
the molecules to be in the excited state? (Hint: See Eq. 40-29.) (b)
What would be the wavelength of the photon emitted in a transi-
tion back to the ground state?
••43
Suppose that the radius of the Sun were increased to
5.90
1012 m (the average radius of the orbit of Pluto), that the
density of this expanded Sun were uniform, and that the planets
revolved within this tenuous object. (a) Calculate Earth’s orbital
speed in this new configuration. (b) What is the ratio of the orbital
speed calculated in (a) to Earth’s present orbital speed of 29.8
km/s? Assume that the radius of Earth’s orbit remains un-
changed. (c) What would be Earth’s new period of revolution?
(The Sun’s mass remains unchanged.)
••44
Suppose that the matter (stars, gas, dust) of a particular
galaxy, of total mass M, is distributed uniformly throughout a
sphere of radius R. A star of mass m is revolving about the center
of the galaxy in a circular orbit of radius r / R. (a) Show that the
orbital speed v of the star is given by
v ! r 2GM/R3,
"
SSM
b !
z2 ' 2z
z2 ' 2z ' 2 .
r ! 3H2
8pG .
ve ! 12GM/r
and therefore that the star’s period T of revolution is
independent of r. Ignore any resistive forces. (b) Next suppose that
the galaxy’s mass is concentrated near the galactic center, within a
sphere of radius less than r. What expression then gives the star’s
orbital period?
Additional Problems
45
There is no known meson with charge quantum number
SSM
T ! 2p 2R3/GM,
Figure 44-13 Problem 48.
7
8
9
6
2
4
5
1
3
q ! '1 and strangeness S ! #1 or with q ! #1 and S ! '1.
Explain why in terms of the quark model.
46
Figure 44-12 is a hypothetical plot of the recessional speeds v of
galaxies against their distance r from us; the best-fit straight line
through the data points is shown. From this plot determine the age of
the universe,assuming that Hubble’s law holds and that Hubble’s con-
stant has always had the same value.
Figure 44-12 Problem 46.
0.40c
5.3
Speed v
Distance r (109 ly) 
47
How much energy would be released if Earth were anni-
hilated by collision with an anti-Earth?
48
A particle game. Figure 44-13 is a sketch of the tracks made by
particles in a fictional cloud chamber experiment (with a uniform
magnetic field directed perpendicular to the page), and Table 44-6
gives fictional quantum numbers associated with the particles making
the tracks. Particle A entered the chamber at the lower left, leaving
track 1 and decaying into three particles. Then the particle creating
track 6 decayed into three other particles, and the particle creating
SSM
