386
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
1
4
Fluids
14-1 FLUIDS, DENSITY, AND PRESSURE
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
14.01 Distinguish fluids from solids.
14.02 When mass is uniformly distributed, relate density to
mass and volume.
14.03 Apply the relationship between hydrostatic
pressure, force, and the surface area over which that 
force acts.
●The density r of any material is defined as the material’s
mass per unit volume:
Usually, where a material sample is much larger than atomic 
dimensions, we can write this as
●A fluid is a substance that can flow; it conforms to the
boundaries of its container because it cannot withstand
r ! m
V .
r ! 'm
'V .
shearing stress. It can, however, exert a force perpendicular
to its surface. That force is described in terms of pressure p:
in which 'F is the force acting on a surface element of
area 'A. If the force is uniform over a flat area, this can be
written as
●The force resulting from fluid pressure at a particular point
in a fluid has the same magnitude in all directions. 
p ! F
A .
p ! 'F
'A ,
Learning Objectives
Key Ideas
What Is Physics?
The physics of fluids is the basis of hydraulic engineering, a branch of engineering
that is applied in a great many fields. A nuclear engineer might study the fluid
flow in the hydraulic system of an aging nuclear reactor, while a medical engineer
might study the blood flow in the arteries of an aging patient. An environmental
engineer might be concerned about the drainage from waste sites or the efficient
irrigation of farmlands. A naval engineer might be concerned with the dangers
faced by a deep-sea diver or with the possibility of a crew escaping from a
downed submarine.An aeronautical engineer might design the hydraulic systems
controlling the wing flaps that allow a jet airplane to land. Hydraulic engineering
is also applied in many Broadway and Las Vegas shows, where huge sets are
quickly put up and brought down by hydraulic systems.
Before we can study any such application of the physics of fluids, we must
first answer the question “What is a fluid?”
What Is a Fluid?
A fluid, in contrast to a solid, is a substance that can flow. Fluids conform to the
boundaries of any container in which we put them. They do so because a fluid
cannot sustain a force that is tangential to its surface. (In the more formal
language of Module 12-3, a fluid is a substance that flows because it cannot
