1086
CHAPTER 36
DIFFRACTION
36-2 INTENSITY IN SINGLE-SLIT DIFFRACTION
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
36.08 Divide a thin slit into multiple zones of equal width
and write an expression for the phase difference of the
wavelets from adjacent zones in terms of the angle u to a
point on the viewing screen.
36.09 For single-slit diffraction, draw phasor diagrams for
the central maximum and several of the minima and maxima off
to one side, indicating the phase difference between adjacent
phasors, explaining how the net electric field is calculated, and
identifying the corresponding part of the diffraction pattern.
36.10 Describe a diffraction pattern in terms of the net electric
field at points in the pattern.
36.11 Evaluate a, the convenient connection between angle u to
a point in a diffraction pattern and the intensity I at that point.
36.12 For a given point in a diffraction pattern, at a given 
angle, calculate the intensity I in terms of the intensity 
Im at the center of the pattern.
Learning Objectives
●The intensity of the diffraction pattern at any given angle is
I(u) ! Im#
sin a
a $
2
,
u
Key Idea
where Im is the intensity at the center of the pattern and
a ! pa
l  sin u.
Intensity in Single-Slit Diffraction, Qualitatively
In Module 36-1 we saw how to find the positions of the minima and the maxima
in a single-slit diffraction pattern. Now we turn to a more general problem: find
an expression for the intensity I of the pattern as a function of u, the angular posi-
tion of a point on a viewing screen.
To do this, we divide the slit of Fig. 36-4 into N zones of equal widths 2x small
enough that we can assume each zone acts as a source of Huygens wavelets. We
wish to superimpose the wavelets arriving at an arbitrary point P on the viewing
screen, at angle u to the central axis, so that we can determine the amplitude Eu of
the electric component of the resultant wave at P.The intensity of the light at P is
then proportional to the square of that amplitude.
To find Eu, we need the phase relationships among the arriving wavelets.The
point here is that in general they have different phases because they travel different
distances to reach P.The phase difference between wavelets from adjacent zones
is given by
For point P at angle u, the path length difference between wavelets from adjacent
zones is 2x sin u.Thus, we can write the phase difference 2f between wavelets from
adjacent zones as
(36-4)
We assume that the wavelets arriving at P all have the same amplitude 2E.
To find the amplitude Eu of the resultant wave at P, we add the amplitudes 2E via
phasors. To do this, we construct a diagram of N phasors, one corresponding to
the wavelet from each zone in the slit.
Central Maximum. For point P0 at u ! 0 on the central axis of Fig. 36-4,
Eq. 36-4 tells us that the phase difference 2f between the wavelets is zero; that is,
the wavelets all arrive in phase. Figure 36-7a is the corresponding phasor dia-
gram; adjacent phasors represent wavelets from adjacent zones and are arranged
head to tail. Because there is zero phase difference between the wavelets, there is
zero angle between each pair of adjacent phasors. The amplitude Eu of the net
2f !#
2p
l $ (2x sin u).
#
phase
difference$ !#
2p
l $#
path length
difference$.
