264
CHAPTER 10
ROTATION
Are Angular Quantities Vectors?
We can describe the position, velocity, and acceleration of a single particle by
means of vectors. If the particle is confined to a straight line, however, we do not
really need vector notation. Such a particle has only two directions available to it,
and we can indicate these directions with plus and minus signs.
In the same way, a rigid body rotating about a fixed axis can rotate only
clockwise or counterclockwise as seen along the axis, and again we can select
between the two directions by means of plus and minus signs.The question arises:
“Can we treat the angular displacement, velocity, and acceleration of a rotating
body as vectors?” The answer is a qualified “yes” (see the caution below, in con-
nection with angular displacements).
Angular Velocities. Consider the angular velocity. Figure 10-6a shows a
vinyl record rotating on a turntable. The record has a constant angular speed
in the clockwise direction. We can represent its angular ve-
locity as a vector 
pointing along the axis of rotation, as in Fig. 10-6b. Here’s
how: We choose the length of this vector according to some convenient scale,
for example, with 1 cm corresponding to 10 rev/min. Then we establish a direc-
tion for the vector 
by using a right-hand rule, as Fig. 10-6c shows: Curl your
right hand about the rotating record, your fingers pointing in the direction of
rotation. Your extended thumb will then point in the direction of the angular
velocity vector. If the record were to rotate in the opposite sense, the right-
v
:
v
:
v (! 331
3 rev/min)
To evaluate the constant of integration C, we note that v !
5 rad/s at t ! 0. Substituting these values in our expression
for v yields
,
so C ! 5 rad/s.Then
.
(Answer)
(b) Obtain an expression for the angular position u(t) of the
top.
KEY IDEA
By definition, v(t) is the derivative of u(t) with respect to
time. Therefore, we can find u(t) by integrating v(t) with 
respect to time.
Calculations: Since Eq. 10-6 tells us that
du ! v dt,
we can write
(Answer)
where C/ has been evaluated by noting that u ! 2 rad at t! 0.
! 1
4t5 % 2
3t3 & 5t & 2,
! 1
4t5 % 2
3t3 & 5t & C/
u !" v dt !" (5
4t4 % 2t2 & 5) dt
v ! 5
4t4 % 2t2 & 5
5 rad/s ! 0 % 0 & C
Sample Problem 10.02
Angular velocity derived from angular acceleration
A child’s top is spun with angular acceleration
,
with t in seconds and a in radians per second-squared. At
t ! 0, the top has angular velocity 5 rad/s, and a reference
line on it is at angular position u ! 2 rad.
(a) Obtain an expression for the angular velocity v(t) of the
top.That is,find an expression that explicitly indicates how the
angular velocity depends on time. (We can tell that there is
such a dependence because the top is undergoing an angular
acceleration,which means that its angular velocity is changing.)
KEY IDEA
By definition,a(t) is the derivative of v(t) with respect to time.
Thus, we can find v(t) by integrating a(t) with respect to time.
Calculations: Equation 10-8 tells us
,
so
.
From this we find
.
v !"(5t3 % 4t) dt ! 5
4t4 % 4
2t2 & C
" dv !"a dt
dv ! a dt
a ! 5t3 % 4t
Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
