Paramagnetism
In paramagnetic materials, the spin and orbital magnetic dipole moments of the
electrons in each atom do not cancel but add vectorially to give the atom a net
(and permanent) magnetic dipole moment 
. In the absence of an external
magnetic field, these atomic dipole moments are randomly oriented, and the
net magnetic dipole moment of the material is zero. However, if a sample of the
material is placed in an external magnetic field 
, the magnetic dipole moments
tend to line up with the field, which gives the sample a net magnetic dipole
moment. This alignment with the external field is the opposite of what we saw
with diamagnetic materials.
B
:
ext
m
:
959
32-7 PARAMAGNETISM
A paramagnetic material placed in an external magnetic field 
develops a
magnetic dipole moment in the direction of 
. If the field is nonuniform, the
paramagnetic material is attracted toward a region of greater magnetic field from
a region of lesser field.
B
:
ext
B
:
ext
32-7 PARAMAGNETISM
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
32.38 For a paramagnetic sample placed in an external mag-
netic field, identify the relative orientations of the field and
the sample’s magnetic dipole moment.
32.39 For a paramagnetic sample in a nonuniform magnetic
field, describe the force on the sample and the resulting
motion.
32.40 Apply the relationship between a sample’s magnetiza-
tion M, its measured magnetic moment, and its volume.
32.41 Apply Curie’s law to relate a sample’s magnetization M
to its temperature T, its Curie constant C, and the
magnitude B of the external field.
32.42 Given a magnetization curve for a paramagnetic
sample, relate the extent of the magnetization for a given
magnetic field and temperature.
32.43 For a paramagnetic sample at a given temperature
and in a given magnetic field, compare the energy
associated with the dipole orientations and the thermal
motion.
Learning Objectives
●Paramagnetic materials have atoms with a permanent
magnetic dipole moment but the moments are randomly
oriented, with no net moment, unless the material is in an
external magnetic field 
, where the dipoles tend to align
with that field.
●The extent of alignment within a volume V is measured as
the magnetization M, given by
M ! measured magnetic moment
V
.
B
:
ext
●Complete alignment (saturation) of all N dipoles in the
volume gives a maximum value Mmax
●At low values of the ratio Bext/T,
(Curie’s law),
where T is the temperature (in kelvins) and C is a material’s
Curie constant.
●In a nonuniform external field, a paramagnetic material is
attracted to the region of greater magnetic field.
M ! C Bext
T
! Nm/V.
Key Ideas
Richard Megna/Fundamental Photographs
Liquid oxygen is suspended between the
two pole faces of a magnet because the
liquid is paramagnetic and is magnetically
attracted to the magnet.
A paramagnetic sample with N atoms would have a magnetic dipole moment
of magnitude Nm if alignment of its atomic dipoles were complete. However, ran-
dom collisions of atoms due to their thermal agitation transfer energy among the
atoms, disrupting their alignment and thus reducing the sample’s magnetic dipole
moment.
Thermal Agitation. The importance of thermal agitation may be measured
by comparing two energies. One, given by Eq. 19-24, is the mean translational ki-
netic energy 
of an atom at temperature T, where k is the Boltzmann
constant (1.38
10'23 J/K) and T is in kelvins (not Celsius degrees). The other,
&
K (! 3
2kT)
