The lens arrangements for telescopes and for microscopes are simi-
lar, but telescopes are designed to view large objects, such as galaxies,
stars, and planets, at large distances, whereas microscopes are designed
for just the opposite purpose. This difference requires that in the tele-
scope of Fig. 34-21 the second focal point of the objective F2 coincide
with the first focal point of the eyepiece F#1, whereas in the microscope
of Fig.34-20 these points are separated by the tube length s.
In Fig. 34-21a, parallel rays from a distant object strike the objec-
tive, making an angle uob with the telescope axis and forming a real, in-
verted image I at the common focal point F2, F#1.This image I acts as an
object for the eyepiece, through which an observer sees a distant (still
inverted) virtual image I#. The rays defining the image make an angle
uey with the telescope axis.
The angular magnification mu of the telescope is uey/uob. From Fig.
34-21b, for rays close to the central axis, we can write uob ! h#/fob and
uey % h#/fey,which gives us
(telescope),
where the minus sign indicates that I# is inverted. In words, the angular
magnification of a telescope is a comparison of the angle occupied by the
image the telescope produces with the angle occupied by the distant ob-
ject as seen without the telescope.
Magnification is only one of the design factors for an astronomical
telescope and is indeed easily achieved. A good telescope needs light-
gathering power, which determines how bright the image is.This is impor-
tant for viewing faint objects such as distant galaxies and is accomplished
by making the objective diameter as large as possible. A telescope also
needs resolving power, which is the ability to distinguish between two dis-
tant objects (stars, say) whose angular separation is small. Field of view is
another important design parameter. A telescope designed to look at
galaxies (which occupy a tiny field of view) is much different from one
designed to track meteors (which move over a wide field of view).
The telescope designer must also take into account the difference
between real lenses and the ideal thin lenses we have discussed. A real lens with
spherical surfaces does not form sharp images, a flaw called spherical aberration.
Also, because refraction by the two surfaces of a real lens depends on wave-
length, a real lens does not focus light of different wavelengths to the same point,
a flaw called chromatic aberration.
This brief discussion by no means exhausts the design parameters of astro-
nomical telescopes—many others are involved. We could make a similar listing
for any other high-performance optical instrument.
mu ! & fob
fey
1033
34-6 THREE PROOFS
Figure 34-21 (a) A thin-lens representation of a refract-
ing telescope. From rays that are approximately paral-
lel when they reach the objective, the objective pro-
duces a real image I of a distant source of light (the
object). (One end of the object is assumed to lie on
the central axis.) Image I, formed at the common
focal points F2 and F#1, acts as an object for the eye-
piece, which produces a virtual final image I# at a
great distance from the observer. The objective has
focal length fob; the eyepiece has focal length fey. (b)
Image I has height h# and takes up angle uob mea-
sured from the objective and angle uey measured from
the eyepiece.
fob
fey
Objective
To image I'
Eyepiece
Parallel
rays
F2, F1'
I
θ 
Parallel
rays
from
distant
object
ob
(a)
I
θ
θ
ob
(b)
h'
ey
34-6 THREE PROOFS
The Spherical Mirror Formula (Eq. 34-4)
Figure 34-22 shows a point object O placed on the central axis of a concave
spherical mirror, outside its center of curvature C. A ray from O that makes an
angle a with the axis intersects the axis at I after reflection from the mirror at a.
A ray that leaves O along the axis is reflected back along itself at c and also
passes through I. Thus, because both rays pass through that common point, I is
the image of O; it is a real image because light actually passes through it. Let us
find the image distance i.
Figure 34-22 A concave spherical mirror
forms a real point image I by reflecting
light rays from a point object O.
c
I
O
C
a
Axis
i
r
p
Mirror
α 
β 
γ 
θ θ 
(34-15)
