1368
CHAPTER 44
QUARKS, LEPTONS, AND THE BIG BANG
of the expansion, what is the resulting equation for )l/l?
If, instead, we assume that Fig. 44-15a applies and that )l is
due to a Doppler effect, then from Eq. 37-36 we have
where v is the radial velocity of galaxy A relative to Earth. (e)
Using Hubble’s law, compare this Doppler-effect result with the
cosmological-expansion result of (d) and find a value for a. From
this analysis you can see that the two results, derived with very dif-
ferent models about the red shift of the light we detect from distant
galaxies, are compatible.
Suppose that the light we detect from galaxy A has a red shift
of 
and that the expansion rate of the universe has
been constant at the current value given in the chapter. (f) Using
the result of (b), find the distance between the galaxy and Earth
when the light was emitted. Next, determine how long ago the light
was emitted by the galaxy (g) by using the result of (a) and (h) by
assuming that the red shift is a Doppler effect. (Hint: For (h), the
time is just the distance at the time of emission divided by the speed
of light, because if the red shift is just a Doppler effect, the distance
)l/l ! 0.050
)l
l
! v
c ,
does not change during the light’s travel to us. Here the two mod-
els about the red shift of the light differ in their results.) (i) At the
time of detection, what is the distance between Earth and galaxy
A? (We make the assumption that galaxy A still exists; if it ceased
to exist, humans would not know about its death until the last light
emitted by the galaxy reached Earth.)
Now suppose that the light we detect from galaxy B (Fig.44-16c)
has a red shift of 
.(j) Using the result of (b),find the dis-
tance between galaxy B and Earth when the light was emitted. (k)
Using the result of (a), find how long ago the light was emitted by
galaxy B. (1) When the light that we detect from galaxy A was emit-
ted,what was the distance between galaxy A and galaxy B?
52
Calculate the difference in mass, in kilograms, between the
muon and pion of Sample Problem 44.01.
53
What is the quark formation that makes up (a) the xi-minus
particle and (b) the anti-xi-minus particle? The particles have no
charm, bottom, or top.
54
An electron and a positron, each with a kinetic energy of
2.500 MeV, annihilate, creating two photons that travel away in
opposite directions.What is the frequency of each photon?
)l/l ! 0.080
