The key element in the equation lies in the argument of the exponential: hc/l,
which we can rewrite in a more suggestive form as hf. Equation 38-14 was the
first use of the symbol h, and the appearance of hf suggests that the energies of
the atomic oscillators in the cavity wall are quantized. However, Planck, with his
training in classical physics, simply could not believe such a result in spite of the
immediate success of his equation in fitting all experimental data.
Einstein’s Solution. No one understood Eq. 38-14 for 17 years, but then
Einstein explained it with a very simple model with two key ideas: (1) The ener-
gies of the cavity-wall atoms that are emitting the radiation are indeed quantized.
(2) The energies of the radiation in the cavity are also quantized in the form of
quanta (what we now call photons), each with energy E 5 hf. In his model he ex-
plained the processes by which atoms can emit and absorb photons and how the
atoms can be in equilibrium with the emitted and absorbed light.
Maximum Value. The wavelength lmax at which the S(l) is maximum (for a
given temperature T) can be found by taking the first derivative of Eq. 38-14 with
respect to l, setting the derivative to zero, and then solving for the wavelength.
The result is known as Wien’s law:
lmaxT ! 2898 mm ? K
(at maximum radiancy).
(38-15)
For example, in Fig. 38-8 for which T ! 2000 K, lmax ! 1.5 mm, which is greater
than the long wavelength end of the visible spectrum and is in the infrared
region, as shown. If we increase the temperature, lmax decreases and the peak in
Fig. 38-8 changes shape and shifts more into the visible range.
Radiated Power. If we integrate Eq. 38-14 over all wavelengths (for a given
temperature), we find the power per unit area of a thermal radiator. If we then
multiply by the total surface area A, we find the total radiated power P.We have
already seen the result in Eq. 18-38 (with some changes in notation):
P ! s AT 4,
(38-16)
where s (! 5.6704 3 1028 W/m2 ? K4) is the Stefan–Boltzmann constant and is
the emissivity of the radiating surface (
! 1 for an ideal blackbody radiator).
Actually, integrating Eq. 38-14 over all wavelengths is difficult. However, for a
given temperature T, wavelength l, and wavelength range )l that is small rela-
tive to l, we can approximate the power in that range by simply evaluating
S(l)A )l.
.
.
.
1166
CHAPTER 38
PHOTONS AND MATTER WAVES
38-5 ELECTRONS AND MATTER WAVES 
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
38.21 Identify that electrons (and protons and all other
elementary particles) are matter waves.
38.22 For both relativistic and nonrelativistic particles, apply
the relationships between the de Broglie wavelength,
momentum, speed, and kinetic energy.
38.23 Describe the double-slit interference pattern obtained
with particles such as electrons.
38.24 Apply the optical two-slit equations (Module 35-2) 
and diffraction equations (Module 36-1) to matter
waves.
Learning Objectives
●A moving particle such as an electron can be described as
a matter wave.
●The wavelength associated with the matter wave is the
particle’s de Broglie wavelength l ! h/p, where p is the
particle’s momentum.
●Particle: When an electron interacts with matter, the inter-
action is particle-like, occurring at a point and transferring
energy and momentum.
●Wave: When an electron is in transit, we interpret it as
being a probability wave.
Key Ideas
