601
20-4 A STATISTICAL VIEW OF ENTROPY
Probability and Entropy
In 1877, Austrian physicist Ludwig Boltzmann (the Boltzmann of Boltzmann’s
constant k) derived a relationship between the entropy S of a configuration of a
gas and the multiplicity W of that configuration.That relationship is
S # k ln W
(Boltzmann’s entropy equation).
(20-21)
This famous formula is engraved on Boltzmann’s tombstone.
It is natural that S and W should be related by a logarithmic function. The
total entropy of two systems is the sum of their separate entropies. The proba-
bility of occurrence of two independent systems is the product of their separate
probabilities. Because ln ab # ln a " ln b, the logarithm seems the logical way to
connect these quantities.
Table 20-1 displays the entropies of the configurations of the six-molecule
system of Fig. 20-17, computed using Eq. 20-21. Configuration IV, which has the
greatest multiplicity, also has the greatest entropy.
When you use Eq. 20-20 to calculate W, your calculator may signal “OVER-
FLOW” if you try to find the factorial of a number greater than a few hundred.
Instead, you can use Stirling’s approximation for ln N!:
ln N! % N(ln N) $ N
(Stirling’s approximation).
(20-22)
The Stirling of this approximation was an English mathematician and not the
Robert Stirling of engine fame.
Checkpoint 5
A box contains 1 mol of a gas. Consider two configurations: (a) each half of the box
contains half the molecules and (b) each third of the box contains one-third of the
molecules.Which configuration has more microstates?
half of the container, their (n1, n2) configuration is (N, 0).
Then, Eq. 20-20 gives their multiplicity as
Finally, with the molecules spread through the full volume,
their (n1, n2) configuration is (N/2, N/2). Then, Eq. 20-20
gives their multiplicity as
From Eq. 20-21, the initial and final entropies are
Si # k ln Wi # k ln 1 # 0
and
Sf # k ln Wf # k ln(N!) $ 2k ln[(N/2)!].
(20-23)
In writing Eq. 20-23, we have used the relation
ln a
b2 # ln a $ 2 ln b.
Wf #
N!
(N/2)! (N/2)! .
Wi #
N!
N! 0! # 1.
Sample Problem 20.06
Entropy change of free expansion using microstates
In Sample Problem 20.01, we showed that when n moles of
an ideal gas doubles its volume in a free expansion, the
entropy increase from the initial state i to the final state f is
Sf $ Si # nR ln 2. Derive this increase in entropy by using
statistical mechanics.
KEY IDEA
We can relate the entropy S of any given configuration of
the molecules in the gas to the multiplicity W of microstates
for that configuration, using Eq. 20-21 (S # k ln W).
Calculations: We are interested in two configurations: the
final configuration f (with the molecules occupying the full
volume of their container in Fig. 20-1b) and the initial con-
figuration i (with the molecules occupying the left half of
the container). Because the molecules are in a closed con-
tainer, we can calculate the multiplicity W of their mi-
crostates with Eq. 20-20. Here we have N molecules in the
n moles of the gas. Initially, with the molecules all in the left
