1195
39-3 AN ELECTRON IN A FINITE WELL
Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
39-3 AN ELECTRON IN A FINITE WELL
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
39.18 Sketch a one-dimensional finite potential well, indicating
the length and height. 
39.19 For an electron trapped in a finite well with given energy
levels, sketch the energy-level diagram, indicate the nonquan-
tized region, and compare the energies and de Broglie wave-
lengths with those of an infinite well of the same length. 
39.20 For an electron trapped in a finite well, explain (in principle)
how the wave functions for the allowed states are determined.
39.21 For an electron trapped in a finite well with a given quan-
tum number, sketch the probability density as a function of
position across the well and into the walls. 
39.22 Identify that a trapped electron can exist in only the
allowed states and relate that energy of the state to the
kinetic energy of the electron. 
39.23 Calculate the energy that an electron must absorb 
or emit to move between the allowed states or between an
allowed state and any value in the nonquantized region.
39.24 If a quantum jump involves light, apply the relationship
between the energy change and the frequency and wave-
length associated with the photon.
39.25 From a given allowed state in a finite well, calculate the
minimum energy required for the electron to escape and
the kinetic energy of the escaped electron if provided more
than that minimal energy.
39.26 Identify the emission and absorption spectra of an
electron in a one-dimensional infinite potential well, includ-
ing escaping the trap and falling into the trap.
Learning Objectives
●The wave function for an electron in a finite, one-dimensional
potential well extends into the walls, where the wave function
decreases exponentially with depth. 
●Compared to the states in an infinite well of the same size,
the states in a finite well have a limited number, longer de
Broglie wavelengths, and lower energies.
Key Ideas
We can simplify the indicated integration by changing the
variable from x to the dimensionless variable y,where
(39-16)
hence
When we change the variable, we must also change the 
integration limits (again). Equation 39-16 tells us that y ! 0
when x ! 0 and that y ! np when x ! L; thus 0 and np are
our new limits.With all these substitutions,Eq.39-15 becomes
A2 L
np "
np
0
(sin2 y) dy ! 1.
dx !
L
np dy.
y ! np
L x,
We can use integral 11 in Appendix E to evaluate the inte-
gral, obtaining the equation
Evaluating at the limits yields
thus
(Answer)
(39-17)
This result tells us that the dimension for A2, and thus for
, is an inverse length. This is appropriate because the
probability density of Eq.39-12 is a probability per unit length.
c n
2(x)
A ! A
2
L .
A2L
np
np
2
! 1;
A2L
np (
y
2 # sin 2y
4 )
0
np
! 1.
An Electron in a Finite Well
A potential energy well of infinite depth is an idealization. Figure 39-7 shows
a realizable potential energy well—one in which the potential energy of an elec-
tron outside the well is not infinitely great but has a finite positive value U0,
Figure 39-7 A finite potential energy well.The depth of the well is U0 and its width is L.As in
the infinite potential well of Fig. 39-2, the motion of the trapped electron is restricted to
the x direction.
x
U0
U
U(x)
00
L
