279
10-7 NEWTON’S SECOND LAW FOR ROTATION
10-7 NEWTON’S SECOND LAW FOR ROTATION
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
10.28 Apply Newton’s second law for rotation to relate the
net torque on a body to the body’s rotational inertia and 
rotational acceleration, all calculated relative to a specified 
rotation axis.
●The rotational analog of Newton’s second law is
tnet ! Ia,
where tnet is the net torque acting on a particle or rigid body, 
I is the rotational inertia of the particle or body about the
rotation axis, and a is the resulting angular acceleration about
that axis.
Learning Objective
Key Idea
Newton’s Second Law for Rotation
A torque can cause rotation of a rigid body, as when you use a torque to rotate
a door. Here we want to relate the net torque tnet on a rigid body to the angular
acceleration a that torque causes about a rotation axis.We do so by analogy with
Newton’s second law (Fnet ! ma) for the acceleration a of a body of mass m due
to a net force Fnet along a coordinate axis.We replace Fnet with tnet, m with I, and a
with a in radian measure, writing
tnet ! Ia
(Newton’s second law for rotation).
(10-42)
Proof of Equation 10-42
We prove Eq. 10-42 by first considering the simple situation shown in Fig. 10-17.
The rigid body there consists of a particle of mass m on one end of a massless rod
of length r.The rod can move only by rotating about its other end, around a rota-
tion axis (an axle) that is perpendicular to the plane of the page.Thus, the particle
can move only in a circular path that has the rotation axis at its center.
A force 
acts on the particle. However, because the particle can move
only along the circular path, only the tangential component Ft of the force (the
component that is tangent to the circular path) can accelerate the particle along
the path. We can relate Ft to the particle’s tangential acceleration at along the
path with Newton’s second law, writing
Ft ! mat.
The torque acting on the particle is, from Eq. 10-40,
t ! Ftr ! matr.
From Eq. 10-22 (at ! ar) we can write this as
t ! m(ar)r ! (mr 2)a.
(10-43)
The quantity in parentheses on the right is the rotational inertia of the particle
about the rotation axis (see Eq. 10-33, but here we have only a single particle).
Thus, using I for the rotational inertia, Eq. 10-43 reduces to
t ! Ia
(radian measure).
(10-44)
If more than one force is applied to the particle, Eq. 10-44 becomes
tnet ! Ia
(radian measure),
(10-45)
which we set out to prove.We can extend this equation to any rigid body rotating
about a fixed axis, because any such body can always be analyzed as an assembly
of single particles.
F
:
Figure 10-17 A simple rigid body, free to
rotate about an axis through O, consists of
a particle of mass m fastened to the end of
a rod of length r and negligible mass. An
applied force 
causes the body to rotate.
F
:
O
x
y
Rod
θ 
Rotation axis 
r
m
Fr
Ft
φ 
F
The torque due to the tangential
component of the force causes
an angular acceleration around
the rotation axis.
