137
6-3 UNIFORM CIRCULAR MOTION
Substituting our known negative lift of FL " 663.7 N and
solving for FL,90 give us
FL,90 " 6572 N % 6600 N.
(Answer)
Upside-down racing: The gravitational force is, of course,
the force to beat if there is a chance of racing upside down:
Fg " mg " (600 kg)(9.8 m/s2)
" 5880 N.
With the car upside down, the negative lift is an upward
force of 6600 N, which exceeds the downward 5880 N. Thus,
the car could run on a long ceiling provided that it moves at
about 90 m/s (" 324 km/h " 201 mi/h). However, moving
that fast while right side up on a horizontal track is danger-
ous enough, so you are not likely to see upside-down racing
except in the movies.
(b) The magnitude FL of the negative lift on a car depends
on the square of the car’s speed v2, just as the drag force
does (Eq. 6-14). Thus, the negative lift on the car here is
greater when the car travels faster, as it does on a straight
section of track. What is the magnitude of the negative lift
for a speed of 90 m/s?
KEY IDEA 
FL is proportional to v2.
Calculations: Thus we can write a ratio of the negative lift
FL,90 at v " 90 m/s to our result for the negative lift FL at v "
28.6 m/s as
FL,90
FL
"
(90 m/s)2
(28.6 m/s)2 .
of mass m as it moves at a constant speed v of 20 m/s around
a banked circular track of radius R " 190 m. (It is a normal
car, rather than a race car, which means that any vertical
force from the passing air is negligible.) If the frictional
force from the track is negligible, what bank angle u pre-
vents sliding?
KEY IDEAS
Here the track is banked so as to tilt the normal force 
on
the car toward the center of the circle (Fig. 6-11b). Thus,
now has a centripetal component of magnitude FNr, directed
inward along a radial axis r. We want to find the value of
the bank angle u such that this centripetal component
keeps the car on the circular track without need of friction.
F
:
N
F
:
N
Sample Problem 6.06
Car in banked circular turn
This problem is quite challenging in setting up but takes
only a few lines of algebra to solve. We deal with not only
uniformly circular motion but also a ramp. However, we will
not need a tilted coordinate system as with other ramps.
Instead we can take a freeze-frame of the motion and work
with simply horizontal and vertical axes. As always in this
chapter, the starting point will be to apply Newton’s second
law, but that will require us to identify the force component
that is responsible for the uniform circular motion.
Curved portions of highways are always banked (tilted)
to prevent cars from sliding off the highway. When a high-
way is dry, the frictional force between the tires and the road
surface may be enough to prevent sliding. When the high-
way is wet, however, the frictional force may be negligible,
and banking is then essential. Figure 6-11a represents a car
(b)
y
r
FNr
R
(a)
θ
FNy
θ
v
r
Car
Fg
FN
a
The toward-the-
center force is due
to the tilted track.
Track-level view 
of the forces
The gravitational force
pulls car downward.
Tilted normal force
supports car and
provides the toward-
the-center force.
Figure 6-11 (a) A car moves around a curved banked road at constant speed v. The bank angle is exaggerated for clarity. (b)
A free-body diagram for the car, assuming that friction between tires and road is zero and that the car lacks negative lift.
The radially inward component FNr of the normal force (along radial axis r) provides the necessary centripetal force and
radial acceleration.
