1155
38-2 THE PHOTOELECTRIC EFFECT 
Checkpoint 1
Rank the following radiations according to their associated photon energies, greatest
first: (a) yellow light from a sodium vapor lamp, (b) a gamma ray emitted by a
radioactive nucleus, (c) a radio wave emitted by the antenna of a commercial radio
station, (d) a microwave beam emitted by airport traffic control radar.
Next, into this we can substitute from Eq. 38-2 (E
hf),
Einstein’s proposal about the energy E of each quantum of
light (which we here call a photon in modern language).We
can then write the absorption rate as 
Using Eq. 38-1 ( f
c/l) to substitute for f and then enter-
ing known data, we obtain
(Answer)
! 2.97 $ 10 20 photons/s.
!
(100 W)(590 $ 10 #9 m)
(6.63 $ 10#34 J"s)(2.998 $ 10 8 m/s)
R ! Pemitl
hc
!
R ! Remit ! Pemit
hf .
!
Sample Problem 38.01
Emission and absorption of light as photons
A sodium vapor lamp is placed at the center of a large
sphere that absorbs all the light reaching it. The rate at
which the lamp emits energy is 100 W; assume that the
emission is entirely at a wavelength of 590 nm.At what rate
are photons absorbed by the sphere?
KEY IDEAS
The light is emitted and absorbed as photons. We assume
that all the light emitted by the lamp reaches (and thus is
absorbed by) the sphere. So, the rate R at which photons are
absorbed by the sphere is equal to the rate Remit at which
photons are emitted by the lamp.
Calculations: That rate is
Remit !
rate of energy emission
energy per emitted photon ! Pemit
E .
Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
38-2 THE PHOTOELECTRIC EFFECT
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
38.03 Make a simple and basic sketch of a photoelectric
experiment, showing the incident light, the metal plate, the
emitted electrons (photoelectrons), and the collector cup.
38.04 Explain the problems physicists had with the photo-
electric effect prior to Einstein and the historical impor-
tance of Einstein’s explanation of the effect.
38.05 Identify a stopping potential Vstop and relate it to the
maximum kinetic energy Kmax of escaping photoelectrons.
38.06 For a photoelectric setup, apply the relationships be-
tween the frequency and wavelength of the incident light,
the maximum kinetic energy Kmax of the photoelectrons,
the work function , and the stopping potential Vstop.
38.07 For a photoelectric setup, sketch a graph of the stop-
ping potential Vstop versus the frequency of the light, identi-
fying the cutoff frequency f0 and relating the slope to the
Planck constant h and the elementary charge e.
%
Learning Objectives
●When light of high enough frequency illuminates a metal
surface, electrons can gain enough energy to escape the
metal by absorbing photons in the illumination, in what is
called the photoelectric effect.
●The conservation of energy in such an absorption and
escape is written as
hf
Kmax
,
%
&
!
where hf is the energy of the absorbed photon, Kmax is the
kinetic energy of the most energetic of the escaping elec-
trons, and 
(called the work function) is the least energy
required by an electron to escape the electric forces holding
electrons in the metal.
●If hf
, electrons barely escape but have no kinetic
energy and the frequency is called the cutoff frequency f0.
●If hf
, electrons cannot escape.
'%
%
!
%
Key Ideas
