1001
PROBLEMS
••13
Sunlight just outside Earth’s atmosphere has an intensity of
1.40 kW/m2. Calculate (a) Em and (b) Bm for sunlight there, assum-
ing it to be a plane wave.
••14
An isotropic point source emits light at wavelength
500 nm, at the rate of 200 W. A light detector is positioned 400 m
from the source. What is the maximum rate )B/)t at which the
magnetic component of the light changes with time at the detec-
tor’s location?
••15
An airplane flying at a distance of 10 km from a radio trans-
mitter receives a signal of intensity 10 mW/m2. What is the ampli-
tude of the (a) electric and (b) magnetic component of the signal at
the airplane? (c) If the transmitter radiates uniformly over a hemi-
sphere, what is the transmission power?
••16
Frank D. Drake, an investigator in the SETI (Search for
Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence) program, once said that the large
radio telescope in Arecibo, Puerto Rico (Fig. 33-36), “can detect a
signal which lays down on the entire surface of the earth a power
of only one picowatt.” (a) What is the power that would be
received by the Arecibo antenna for such a signal? The antenna di-
ameter is 300 m. (b) What would be the power of an isotropic
source at the center of our galaxy that could provide such a signal?
The galactic center is 2.2 ( 104 ly away.A light-year is the distance
light travels in one year.
Tutoring problem available (at instructor’s discretion) in WileyPLUS and WebAssign
SSM
Worked-out solution available in Student Solutions Manual      
• – •••
Number of dots indicates level of problem difficulty
Additional information available in The Flying Circus of Physics and at flyingcircusofphysics.com
WWW Worked-out solution is at
ILW
Interactive solution is at 
http://www.wiley.com/college/halliday
Problems
Module 33-1
Electromagnetic Waves
•1
A certain helium–neon laser emits red light in a narrow band
of wavelengths centered at 632.8 nm and with a “wavelength
width” (such as on the scale of Fig. 33-1) of 0.0100 nm. What is the
corresponding “frequency width” for the emission?
•2
Project Seafarer was an ambitious program to construct an
enormous antenna, buried underground on a site about 10 000 km2
in area. Its purpose was to transmit signals to submarines while they
were deeply submerged. If the effective wavelength were 1.0 ( 104
Earth radii, what would be the (a) frequency and (b) period of the
radiations emitted? Ordinarily, electromagnetic radiations do not
penetrate very far into conductors such as seawater, and so normal
signals cannot reach the submarines.
•3
From Fig.33-2,approximate the (a) smaller and (b) larger wave-
length at which the eye of a standard observer has half the eye’s
maximum sensitivity. What are the (c) wavelength, (d) frequency,
and (e) period of the light at which the eye is the most sensitive?
•4
About how far apart must you hold your hands for them to
be separated by 1.0 nano-light-second (the distance light travels
in 1.0 ns)?
•5
What inductance must be connected to a 17 pF capacitor
in an oscillator capable of generating 550 nm (i.e., visible) electro-
magnetic waves? Comment on your answer.
•6
What is the wavelength of the electromagnetic wave emitted
by the oscillator–antenna system of Fig. 33-3 if L ! 0.253 mH and
C ! 25.0 pF?
Module 33-2
Energy Transport and the Poynting Vector
•7
What is the intensity of a traveling plane electromagnetic
wave if Bm is 1.0 ( 10&4 T?
•8
Assume (unrealistically) that a TV station acts as a point
source broadcasting isotropically at 1.0 MW. What is the intensity
of the transmitted signal reaching Proxima Centauri, the star near-
est our solar system, 4.3 ly away? (An alien civilization at that dis-
tance might be able to watch X Files.) A light-year (ly) is the dis-
tance light travels in one year.
•9
Some neodymium–glass lasers can provide 100 TW of
power in 1.0 ns pulses at a wavelength of 0.26 mm. How much en-
ergy is contained in a single pulse?
•10
A plane electromagnetic wave has a maximum electric field
magnitude of 3.20 ( 10&4 V/m. Find the magnetic field amplitude.
•11
A plane electromagnetic wave traveling in the positive
direction of an x axis in vacuum has components Ex
Ey
0 and
Ez ! (2.0 V/m) cos[(p ( 1015 s&1)(t & x/c)]. (a) What is the ampli-
tude of the magnetic field component? (b) Parallel to which axis
does the magnetic field oscillate? (c) When the electric field com-
ponent is in the positive direction of the z axis at a certain point P,
what is the direction of the magnetic field component there?
•12
In a plane radio wave the maximum value of the electric field
component is 5.00 V/m. Calculate (a) the maximum value of the
magnetic field component and (b) the wave intensity.
!
!
ILW
ILW
SSM
Figure 33-36 Problem 16. Radio telescope at Arecibo.
Courtesy SRI International, USRA, UMET
••17
The maximum electric field 10 m from an isotropic point
source of light is 2.0 V/m. What are
(a) the maximum value of the mag-
netic field and (b) the average in-
tensity of the light there? (c) What
is the power of the source?
••18
The intensity I of light from
an isotropic point source is deter-
mined as a function of distance r
from the source. Figure 33-37 gives
I (W/m2)
Is
0
r s
–2
r –2 (m–2)
Figure 33-37 Problem 18.
