Conservation of Mechanical Energy
The mechanical energy Emec of a system is the sum of its potential energy U and
the kinetic energy K of the objects within it:
Emec ! K " U
(mechanical energy).
(8-12)
In this module, we examine what happens to this mechanical energy when only
conservative forces cause energy transfers within the system—that is, when
frictional and drag forces do not act on the objects in the system. Also, we shall
assume that the system is isolated from its environment; that is, no external force
from an object outside the system causes energy changes inside the system.
When a conservative force does work W on an object within the system, that
force transfers energy between kinetic energy K of the object and potential
energy U of the system. From Eq. 7-10, the change %K in kinetic energy is
%K ! W
(8-13)
and from Eq. 8-1, the change %U in potential energy is
%U ! $W.
(8-14)
Combining Eqs. 8-13 and 8-14, we find that
%K ! $%U.
(8-15)
In words, one of these energies increases exactly as much as the other decreases.
We can rewrite Eq. 8-15 as
K2 $ K1 ! $(U2 $ U1),
(8-16)
where the subscripts refer to two different instants and thus to two different
arrangements of the objects in the system. Rearranging Eq. 8-16 yields
K2 " U2 ! K1 " U1
(conservation of mechanical energy).
(8-17)
In words, this equation says:
#
the sum of K and U for
any state of a system $ !#
the sum of K and U for
any other state of the system$,
184
CHAPTER 8
POTENTIAL ENERGY AND CONSERVATION OF ENERGY
8-2 CONSERVATION OF MECHANICAL ENERGY
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
8.05 After first clearly defining which objects form a system,
identify that the mechanical energy of the system is the
sum of the kinetic energies and potential energies of those
objects.
8.06 For an isolated system in which only conservative forces
act, apply the conservation of mechanical energy to relate
the initial potential and kinetic energies to the potential and
kinetic energies at a later instant.
Learning Objectives
Key Ideas
●The mechanical energy Emec of a system is the sum of its 
kinetic energy K and potential energy U:
Emec ! K " U.
●An isolated system is one in which no external force causes
energy changes. If only conservative forces do work within
an isolated system, then the mechanical energy Emec of the
system cannot change. This principle of conservation of 
mechanical energy is written as
K2 " U2 ! K1 " U1,
in which the subscripts refer to different instants during an
energy transfer process. This conservation principle can also
be written as
%Emec ! %K " %U ! 0.
©AP/Wide World Photos
In olden days, a person would be tossed
via a blanket to be able to see farther
over the flat terrain. Nowadays, it is
done just for fun. During the ascent of
the person in the photograph, energy is
transferred from kinetic energy to gravita-
tional potential energy. The maximum
height is reached when that transfer is
complete. Then the transfer is reversed
during the fall.
