Current, as defined by Eq. 26-1, is a scalar because both charge and time in
that equation are scalars. Yet, as in Fig. 26-1b, we often represent a current with
an arrow to indicate that charge is moving. Such arrows are not vectors, however,
and they do not require vector addition. Figure 26-3a shows a conductor with
current i0 splitting at a junction into two branches. Because charge is conserved,
the magnitudes of the currents in the branches must add to yield the magnitude
of the current in the original conductor, so that
i0 ! i1 % i2.
(26-3)
As Fig. 26-3b suggests, bending or reorienting the wires in space does not change
the validity of Eq. 26-3. Current arrows show only a direction (or sense) of flow
along a conductor, not a direction in space.
The Directions of Currents
In Fig. 26-1b we drew the current arrows in the direction in which positively
charged particles would be forced to move through the loop by the electric field.
Such positive charge carriers, as they are often called, would move away from the
positive battery terminal and toward the negative terminal. Actually, the charge
carriers in the copper loop of Fig. 26-1b are electrons and thus are negatively
charged.The electric field forces them to move in the direction opposite the current
arrows, from the negative terminal to the positive terminal. For historical reasons,
however,we use the following convention:
747
26-1 ELECTRIC CURRENT
Figure 26-3 The relation i0
i1
i2 is true at
junction a no matter what the orientation
in space of the three wires. Currents are
scalars, not vectors.
%
!
i 0
a
i 1
i 2
(a)
(b)
a
i 2
i 1
i 0
The current into the
junction must equal
the current out
(charge is conserved).
Checkpoint 1
The figure here shows a portion of a circuit.
What are the magnitude and direction of the
current i in the lower right-hand wire?
A current arrow is drawn in the direction in which positive charge carriers would
move, even if the actual charge carriers are negative and move in the opposite
direction.
1 A 
2 A 
3 A 
4 A 
2 A 
2 A 
i
We can use this convention because in most situations, the assumed motion
of positive charge carriers in one direction has the same effect as the actual
motion of negative charge carriers in the opposite direction. (When the effect is
not the same, we shall drop the convention and describe the actual motion.)
Calculations: We can write the current in terms of the num-
ber of molecules that pass through such a plane per second as
or
i ! (e)(10) dN
dt .
i ! #
charge
per
electron$#
electrons
per
molecule$#
molecules
per
second $
Sample Problem 26.01
Current is the rate at which charge passes a point
Water flows through a garden hose at a volume flow rate
dV/dt of 450 cm3/s. What is the current of negative charge?
KEY IDEAS
The current i of negative charge is due to the electrons in
the water molecules moving through the hose.The current is
the rate at which that negative charge passes through any
plane that cuts completely across the hose.
