690
CHAPTER 24
ELECTRIC POTENTIAL
Equipotential Surfaces
Adjacent points that have the same electric potential form an equipotential
surface, which can be either an imaginary surface or a real, physical surface. No
net work W is done on a charged particle by an electric field when the particle
moves between two points i and f on the same equipotential surface.This follows
from Eq. 24-6, which tells us that W must be zero if Vf $ Vi. Because of the path
independence of work (and thus of potential energy and potential), W $ 0 for
any path connecting points i and f on a given equipotential surface regardless of
whether that path lies entirely on that surface.
Figure 24-4 shows a family of equipotential surfaces associated with the elec-
tric field due to some distribution of charges. The work done by the electric field
on a charged particle as the particle moves from one end to the other of paths
24-2 EQUIPOTENTIAL SURFACES AND THE ELECTRIC FIELD
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
24.09 Identify an equipotential surface and describe how it is
related to the direction of the associated electric field.
24.10 Given an electric field as a function of position, calcu-
late the change in potential !V from an initial point to a
final point by choosing a path between the points and
integrating the dot product of the field 
and a length
element 
along the path.
ds:
E
:
24.11 For a uniform electric field, relate the field magnitude
E and the separation !x and potential difference !V
between adjacent equipotential lines.
24.12 Given a graph of electric field E versus position along
an axis, calculate the change in potential !V from an initial
point to a final point by graphical integration.
24.13 Explain the use of a zero-potential location.
Learning Objectives
●The points on an equipotential surface all have the same
electric potential. The work done on a test charge in moving it
from one such surface to another is independent of the loca-
tions of the initial and final points on these surfaces and of the
path that joins the points. The electric field 
is always directed
perpendicularly to corresponding equipotential surfaces.
●The electric potential difference between two points i and f is
where the integral is taken over any path connecting the
points. If the integration is difficult along any particular path,
Vf ' Vi $ '"
f
i
E
: " ds:,
E
:
we can choose a different path along which the integration
might be easier. 
●If we choose Vi $ 0, we have, for the potential at a particu-
lar point,
●In a uniform field of magnitude E, the change in potential
from a higher equipotential surface to a lower one, separated
by distance !x, is
!V $ 'E !x.
V $ '"
f
i
E
: " ds:.
Key Ideas
I
II
III
IV
V1
V2
V3
V4
Equal work is done along
these paths between the
same surfaces.
No work is done along
this path on an
equipotential surface.
No work is done along this path 
that returns to the same surface.
Figure 24-4 Portions of four equipotential
surfaces at electric potentials V1 $ 100 V,
V2 $ 80 V, V3 $ 60 V, and V4 $ 40 V. Four
paths along which a test charge may move
are shown.Two electric field lines are also
indicated.
