Checkpoint 1
The figure shows three paths connecting points a
and b.A single force 
does the indicated work on
a particle moving along each path in the indicated
direction. On the basis of this information, is force
conservative?
F
:
F
:
on the tomato slows it, stops it, and then causes it to fall back down. When the
tomato returns to the launch point, it again has speed v0 and kinetic energy 
Thus, the gravitational force transfers as much energy from the tomato dur-
ing the ascent as it transfers to the tomato during the descent back to the launch
point. The net work done on the tomato by the gravitational force during the
round trip is zero.
An important result of the closed-path test is that:
1
2 mv0
2.
180
CHAPTER 8
POTENTIAL ENERGY AND CONSERVATION OF ENERGY
b
a
1
2
(a)
b
a
1
2
(b)
The force is 
conservative. Any 
choice of path 
between the points 
gives the same
amount of work.
And a round trip 
gives a total work 
of zero.
Figure 8-4 (a) As a conservative force acts
on it, a particle can move from point a to
point b along either path 1 or path 2.
(b) The particle moves in a round trip,
from point a to point b along path 1 and
then back to point a along path 2.
a
b
–60 J
60 J
60 J
The work done by a conservative force on a particle moving between two points
does not depend on the path taken by the particle.
For example, suppose that a particle moves from point a to point b in Fig. 8-4a
along either path 1 or path 2. If only a conservative force acts on the particle, then
the work done on the particle is the same along the two paths. In symbols, we can
write this result as
Wab,1 ! Wab,2,
(8-2)
where the subscript ab indicates the initial and final points, respectively, and the
subscripts 1 and 2 indicate the path.
This result is powerful because it allows us to simplify difficult problems
when only a conservative force is involved. Suppose you need to calculate the
work done by a conservative force along a given path between two points, and
the calculation is difficult or even impossible without additional information.
You can find the work by substituting some other path between those two points
for which the calculation is easier and possible.
Proof of Equation 8-2
Figure 8-4b shows an arbitrary round trip for a particle that is acted upon by a single
force. The particle moves from an initial point a to point b along path 1 and then
back to point a along path 2. The force does work on the particle as the particle
moves along each path. Without worrying about where positive work is done and
where negative work is done, let us just represent the work done from a to b along
path 1 as Wab,1 and the work done from b back to a along path 2 as Wba,2. If the force
is conservative,then the net work done during the round trip must be zero:
Wab,1 " Wba,2 ! 0,
and thus
Wab,1 ! $Wba,2.
(8-3)
In words, the work done along the outward path must be the negative of the work
done along the path back.
Let us now consider the work Wab,2 done on the particle by the force when
the particle moves from a to b along path 2, as indicated in Fig. 8-4a. If the force is
conservative, that work is the negative of Wba,2:
Wab,2 ! $Wba,2.
(8-4)
Substituting Wab,2 for $Wba,2 in Eq. 8-3, we obtain
Wab,1 ! Wab,2,
which is what we set out to prove.
