932
CHAPTER 31
ELECTROMAGNETIC OSCILLATIONS AND ALTERNATING CURRENT
With switch S open, no energy is transferred from the generator to the rest of
the circuit, but when we close S to connect the secondary to the resistive load R,
energy is transferred. (In general, the load would also contain inductive and
capacitive elements, but here we consider just resistance R.) Here is the process:
1. An alternating current Is appears in the secondary circuit, with corresponding
energy dissipation rate 
in the resistive load.
2. This current produces its own alternating magnetic flux in the iron core, and
this flux induces an opposing emf in the primary windings.
3. The voltage Vp of the primary, however, cannot change in response to this
opposing emf because it must always be equal to the emf # that is provided by
the generator; closing switch S cannot change this fact.
4. To maintain Vp, the generator now produces (in addition to Imag) an alternat-
ing current Ip in the primary circuit; the magnitude and phase constant of
Ip are just those required for the emf induced by Ip in the primary to exactly
cancel the emf induced there by Is. Because the phase constant of Ip is not 90°
like that of Imag, this current Ip can transfer energy to the primary.
Energy Transfers. We want to relate Is to Ip. However, rather than analyze the
foregoing complex process in detail, let us just apply the principle of conservation
of energy.The rate at which the generator transfers energy to the primary is equal
to IpVp.The rate at which the primary then transfers energy to the secondary (via
the alternating magnetic field linking the two coils) is IsVs. Because we assume
that no energy is lost along the way,conservation of energy requires that
IpVp ! IsVs.
Substituting for Vs from Eq. 31-79, we find that
(transformation of currents).
(31-80)
This equation tells us that the current Is in the secondary can differ from the
current Ip in the primary, depending on the turns ratio Np/Ns.
Current Ip appears in the primary circuit because of the resistive load R in
the secondary circuit. To find Ip, we substitute Is ! Vs/R into Eq. 31-80 and then
we substitute for Vs from Eq. 31-79.We find
(31-81)
This equation has the form Ip ! Vp/Req, where equivalent resistance Req is
(31-82)
This Req is the value of the load resistance as “seen” by the generator; the genera-
tor produces the current Ip and voltage Vp as if the generator were connected to a
resistance Req.
Impedance Matching
Equation 31-82 suggests still another function for the transformer. For maximum
transfer of energy from an emf device to a resistive load, the resistance of the emf
device must equal the resistance of the load. The same relation holds for ac
circuits except that the impedance (rather than just the resistance) of the genera-
tor must equal that of the load. Often this condition is not met. For example, in
a music-playing system, the amplifier has high impedance and the speaker set has
low impedance. We can match the impedances of the two devices by coupling
them through a transformer that has a suitable turns ratio Np/Ns.
Req !#
Np
Ns $
2
R.
Ip ! 1
R #
Ns
Np $
2
Vp.
Is ! Ip
Np
Ns
I s
2R (! Vs
2/R)
