1279
42-2 SOME NUCLEAR PROPERTIES
Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
(Answer)
This distance is considerably larger than the sum of the radii
of the gold nucleus and the alpha particle. Thus, this alpha
particle reverses its motion (Fig. 42-4d) without ever actu-
ally “touching” the gold nucleus.
!  4.29 " 10#14 m.
!
(2 " 79)(1.60 " 10#19 C)2
4p50(5.30 MeV)(1.60 " 10#13 J/MeV)
d ! (2e)(79e)
4p´0Ka
To find d, we conserve the total mechanical energy between
the initial state i and this later state f, writing
Ki' Ui ! Kf ' Uf
and
(We are assuming that the alpha particle is not affected by
the force holding the nucleus together, which acts over only
a short distance.) Solving for d and then substituting for the
charges and initial kinetic energy lead to
Ki ' 0 ! 0 '
1
4p´0
qaqAu
d
.
42-2 SOME NUCLEAR PROPERTIES
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
42.03 Identify nuclides, atomic number (or proton number),
neutron number, mass number, nucleon, isotope, disinte-
gration, neutron excess, isobar, zone of stable nuclei, and
island of stability, and explain the symbols used for nuclei
(such as 197Au).
42.04 Sketch a graph of proton number versus neutron
number and identify the approximate location of the
stable nuclei, the proton-rich nuclei, and the neutron-rich
nuclei.
42.05 For spherical nuclei, apply the relationship between
radius and mass number and calculate the nuclear density.
42.06 Work with masses in atomic mass units, relate the
mass number and the approximate nuclear mass, and
convert between mass units and energy.
42.07 Calculate mass excess.
42.08 For a given nucleus, calculate the binding energy )Ebe
and the binding energy per nucleon )Eben, and explain the
meaning of each term.
42.09 Sketch a graph of the binding energy per nucleon ver-
sus mass number, indicating the nuclei that are the most
tightly bound, those that can undergo fission with a release
of energy, and those that can undergo fusion with a re-
lease of energy.
42.10 Identify the force that holds nucleons together.
●Different types of nuclei are called nuclides. Each is charac-
terized by an atomic number Z (the number of protons), a
neutron number N, and a mass number A (the total number
of nucleons—protons and neutrons). Thus, 
. A
nuclide is represented with a symbol such as 197Au or 197
79 Au,
where the chemical symbol carries a superscript with the
value of A and (possibly) a subscript with the value of Z.
●Nuclides with the same atomic number but different neu-
tron numbers are isotopes of one another.
●Nuclei have a mean radius r given by
where
●Atomic masses are often reported in terms of mass excess
where M is the actual mass of an atom in atomic mass units
and A is the mass number for that atom’s nucleus.
) ! M # A,
r0 % 1.2 fm.
r ! r0A1/3
A ! Z ' N
●The binding energy of a nucleus is the difference
where 
is the total mass energy of the individual protons
'(mc2)
)Ebe ! '(mc2) # Mc2,
Learning Objectives
Key Ideas
and neutrons. The binding energy of a nucleus is the amount
of energy needed to break the nucleus into its constituent
parts (and is not an energy that resides in the nucleus).
●The binding energy per nucleon is
●The energy equivalent of one mass unit (u) is 931.494 013 MeV.
●A plot of the binding energy per nucleon )Eben versus mass
number A shows that middle-mass nuclides are the most
stable and that energy can be released both by fission of
high-mass nuclei and by fusion of low-mass nuclei.
)Eben ! )Ebe
A
.
