922
CHAPTER 31
ELECTROMAGNETIC OSCILLATIONS AND ALTERNATING CURRENT
Figure 31-14 (a) A phasor representing the
alternating current in the driven RLC cir-
cuit of Fig. 31-7 at time t.The amplitude I,
the instantaneous value i, and the phase
(vdt ' f) are shown. (b) Phasors repre-
senting the voltages across the inductor,
resistor, and capacitor, oriented with re-
spect to the current phasor in (a). (c) A
phasor representing the alternating emf
that drives the current of (a). (d) The emf
phasor is equal to the vector sum of the
three voltage phasors of (b). Here, voltage
phasors VL and VC have been added vecto-
rially to yield their net phasor (VL ' VC).
φ
(a)
 – 
ω
i
I
dt
vR
(b)
vL
vC
VL
VR
VC
φ
 – 
ωdt
This is ahead
of I by 90º.
This is in
phase with I.
This is behind
I by 90º.
(c)
m
ωdt
(d)
VL – VC
VR
φ
ωdt
m
φ
 – 
ωdt
This   is the angle
between I and the
driving emf.
φ
The Current Amplitude
We start with Fig. 31-14a, which shows the phasor representing the current of
Eq. 31-56 at an arbitrary time t. The length of the phasor is the current ampli-
tude I, the projection of the phasor on the vertical axis is the current i at time t, and
the angle of rotation of the phasor is the phase vdt ' f of the current at time t.
Figure 31-14b shows the phasors representing the voltages across R, L, and C
at the same time t. Each phasor is oriented relative to the angle of rotation of
current phasor I in Fig. 31-14a, based on the information in Table 31-2:
Resistor: Here current and voltage are in phase; so the angle of rotation of volt-
age phasor VR is the same as that of phasor I.
Capacitor: Here current leads voltage by 90°; so the angle of rotation of voltage
phasor VC is 90+ less than that of phasor I.
Inductor: Here current lags voltage by 90°; so the angle of rotation of voltage
phasor vL is 90+ greater than that of phasor I.
Figure 31-14b also shows the instantaneous voltages vR, vC, and vL across R, C,
and L at time t; those voltages are the projections of the corresponding phasors
on the vertical axis of the figure.
Figure 31-14c shows the phasor representing the applied emf of Eq. 31-55.
The length of the phasor is the emf amplitude #m, the projection of the phasor
on the vertical axis is the emf # at time t, and the angle of rotation of the phasor is
the phase vdt of the emf at time t.
From the loop rule we know that at any instant the sum of the voltages vR, vC,
and vL is equal to the applied emf #:
# ! vR $ vC $ vL.
(31-57)
Thus, at time t the projection # in Fig. 31-14c is equal to the algebraic sum of the
projections vR, vC, and vL in Fig. 31-14b. In fact, as the phasors rotate together, this
equality always holds. This means that phasor #m in Fig. 31-14c must be equal to
the vector sum of the three voltage phasors VR, VC, and VL in Fig. 31-14b.
That requirement is indicated in Fig. 31-14d, where phasor #m is drawn as the
sum of phasors VR, VL, and VC. Because phasors VL and VC have opposite direc-
tions in the figure, we simplify the vector sum by first combining VL and VC to
form the single phasor VL ' VC. Then we combine that single phasor with VR to
find the net phasor.Again, the net phasor must coincide with phasor #m, as shown.
