724
CHAPTER 25
CAPACITANCE
When we analyze a circuit of capacitors in parallel, we can simplify it with
this mental replacement:
Capacitors in Parallel and in Series
When there is a combination of capacitors in a circuit, we can sometimes replace
that combination with an equivalent capacitor—that is, a single capacitor that
has the same capacitance as the actual combination of capacitors. With such a
replacement, we can simplify the circuit, affording easier solutions for unknown
quantities of the circuit. Here we discuss two basic combinations of capacitors
that allow such a replacement.
Capacitors in Parallel
Figure 25-8a shows an electric circuit in which three capacitors are connected in par-
allel to battery B. This description has little to do with how the capacitor plates are
drawn. Rather,“in parallel” means that the capacitors are directly wired together at
one plate and directly wired together at the other plate, and that the same potential
difference V is applied across the two groups of wired-together plates.Thus, each ca-
pacitor has the same potential difference V, which produces charge on the capacitor.
(In Fig.25-8a,the applied potential V is maintained by the battery.) In general:
Figure 25-8 (a) Three capacitors connected
in parallel to battery B.The battery main-
tains potential difference V across its termi-
nals and thus across each capacitor. (b) The
equivalent capacitor, with capacitance Ceq,
replaces the parallel combination.
V
+q3
V
–
+
Terminal
C3
B
(a)
–q
+q
V
+
–
(b)
Ceq
B
Terminal
–q3
+q2
–q2 C2
V
+q1
–q1 C1
V
Parallel capacitors and
their equivalent have
the same V (“par-V”).
When a potential difference V is applied across several capacitors connected in
parallel,that potential difference V is applied across each capacitor.The total
charge q stored on the capacitors is the sum of the charges stored on all the capacitors.
Capacitors connected in parallel can be replaced with an equivalent capacitor that has
the same total charge q and the same potential difference V as the actual capacitors.
(You might remember this result with the nonsense word “par-V,” which is close to
“party,” to mean “capacitors in parallel have the same V.”) Figure 25-8b shows the
equivalent capacitor (with equivalent capacitance Ceq) that has replaced the three ca-
pacitors (with actual capacitances C1,C2,and C3) of Fig.25-8a.
To derive an expression for Ceq in Fig. 25-8b, we first use Eq. 25-1 to find the
charge on each actual capacitor:
q1 ! C1V,
q2 ! C2V,
and
q3 ! C3V.
The total charge on the parallel combination of Fig. 25-8a is then
q ! q1 % q2 % q3 ! (C1 % C2 % C3)V.
The equivalent capacitance, with the same total charge q and applied potential
difference V as the combination, is then
a result that we can easily extend to any number n of capacitors, as
(n capacitors in parallel).
(25-19)
Thus, to find the equivalent capacitance of a parallel combination, we simply add
the individual capacitances.
Capacitors in Series
Figure 25-9a shows three capacitors connected in series to battery B.This description
has little to do with how the capacitors are drawn. Rather,“in series” means that the
capacitors are wired serially, one after the other, and that a potential difference V is
Ceq ! '
n
j!1
Cj
Ceq ! q
V ! C1 % C2 % C3,
