1
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
1
Measurement
1-1 MEASURING THINGS, INCLUDING LENGTHS
Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
1.01 Identify the base quantities in the SI system.
1.02 Name the most frequently used prefixes for
SI units.
1.03 Change units (here for length, area, and volume) by 
using chain-link conversions.
1.04 Explain that the meter is defined in terms of the speed of
light in vacuum.
Key Ideas
●Physics is based on measurement of physical quantities.
Certain physical quantities have been chosen as base quanti-
ties (such as length, time, and mass); each has been defined in
terms of a standard and given a unit of measure (such as meter,
second, and kilogram). Other physical quantities are defined in
terms of the base quantities and their standards and units.
●The unit system emphasized in this book is the International
System of Units (SI). The three physical quantities displayed
in Table 1-1 are used in the early chapters. Standards, which
must be both accessible and invariable, have been estab-
lished for these base quantities by international agreement.
These standards are used in all physical measurement, for
both the base quantities and the quantities derived from
them. Scientific notation and the prefixes of Table 1-2 are
used to simplify measurement notation.
●Conversion of units may be performed by using chain-link
conversions in which the original data are multiplied succes-
sively by conversion factors written as unity and the units are
manipulated like algebraic quantities until only the desired
units remain.
●The meter is defined as the distance traveled by light 
during a precisely specified time interval.
What Is Physics?
Science and engineering are based on measurements and comparisons. Thus, we
need rules about how things are measured and compared, and we need
experiments to establish the units for those measurements and comparisons. One
purpose of physics (and engineering) is to design and conduct those experiments.
For example, physicists strive to develop clocks of extreme accuracy so that any
time or time interval can be precisely determined and compared.You may wonder
whether such accuracy is actually needed or worth the effort.Here is one example of
the worth: Without clocks of extreme accuracy, the Global Positioning System
(GPS) that is now vital to worldwide navigation would be useless.
Measuring Things
We discover physics by learning how to measure the quantities involved in
physics. Among these quantities are length, time, mass, temperature, pressure,
and electric current.
We measure each physical quantity in its own units, by comparison with a
standard. The unit is a unique name we assign to measures of that quantity—for
example, meter (m) for the quantity length. The standard corresponds to exactly
1.0 unit of the quantity.As you will see, the standard for length, which corresponds
