946
CHAPTER 32
MAXWELL’S EQUATIONS; MAGNETISM OF MATTER
loop in the electric field is not the full area pr 2 of the loop.
Rather, A is only the plate area pR2.
Substituting pR2 for A in Eq. 32-7 and solving the result
for B give us, for r 4 R,
(Answer)
(32-9)
This equation tells us that, outside the capacitor, B
decreases with increased radial distance r, from a maximum
value at the plate edges (where r ! R). By substituting r !
R into Eqs. 32-8 and 32-9, you can show that these equations
are consistent; that is, they give the same maximum value of
B at the plate radius.
The magnitude of the induced magnetic field calculated in
(b) is so small that it can scarcely be measured with simple ap-
paratus.This is in sharp contrast to the magnitudes of induced
electric fields (Faraday’s law), which can be measured easily.
This experimental difference exists partly because induced
emfs can easily be multiplied by using a coil of many turns. No
technique of comparable simplicity exists for multiplying in-
duced magnetic fields. In any case, the experiment suggested
by this sample problem has been done,and the presence of the
induced magnetic fields has been verified quantitatively.
B ! m0´0R2
2r
dE
dt .
This equation tells us that, inside the capacitor, B increases
linearly with increased radial distance r, from 0 at the cen-
tral axis to a maximum value at plate radius R.
(b) Evaluate the field magnitude B for r ! R/5 ! 11.0 mm
and dE/dt ! 1.50 & 1012 V/m(s.
Calculation: From the answer to (a), we have
(Answer)
(c) Derive an expression for the induced magnetic field for
the case r 4 R.
Calculation: Our procedure is the same as in (a) except we
now use an Amperian loop with a radius r that is greater
than the plate radius R, to evaluate B outside the capacitor.
Evaluating the left and right sides of Eq. 32-6 again leads to
Eq. 32-7. However, we then need this subtle point:The elec-
tric field exists only between the plates, not outside the
plates. Thus, the area A that is encircled by the Amperian
! 9.18 & 10'8 T.
& (11.0 & 10'3 m)(1.50 & 1012 V/m ( s)
! 1
2(4p & 10'7 T ( m/A)(8.85 & 10'12 C2/N ( m2)
B ! 1
2 m0´0r dE
dt
Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
32-3 DISPLACEMENT CURRENT
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
32.08 Identify that in the Ampere–Maxwell law, the contribution
to the induced magnetic field by the changing electric flux
can be attributed to a fictitious current (“displacement cur-
rent”) to simplify the expression.
32.09 Identify that in a capacitor that is being charged or
discharged, a displacement current is said to be spread uni-
formly over the plate area, from one plate to the other.
32.10 Apply the relationship between the rate of change of an
electric flux and the associated displacement current.
32.11 For a charging or discharging capacitor, relate
the amount of displacement current to the amount of actual
current and identify that the displacement current exists only
when the electric field within the capacitor is changing.
32.12 Mimic the equations for the magnetic field inside and
outside a wire with real current to write (and apply) the
equations for the magnetic field inside and outside a
region of displacement current.
32.13 Apply the Ampere–Maxwell law to calculate the
magnetic field of a real current and a displacement current.
32.14 For a charging or discharging capacitor with parallel
circular plates, draw the magnetic field lines due to the
displacement current.
32.15 List Maxwell’s equations and the purpose of each.
Learning Objectives
●We define the fictitious displacement current due to a
changing electric field as
●The Ampere–Maxwell law then becomes
(Ampere–Maxwell law),
, B
: ! ds
: ! m0id,enc $ m0ienc
id ! ´0
d#E
dt .
where id,enc is the displacement current encircled by the
integration loop. 
●The idea of a displacement current allows us to retain the
notion of continuity of current through a capacitor. However,
displacement current is not a transfer of charge.
●Maxwell’s equations, displayed in Table 32-1, summarize
electromagnetism and form its foundation, including optics.
Key Ideas
