1171
38-6 SCHRÖDINGER'S EQUATION
The probability of detecting a particle in a small volume centered on a given point
in a matter wave is proportional to the value of |c|2 at that point.
Because c is usually a complex quantity, we find the square of its absolute value
by multiplying c by c*, the complex conjugate of c. (To find c* we replace the
imaginary number i in c with #i, wherever it occurs.)
How do we find the wave function? Sound waves and waves on strings are
described by the equations of Newtonian mechanics. Light waves are described
by Maxwell’s equations. Matter waves for nonrelativistic particles are described
by Schrödinger’s equation, advanced in 1926 by Austrian physicist Erwin
Schrödinger.
Many of the situations that we shall discuss involve a particle traveling in the
x direction through a region in which forces acting on the particle cause it to have
a potential energy U(x). In this special case, Schrödinger’s equation reduces to
(38-19)
in which E is the total mechanical energy of the moving particle. (We do not
consider mass energy in this nonrelativistic equation.) We cannot derive
Schrödinger’s equation from more basic principles; it is the basic principle.
We can simplify the expression of Schrödinger’s equation by rewriting the
second term. First, note that E # U(x) is the kinetic energy of the particle. Let’s
assume that the potential energy is uniform and constant (it might even be zero).
Because the particle is nonrelativistic, we can write the kinetic energy classically
in terms of speed v and then momentum p, and then we can introduce quantum
theory by using the de Broglie wavelength:
E # U !
!
! 
.
(38-20)
By putting 2p in both the numerator and denominator of the squared term, we
can rewrite the kinetic energy in terms of the angular wave number k ! 2p/l:
.
(38-21)
Substituting this into Eq. 38-19 leads to
(Schrödinger’s equation, uniform U),
(38-22)
where, from Eq. 38-21, the angular wave number is 
(angular wave number).
(38-23)
The general solution of Eq. 38-22 is
c (x) ! Aeikx ' Be#ikx,
(38-24)
in which A and B are constants.You can show that this equation is indeed a solu-
tion of Eq. 38-22 by substituting it and its second derivative into that equation
and noting that an identity results.
k ! 2p22m(E # U)
h
d2c
dx2 ' k2c ! 0
E # U !
1
2m#
kh
2p$
2
#
h
l$
2
1
2m
p2
2m
1
2 mv2
(Schrödinger’s equation,
one-dimensional motion),
d2c
dx2 ' 8p 2m
h2
 [E # U(x)]c ! 0
is usually a complex quantity, |c|2 is always both real and positive. It is, then,
|c|2, which we call the probability density, and not c, that has physical meaning.
Speaking loosely, the meaning is this:
