As the temperature increases, the value of CV/R gradually increases to 2.5, im-
plying that two additional degrees of freedom have become involved. Quantum
theory shows that these two degrees of freedom are associated with the rota-
tional motion of the hydrogen molecules and that this motion requires a certain
minimum amount of energy. At very low temperatures (below 80 K), the mole-
cules do not have enough energy to rotate.As the temperature increases from 80
K, first a few molecules and then more and more of them obtain enough energy
to rotate, and the value of CV/R increases, until all of the molecules are rotating
and CV/R # 2.5.
Similarly, quantum theory shows that oscillatory motion of the molecules
requires a certain (higher) minimum amount of energy.This minimum amount is
not met until the molecules reach a temperature of about 1000 K, as shown in
Fig. 19-14. As the temperature increases beyond 1000 K, more and more mole-
cules have enough energy to oscillate and the value of CV/R increases, until all of
the molecules are oscillating and CV/R # 3.5. (In Fig. 19-14, the plotted curve
stops at 3200 K because there the atoms of a hydrogen molecule oscillate so
much that they overwhelm their bond, and the molecule then dissociates into two
separate atoms.)
The turning on of the rotation and vibration of the diatomic and polyatomic
molecules is due to the fact that the energies of these motions are quantized, that
is, restricted to certain values.There is a lowest allowed value for each type of mo-
tion. Unless the thermal agitation of the surrounding molecules provides those
lowest amounts, a molecule simply cannot rotate or vibrate.
571
19-9 THE ADIABATIC EXPANSION OF AN IDEAL GAS
19-9 THE ADIABATIC EXPANSION OF AN IDEAL GAS
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
19.44 On a p-V diagram, sketch an adiabatic expansion 
(or contraction) and identify that there is no heat exchange
Q with the environment.
19.45 Identify that in an adiabatic expansion, the gas does
work on the environment, decreasing the gas’s internal
energy, and that in an adiabatic contraction, work is done
on the gas, increasing the internal energy.
19.46 In an adiabatic expansion or contraction, relate the ini-
tial pressure and volume to the final pressure and volume.
19.47 In an adiabatic expansion or contraction, relate the ini-
tial temperature and volume to the final temperature and
volume.
19.48 Calculate the work done in an adiabatic process by
integrating the pressure with respect to volume.
19.49 Identify that a free expansion of a gas into a vacuum is
adiabatic but no work is done and thus, by the first law of
thermodynamics, the internal energy and temperature of
the gas do not change.
Learning Objectives
●When an ideal gas undergoes a slow adiabatic volume
change (a change for which Q # 0),
pVg # a constant
(adiabatic process),
in which g (# Cp/CV) is the ratio of molar specific heats for
the gas. 
●For a free expansion, pV # a constant.
Key Ideas
The Adiabatic Expansion of an Ideal Gas
We saw in Module 17-2 that sound waves are propagated through air and
other gases as a series of compressions and expansions; these variations in the
transmission medium take place so rapidly that there is no time for energy to
be transferred from one part of the medium to another as heat. As we saw in
Module 18-5, a process for which Q # 0 is an adiabatic process. We can ensure
that Q # 0 either by carrying out the process very quickly (as in sound waves) or
by doing it (at any rate) in a well-insulated container.
