1349
44-3 QUARKS AND MESSENGER PARTICLES
Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
KEY IDEA
Any process must separately conserve the net lepton 
number for each lepton family of Table 44-2.
Lepton number: Let us first consider the electron lepton
number Le, which is '1 for the electron e#, #1 for the anti-
electron neutrino 
, and 0 for the other particles in the over-
all decay of Eq. 44-17. We see that the net Le is 0 before the
decay and 2['1 ' (#1)] ' 2(0 ' 0) ! 0 after the decay.
Thus, the net electron lepton number is conserved. You can
similarly show that the net muon lepton number and the net
tau lepton number are also conserved.
(c) What can you say about the spin of the @# particle?
¯ne
KEY IDEA
The overall decay scheme of Eq. 44-17 must conserve the
net spin component Sz.
Spin: We can determine the spin component Sz of the @#
particle on the left side of Eq. 44-17 by considering the Sz
components of the nine particles on the right side. All nine
of those particles are spin- particles and thus can have Sz of
1
2
either 
or 
. No matter how we choose between those
two possible values of Sz, the net Sz for those nine particles
must be a half-integer times . Thus, the @# particle must
have Sz of a half-integer times , and that means that its spin
quantum number s must be a half-integer. (It is ) 
1
2.
+
+
#1
2+
'1
2+
44-3 QUARKS AND MESSENGER PARTICLES
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
44.16 Identify that there are six quarks (with an antiparticle for each).
44.17 Identify that baryons contain three quarks (or antiquarks)
and mesons contain a quark and an antiquark, and that many
of these hadrons are excited states of the basic quark combi-
nations.
44.18 For a given hadron, identify the quarks it contains, and
vice versa.
44.19 Identify virtual particles.
44.20 Apply the relationship between the violation of energy
by a virtual particle and the time interval allowed for that vi-
olation (an uncertainty principle written in terms of energy).
44.21 Identify the messenger particles for electromagnetic
interactions, weak interactions, and strong interactions.
Learning Objectives
●The six quarks (up, down, strange, charm, bottom, and top,
in order of increasing mass) each have baryon number 
and
'1
3
●Particles with electric charge interact through the electro-
magnetic force by exchanging virtual photons.
●Leptons can also interact with each other and with quarks
through the weak force, via massive W and Z particles as
messengers.
●Quarks primarily interact with each other through the color
force, via gluons.
●The electromagnetic and weak forces are different manifes-
tations of the same force, called the electroweak force.
charge equal to either 
or 
. The strange quark has strange-
ness 
, whereas the others all have strangeness 0. These four
algebraic signs are reversed for the antiquarks.
●Leptons do not contain quarks and have no internal structure.
Mesons contain one quark and one antiquark. Baryons contain
three quarks or antiquarks. The quantum numbers of the quarks
and antiquarks are assigned to be consistent with the quantum
numbers of the mesons and baryons.
#1
#1
3
'2
3
Key Ideas
The Quark Model
In 1964 Gell-Mann and George Zweig independently pointed out that the eight-
fold way patterns can be understood in a simple way if the mesons and the
baryons are built up out of subunits that Gell-Mann called quarks. We deal first
with three of them, called the up quark (symbol u), the down quark (symbol d),
and the strange quark (symbol s). The names of the quarks, along with those as-
signed to three other quarks that we shall meet later, have no meaning other than
