1020
CHAPTER 34
IMAGES
34-3 SPHERICAL REFRACTING SURFACES
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
34.18 Identify that the refraction of rays by a spherical
surface can produce real images and virtual images of an
object, depending on the indexes of refraction on the two
sides, the surface’s radius of curvature r, and whether the
object faces a concave or convex surface.
34.19 For a point object on the central axis of a spherical
refracting surface, sketch the refraction of a ray in the six
general arrangements and identify whether the image is
real or virtual.
34.20 For a spherical refracting surface, identify what type of
image appears on the same side as the object and what
type appears on the opposite side.
34.21 For a spherical refracting surface, apply the relation-
ship between the two indexes of refraction, the object dis-
tance p, the image distance i, and the radius of curvature r.
34.22 Identify the algebraic signs of the radius r for an object
facing a concave refracting surface and a convex refract-
ing surface.
Learning Objectives
●A single spherical surface that refracts light can form 
an image.
●The object distance p, the image distance i,
and the radius of curvature r of the surface are 
related by
n1
p ' n2
i
! n2 & n1
r
,
where n1 is the index of refraction of the material where the
object is located and n2 is the index of refraction on the other
side of the surface.
●If the surface faced by the object is convex, r is positive,
and if it is concave, r is negative.
●Images on the object’s side of the surface are virtual, and
images on the opposite side are real.
Key Ideas
Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
Calculations: From the given information, we know that
the ratio of image height 
to object height h is 0.20. Thus,
from Eq. 34-5 we have 
Because the object and image have the same orientation, we
know that m must be positive: m ! '0.20. Substituting this
into Eq. 34-6 and solving for, say, i gives us
i ! &0.20p,
!m! ! h#
h ! 0.20.
h#
which does not appear to be of help in finding f. However, it is
helpful if we substitute it into Eq. 34-4. That equation gives us
from which we find
f ! &p/4.
Now we have it: Because p is positive, f must be negative,
which means that the mirror is convex with
f ! &40 cm.
(Answer)
1
f ! 1
i ' 1
p !
1
&0.20p ' 1
p ! 1
p  (&5 ' 1),
Spherical Refracting Surfaces
We now turn from images formed by reflection to images formed by refrac-
tion through surfaces of transparent materials, such as glass. We shall consider
only spherical surfaces, with radius of curvature r and center of curvature C.
The light will be emitted by a point object O in a medium with index of re-
fraction n1; it will refract through a spherical surface into a medium of index
of refraction n2.
Our concern is whether the light rays, after refracting through the surface,
form a real image (no observer necessary) or a virtual image (assuming that an
