1242
CHAPTER 40
ALL ABOUT ATOMS
Figure 40-18 The interaction of radiation and
matter in the processes of (a) absorption,
(b) spontaneous emission, and (c) stimu-
lated emission.An atom (matter) is repre-
sented by the red dot; the atom is in either a
lower quantum state with energy E0 or a
higher quantum state with energy Ex.
In (a) the atom absorbs a photon of energy
hf from  a passing light wave. In (b) it emits
a light wave by emitting a photon of energy
hf. In (c) a passing light wave with photon
energy hf causes the atom to emit a photon
of the same energy, increasing the energy of
the light wave.
Ex
E0
hf
(a)
Ex
E0
None
(b)
Ex
E0
hf
(c)
Before
Radiation
Matter
Ex
E0
hf
Ex
E0
None
Ex
E0
hf
After
Radiation
Matter
Process
Absorption
Spontaneous
emission
Stimulated
emission
hf
These are three
ways that radiation
(light) can interact
with matter. The
third way is the
basis of lasing.
How Lasers Work
Because the word “laser” is an acronym for “light amplification by the stimulated
emission of radiation,” you should not be surprised that stimulated emission is
the key to laser operation. Einstein introduced this concept in 1917 in the paper
where he explained the Planck formula for an ideal blackbody radiator (Eq.38-14).
Although the world had to wait until 1960 to see an operating laser, the ground-
work for its development was put in place decades earlier.
Consider an isolated atom that can exist either in its state of lowest energy
(its ground state), whose energy is E0, or in a state of higher energy (an excited
state), whose energy is Ex. Here are three processes by which the atom can move
from one of these states to the other:
1. Absorption. Figure 40-18a shows the atom initially in its ground state. If
the atom is placed in an electromagnetic field that is alternating at frequency f,
the atom can absorb an amount of energy hf from that field and move to the
higher-energy state. From the principle of conservation of energy we have
hf ! Ex # E0.
(40-28)
We call this process absorption.
2. Spontaneous emission. In Fig. 40-18b the atom is in its excited state and no
external radiation is present.After a time, the atom will de-excite to its ground
state, emitting a photon of energy hf in the process. We call this process spon-
taneous emission—spontaneous because the event is random and set by
chance.The light from the filament of an ordinary lightbulb or any other com-
mon light source is generated in this way.
Normally, the mean life of excited atoms before spontaneous emission
occurs is about 1028 s. However, for some excited states, this mean life is per-
haps as much as 105 times longer. We call such long-lived states metastable;
they play an important role in laser operation.
3. Stimulated emission. In Fig. 40-18c the atom is again in its excited state, but
this time radiation with a frequency given by Eq. 40-28 is present.A photon of
energy hf can stimulate the atom to move to its ground state, during which
process the atom emits an additional photon, whose energy is also hf. We call
this process stimulated emission—stimulated because the event is triggered by
the external photon.The emitted photon is in every way identical to the stimu-
lating photon. Thus, the waves associated with the photons have the same
energy, phase, polarization, and direction of travel.
