214
What Is Physics?
Every mechanical engineer who is hired as a courtroom expert witness to recon-
struct a traffic accident uses physics. Every dance trainer who coaches a ballerina
on how to leap uses physics. Indeed, analyzing complicated motion of any sort re-
quires simplification via an understanding of physics. In this chapter we discuss
how the complicated motion of a system of objects, such as a car or a ballerina,
can be simplified if we determine a special point of the system—the center of
mass of that system.
Here is a quick example. If you toss a ball into the air without much spin on the
ball (Fig. 9-1a), its motion is simple—it follows a parabolic path, as we discussed in
Chapter 4, and the ball can be treated as a particle. If, instead, you flip a baseball bat
into the air (Fig.9-1b),its motion is more complicated.Because every part of the bat
moves differently, along paths of many different shapes, you cannot represent the
bat as a particle.Instead,it is a system of particles each of which follows its own path
through the air. However, the bat has one special point—the center of mass—that
does move in a simple parabolic path. The other parts of the bat move around the
center of mass. (To locate the center of mass, balance the bat on an outstretched fin-
ger;the point is above your finger,on the bat’s central axis.)
You cannot make a career of flipping baseball bats into the air, but you can
make a career of advising long-jumpers or dancers on how to leap properly into
the air while either moving their arms and legs or rotating their torso. Your
starting point would be to determine the person’s center of mass because of its
simple motion.
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
9
Center of Mass and Linear Momentum
9-1 CENTER OF MASS 
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
9.01 Given the positions of several particles along an axis or
a plane, determine the location of their center of mass.
9.02 Locate the center of mass of an extended, symmetric
object by using the symmetry.
9.03 For a two-dimensional or three-dimensional extended ob-
ject with a uniform distribution of mass, determine the center
of mass by (a) mentally dividing the object into simple geomet-
ric figures, each of which can be replaced by a particle at its
center and (b) finding the center of mass of those particles.
●The center of mass of a system of n particles is defined to be the point whose coordinates are given by
or
where M is the total mass of the system.
r:
com ! 1
M '
n
i!1
mi r:
i ,
xcom ! 1
M '
n
i!1
mi xi, ycom ! 1
M '
n
i!1
miyi, zcom ! 1
M '
n
i!1
mizi,
Key Idea
Learning Objectives
