215
9-1 CENTER OF MASS
The Center of Mass
We define the center of mass (com) of a system of particles (such as a person) in
order to predict the possible motion of the system.
Here we discuss how to determine where the center of mass of a system of parti-
cles is located.We start with a system of only a few particles, and then we consider
a system of a great many particles (a solid body, such as a baseball bat). Later in
the chapter, we discuss how the center of mass of a system moves when external
forces act on the system.
Systems of Particles
Two Particles. Figure 9-2a shows two particles of masses m1 and m2 separated by dis-
tance d.We have arbitrarily chosen the origin of an x axis to coincide with the particle
of mass m1.We define the position of the center of mass (com) of this two-particle sys-
tem to be
(9-1)
Suppose, as an example, that m2 ! 0.Then there is only one particle, of mass m1,
and the center of mass must lie at the position of that particle;Eq.9-1 dutifully reduces
to xcom ! 0.If m1 ! 0,there is again only one particle (of mass m2),and we have,as we
expect, xcom ! d. If m1 ! m2, the center of mass should be halfway between the two
particles;Eq.9-1 reduces to 
again as we expect.Finally,Eq.9-1 tells us that
if neither m1 nor m2 is zero,xcom can have only values that lie between zero and d;that
is,the center of mass must lie somewhere between the two particles.
We are not required to place the origin of the coordinate system on one of
the particles. Figure 9-2b shows a more generalized situation, in which the coordi-
nate system has been shifted leftward. The position of the center of mass is now
defined
as
(9-2)
Note that if we put x1 ! 0, then x2 becomes d and Eq. 9-2 reduces to Eq. 9-1, as
it must. Note also that in spite of the shift of the coordinate system, the center
xcom ! m1x1 & m2x2
m1 & m2
.
xcom ! 1
2d,
xcom !
m2
m1 & m2
d.
Figure 9-1 (a) A ball tossed into the air
follows a parabolic path. (b) The center 
of mass (black dot) of a baseball bat
flipped into the air follows a parabolic 
path, but all other points of the bat 
follow more complicated curved paths.
(a)
(b)
Richard Megna/Fundamental Photographs
The center of mass of a system of particles is the point that moves as though
(1) all of the system’s mass were concentrated there and (2) all external forces
were applied there.
Figure 9-2 (a) Two particles of masses m1 and m2 are separated by distance d. The dot
labeled com shows the position of the center of mass, calculated from Eq. 9-1. (b) The
same as (a) except that the origin is located farther from the particles. The position of
the center of mass is calculated from Eq. 9-2. The location of the center of mass with
respect to the particles is the same in both cases.
x
y
xcom
x1
d
com
m1
m2
x2
(b)
x
y
xcom
d
com
m1
m2
(a)
This is the center of mass
of the two-particle system.
Shifting the axis
does not change
the relative position
of the com.
