990
CHAPTER 33
ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
33-5 REFLECTION AND REFRACTION
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
33.36 With a sketch, show the reflection of a light ray from an
interface and identify the incident ray, the reflected ray, the
normal, the angle of incidence, and the angle of reflection.
33.37 For a reflection, relate the angle of incidence and the
angle of reflection.
33.38 With a sketch, show the refraction of a light ray at an
interface and identify the incident ray, the refracted ray,
the normal on each side of the interface, the angle of
incidence, and the angle of refraction.
33.39 For refraction of light, apply Snell’s law to relate the
index of refraction and the angle of the ray on one side of
the interface to those quantities on the other side.
33.40 In a sketch and using a line along the undeflected
direction, show the refraction of light from one material into
a second material that has a greater index, a smaller index,
and the same index, and, for each situation, describe the
refraction in terms of the ray being bent toward the normal,
away from the normal, or not at all.
33.41 Identify that refraction occurs only at an interface and
not in the interior of a material.
33.42 Identify chromatic dispersion.
33.43 For a beam of red and blue light (or other colors)
refracting at an interface, identify which color has the
greater bending and which has the greater angle of
refraction when they enter a material with a lower index
than the initial material and a greater index.
33.44 Describe how the primary and secondary rainbows are
formed and explain why they are circular arcs.
Learning Objectives
●Geometrical optics is an approximate treatment of light in
which light waves are represented as straight-line rays.
●When a light ray encounters a boundary between two
transparent media, a reflected ray and a refracted ray
generally appear. Both rays remain in the plane of incidence.
The angle of reflection is equal to the angle of incidence, and
the angle of refraction is related to the angle of incidence by
Snell’s law,
n2 sin u2 ! n1 sin u1
(refraction),
where n1 and n2 are the indexes of refraction of the media in
which the incident and refracted rays travel.
Key Ideas
Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
Because the polarizing direction of the first sheet is parallel
to the y axis, the polarization of the light transmitted by it is
also, as shown in the head-on view of Fig. 33-15c.
Second sheet: Because the light reaching the second sheet
is polarized, the intensity I2 of the light transmitted by that
sheet is given by the cosine-squared rule (Eq. 33-38). The
angle u in the rule is the angle between the polarization di-
rection of the entering light (parallel to the y axis) and the
polarizing direction of the second sheet (60° counterclock-
wise from the y axis), and so u is 60°. (The larger angle
between the two directions, namely 120°, can also be used.)
We have
I2 ! I1 cos2 60°.
The polarization of this transmitted light is parallel to the
polarizing direction of the sheet transmitting it—that is, 60°
counterclockwise from the y axis, as shown in the head-on
view of Fig. 33-15d.
Third sheet: Because the light reaching the third sheet is
polarized, the intensity I3 of the light transmitted by that
sheet is given by the cosine-squared rule.The angle u is now
the angle between the polarization direction of the entering
light (Fig. 33-15d) and the polarizing direction of the third
sheet (parallel to the x axis), and so u ! 30°.Thus,
I3 ! I2 cos2 30°.
This final transmitted light is polarized parallel to the x axis
(Fig. 33-15e). We find its intensity by substituting first for I2
and then for I1 in the equation above:
Thus,
(Answer)
That is to say, 9.4% of the initial intensity emerges from the
three-sheet system. (If we now remove the second sheet,
what fraction of the initial intensity emerges from the
system?)
I3
I0
! 0.094.
! (1
2 I0) cos2 60" cos2 30" ! 0.094I0.
I3 ! I2 cos2 30" ! (I1 cos2 60") cos2 30"
