Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle
Our inability to predict the position of a particle with a uniform electric potential
energy, as indicated by Fig. 38-13, is our first example of Heisenberg’s uncertainty
principle, proposed in 1927 by German physicist Werner Heisenberg. It states
that measured values cannot be assigned to the position 
and the momentum 
of a particle simultaneously with unlimited precision.
In terms of 
(called “h-bar”), the principle tells us
(Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle).
(38-28)
Here )x and )px represent the intrinsic uncertainties in the measurements of the
x components of 
and , with parallel meanings for the y and z terms. Even with
the best measuring instruments, each product of a position uncertainty and a mo-
mentum uncertainty in Eq. 38-28 will be greater than , never less.
Here we shall not derive the uncertainty relationships but only apply them.
They are due to the fact that electrons and other particles are matter waves and
that repeated measurements of their positions and momenta involve probabili-
ties, not certainties. In the statistics of such measurements, we can view, say, )x
and )px as the spread (actually, the standard deviations) in the measurements.
We can also justify them with a physical (though highly simplified) argument:
In earlier chapters we took for granted our ability to detect and measure location
and motion, such as a car moving down a street or a pool ball rolling across a
table. We could locate a moving object by watching it—that is, by intercepting
light scattered by the object. That scattering did not alter the object’s motion. In
quantum physics, however, the act of detection in itself alters the location and
motion.The more precisely we wish to determine the location of, say, an electron
moving along an x axis (by using light or by any other means), the more we alter
the electron’s momentum and thus become less certain of the momentum. That
is, by decreasing )x, we necessarily increase )px. Vice versa, if we determine the
momentum very precisely (less )px), we become less certain of where the elec-
tron will be located (we increase )x).
That latter situation is what we found in Fig 38-13.We had an electron with a cer-
tain value of k, which, by the de Broglie relationship, means a certain momentum px.
Thus,)px ! 0.By Eq.38-28,that means that )x !
.If we then set up an experiment
to detect the electron,it could show up anywhere between x ! #
and x ! ' .
You might push back on the argument: Couldn’t we very precisely measure
px and then next very precisely measure x wherever the electron happens to show
up? Doesn’t that mean that we have measured both px and x simultaneously and
very precisely? No, the flaw is that although the first measurement can give us a
precise value for px, the second measurement necessarily alters that value.
Indeed, if the second measurement really does give us a precise value for x, we
then have no idea what the value of px is.
,
,
,
+
p
:
r:
)z$)pz * +
)y$)py * +
)x$)px * +
+ ! h/2-
p
:
r:
1173
38-7 HEISENBERG’S UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE
KEY IDEA
The minimum uncertainty allowed by quantum theory is
given by Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle in Eq. 38-28.
We need only consider components along the x axis be-
cause we have motion only along that axis and want the
Sample Problem 38.05
Uncertainty principle: position and momentum
Assume that an electron is moving along an x axis and that
you measure its speed to be 2.05 " 10 6 m/s, which can be
known with a precision of 0.50%. What is the minimum
uncertainty (as allowed by the uncertainty principle in
quantum theory) with which you can simultaneously meas-
ure the position of the electron along the x axis?
