1059
35-3 INTERFERENCE AND DOUBLE-SLIT INTENSITY 
35-3 INTERFERENCE AND DOUBLE-SLIT INTENSITY 
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
35.23 Distinguish between coherent and incoherent 
light.
35.24 For two light waves arriving at a common point, write
expressions for their electric field components as
functions of time and a phase constant.
35.25 Identify that the phase difference between two waves
determines their interference.
35.26 For a point in a double-slit interference pattern,
calculate the intensity in terms of the phase difference of
the arriving waves and relate that phase difference to the
angle u locating that point in the pattern.
35.27 Use a phasor diagram to find the resultant wave 
(amplitude and phase constant) of two or more light
waves arriving at a common point and use that result to
determine the intensity.
35.28 Apply the relationship between a light wave’s angular
frequency v and the angular speed v of the phasor repre-
senting the wave.
Learning Objectives
●If two light waves that meet at a point are to interfere
perceptibly, the phase difference between them must remain
constant with time; that is, the waves must be coherent.
When two coherent waves meet, the resulting intensity may
be found by using phasors.
Key Ideas
●In Young’s interference experiment, two waves, each with
intensity I0, yield a resultant wave of intensity I at the viewing
screen, with
I ! 4I0 cos2 1
2f,  where f ! 2pd
l
 sin u.
Coherence
For the interference pattern to appear on viewing screen C in Fig. 35-8, the light
waves reaching any point P on the screen must have a phase difference that does
not vary in time. That is the case in Fig. 35-8 because the waves passing through
slits S1 and S2 are portions of the single light wave that illuminates the slits.
Because the phase difference remains constant, the light from slits S1 and S2 is
said to be completely coherent.
Sunlight and Fingernails. Direct sunlight is partially coherent; that is, sun-
light waves intercepted at two points have a constant phase difference only if the
points are very close. If you look closely at your fingernail in bright sunlight, you
can see a faint interference pattern called speckle that causes the nail to appear to
be covered with specks. You see this effect because light waves scattering from
very close points on the nail are sufficiently coherent to interfere with one
another at your eye. The slits in a double-slit experiment, however, are not close
enough, and in direct sunlight, the light at the slits would be incoherent. To get
coherent light, we would have to send the sunlight through a single slit as in
Fig. 35-8; because that single slit is small, light that passes through it is coherent.
In addition, the smallness of the slit causes the coherent light to spread via
diffraction to illuminate both slits in the double-slit experiment.
Incoherent Sources. If we replace the double slits with two similar but inde-
pendent monochromatic light sources, such as two fine incandescent wires, the
phase difference between the waves emitted by the sources varies rapidly and
randomly. (This occurs because the light is emitted by vast numbers of atoms in
the wires, acting randomly and independently for extremely short times—of the
order of nanoseconds.) As a result, at any given point on the viewing screen, the
interference between the waves from the two sources varies rapidly and ran-
domly between fully constructive and fully destructive. The eye (and most com-
mon optical detectors) cannot follow such changes, and no interference pattern
can be seen. The fringes disappear, and the screen is seen as being uniformly
illuminated.
