permanent magnetism, and not a diamagnetic or paramagnetic material having
weak, temporary magnetism.
Iron, cobalt, nickel, gadolinium, dysprosium, and alloys containing these
elements exhibit ferromagnetism because of a quantum physical effect called
exchange coupling in which the electron spins of one atom interact with those
of neighboring atoms. The result is alignment of the magnetic dipole moments
of the atoms, in spite of the randomizing tendency of atomic collisions due to
thermal agitation.This persistent alignment is what gives ferromagnetic materials
their permanent magnetism.
Thermal Agitation. If the temperature of a ferromagnetic material is raised
above a certain critical value, called the Curie temperature, the exchange coupling
ceases to be effective. Most such materials then become simply paramagnetic;
that is, the dipoles still tend to align with an external field but much more weakly,
and thermal agitation can now more easily disrupt the alignment.The Curie tem-
perature for iron is 1043 K (! 770°C).
Measurement. The magnetization of a ferromagnetic material such as iron can
be studied with an arrangement called a Rowland ring (Fig. 32-15).The material is
formed into a thin toroidal core of circular cross section.A primary coil P having n
turns per unit length is wrapped around the core and carries current iP. (The coil is
essentially a long solenoid bent into a circle.) If the iron core were not present, the
magnitude of the magnetic field inside the coil would be,from Eq.29-23,
B0 ! m0iPn.
(32-40)
However, with the iron core present, the magnetic field 
inside the coil is greater
than 
,usually by a large amount.We can write the magnitude of this field as
B ! B0 $ BM,
(32-41)
where BM is the magnitude of the magnetic field contributed by the iron core.
This contribution results from the alignment of the atomic dipole moments
within the iron, due to exchange coupling and to the applied magnetic field B0,
and is proportional to the magnetization M of the iron. That is, the contribution
BM is proportional to the magnetic dipole moment per unit volume of the iron.
To determine BM we use a secondary coil S to measure B, compute B0 with
Eq. 32-40, and subtract as suggested by Eq. 32-41.
Figure 32-16 shows a magnetization curve for a ferromagnetic material in
a Rowland ring:The ratio BM/BM,max, where BM,max is the maximum possible value
of BM, corresponding to saturation, is plotted versus B0. The curve is like
Fig. 32-14, the magnetization curve for a paramagnetic substance: Both curves
show the extent to which an applied magnetic field can align the atomic dipole
moments of a material.
For the ferromagnetic core yielding Fig. 32-16, the alignment of the dipole
moments is about 70% complete for B0 % 1 & 10'3 T. If B0 were increased to 1 T,
the alignment would be almost complete (but B0 ! 1 T, and thus almost complete
saturation, is quite difficult to obtain).
Magnetic Domains
Exchange coupling produces strong alignment of adjacent atomic dipoles in
a ferromagnetic material at a temperature below the Curie temperature. Why,
then, isn’t the material naturally at saturation even when there is no applied
magnetic field B0? Why isn’t every piece of iron a naturally strong magnet?
To understand this, consider a specimen of a ferromagnetic material such as
iron that is in the form of a single crystal; that is, the arrangement of the atoms
that make it up—its crystal lattice—extends with unbroken regularity through-
out the volume of the specimen. Such a crystal will, in its normal state, be made
up of a number of magnetic domains. These are regions of the crystal throughout
which the alignment of the atomic dipoles is essentially perfect. The domains,
B
:
0
B
:
962
CHAPTER 32
MAXWELL’S EQUATIONS; MAGNETISM OF MATTER
Figure 32-15 A Rowland ring. A primary coil
P has a core made of the ferromagnetic
material to be studied (here iron).The core
is magnetized by a current iP sent through
coil P. (The turns of the coil are represented
by dots.) The extent to which the core is
magnetized determines the total magnetic
field 
within coil P. Field 
can be mea-
sured by means of a secondary coil S.
B
:
B
:
P
iP
B
S
iS
Iron core 
iP
iS
Figure 32-16 A magnetization curve for a
ferromagnetic core material in the Rowland
ring of Fig. 32-15. On the vertical axis,
1.0 corresponds to complete alignment
(saturation) of the atomic dipoles within 
the material.
BM/BM,max
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 12 14 
B0 (10–4 T) 
