1236
CHAPTER 40
ALL ABOUT ATOMS
Chlorine is receptive to interacting with other atoms that have a valence
electron that might fill this hole. Sodium chloride (NaCl), for example, is a very
stable compound. Chlorine, like the other halogens that form column VIIA of the
periodic table, is chemically active.
Iron
The arrangement of the 26 electrons of the iron atom can be represented as
follows:
1s2
2s2 2p6
3s2 3p6 3d6
4s2.
The subshells are listed in numerical order and, following convention, a super-
script gives the number of electrons in each subshell. From Table 40-1 we can see
that an s subshell 
can hold 2 electrons, a p subshell 
can hold 6,
and a d subshell 
can hold 10. Thus, iron’s first 18 electrons form the
five filled subshells that are marked off by the bracket, leaving 8 electrons to be
accounted for. Six of the eight go into the 3d subshell, and the remaining two go
into the 4s subshell.
The reason the last two electrons do not also go into the 3d subshell (which
can hold 10 electrons) is that the 3d6 4s2 configuration results in a lower-energy
state for the atom as a whole than would the 3d8 configuration. An iron atom
with 8 electrons (rather than 6) in the 3d subshell would quickly make a transi-
tion to the 3d6 4s2 configuration, emitting electromagnetic radiation in the
process. The lesson here is that except for the simplest elements, the states may
not be filled in what we might think of as their “logical” sequence.
(! ! 2)
(! ! 1)
(! ! 0)
40-6 X RAYS AND THE ORDERING OF THE ELEMENTS
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
40.33 Identify where x rays are located in the electromagnetic
spectrum.
40.34 Explain how x rays are produced in a laboratory or
medical setting.
40.35 Distinguish between a continuous x-ray spectrum and
a characteristic x-ray spectrum.
40.36 In a continuous x-ray spectrum, identify the cause of
the cutoff wavelength 
.
40.37 Identify that in an electron–atom collision, energy and
momentum are conserved.
40.38 Apply the relationship between a cutoff wavelength
and the kinetic energy K0 of the incident electrons.
lmin
lmin
40.39 Draw an energy-level diagram for holes and identify
(with labels) the transitions that produce x rays.
40.40 For a given hole transition, calculate the wavelength of
the emitted x ray.
40.41 Explain the importance of Moseley’s work with regard
to the periodic table.
40.42 Sketch a Moseley plot.
40.43 Describe the screening effect in a multielectron
atom.
40.44 Apply the relationship between the frequency of the
emitted K-alpha x rays and the atomic number Z of the
atoms.
●When a beam of high-energy electrons impact a target, the
electrons can lose their energy by scattering from atoms and
emitting a continuous spectrum of x rays.
●The shortest wavelength in the spectrum is the cutoff wave-
length 
, which is emitted when an incident electron loses
its full kinetic energy K0 in a single collision:
lmin ! hc
K0
.
lmin
●The characteristic x-ray spectrum is produced when inci-
dent electrons eject low-lying electrons in the target atoms
and electrons from upper levels jump down to the resulting
holes, emitting light.
●A Moseley plot is a graph of the square root of the charac-
teristic-emission frequencies 
versus atomic number Z of
the target atoms. The straight-line plot reveals that the posi-
tion of an element in the periodic table is set by Z and not the
atomic weight.
1f
Learning Objectives
Key Ideas
