70
CHAPTER 4
MOTION IN TWO AND THREE DIMENSIONS
Projectile Motion
We next consider a special case of two-dimensional motion:A particle moves in a
vertical plane with some initial velocity 
but its acceleration is always the free-
fall acceleration , which is downward. Such a particle is called a projectile (mean-
ing that it is projected or launched), and its motion is called projectile motion. A
projectile might be a tennis ball (Fig. 4-8) or baseball in flight, but it is not a duck
in flight. Many sports involve the study of the projectile motion of a ball. For ex-
ample, the racquetball player who discovered the Z-shot in the 1970s easily won
his games because of the ball’s perplexing flight to the rear of the court.
Our goal here is to analyze projectile motion using the tools for two-
dimensional motion described in Module 4-1 through 4-3 and making the
assumption that air has no effect on the projectile. Figure 4-9, which we shall ana-
lyze soon, shows the path followed by a projectile when the air has no effect.The
projectile is launched with an initial velocity 
that can be written as
(4-19)
The components v0x and v0y can then be found if we know the angle u0 between
and the positive x direction:
v0x " v0 cos u0
and
v0y " v0 sin u0.
(4-20)
During its two-dimensional motion, the projectile’s position vector 
and velocity
vector 
change continuously, but its acceleration vector 
is constant and always
directed vertically downward.The projectile has no horizontal acceleration.
Projectile motion, like that in Figs. 4-8 and 4-9, looks complicated, but we
have the following simplifying feature (known from experiment):
a
:
v
:
r:
v
:
0
v
:
0 " v0xiˆ # v0yjˆ.
v
:
0
g
:
v
:
0
Figure 4-8 A stroboscopic photograph of
a yellow tennis ball bouncing off a hard
surface. Between impacts, the ball has 
projectile motion.
Richard Megna/Fundamental Photographs
●In projectile motion, a particle is launched into the air with a
speed v0 and at an angle u0 (as measured from a horizontal x
axis). During flight, its horizontal acceleration is zero and its
vertical acceleration is $g (downward on a vertical y axis).
●The equations of motion for the particle (while in flight) can
be written as
v2
y " (v0 sin 10)2 $ 2g(y $ y0).
vy " v0 sin 10 $ gt,
y $ y0 " (v0 sin 10)t $ 1
2gt2,
x $ x0 " (v0 cos 10)t,
●The trajectory (path) of a particle in projectile motion is par-
abolic and is given by
if x0 and y0 are zero. 
●The particle’s horizontal range R, which is the horizontal
distance from the launch point to the point at which the parti-
cle returns to the launch height, is
R " v0
2
g sin 210.
y " (tan 10)x $
gx2
2(v0 cos 10)2 ,
4-4 PROJECTILE MOTION
4.14 Given the launch velocity in either magnitude-angle or
unit-vector notation, calculate the particle’s position, dis-
placement, and velocity at a given instant during the flight.
4.15 Given data for an instant during the flight, calculate the
launch velocity.
Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
4.13 On a sketch of the path taken in projectile motion, 
explain the magnitudes and directions of the velocity 
and acceleration components during the flight.
Key Ideas
In projectile motion, the horizontal motion and the vertical motion are indepen-
dent of each other; that is, neither motion affects the other.
