The Hydrogen Atom Is an Electron Trap
We now move from artificial or fictitious electron traps to natural ones — atoms.
In this chapter we focus on the simplest example, a hydrogen atom, which con-
tains an electron that is trapped by the Coulomb force it experiences from the
proton, which is the nucleus of the atom. Because the proton’s mass is much
greater than the electron’s mass, we shall assume that the proton is fixed in place.
So, we think of the atom as a fixed potential trap with the electron moving
around inside it.
We have now discussed at length that confinement of an electron means that
the electron’s energy E is quantized and thus so is any change )E in its energy.
In this module we want to calculate the quantized energies of the electron con-
fined to a hydrogen atom. We shall, in principle at least, apply Schrödinger’s
equation to the trap, to find those energies and the associated wave functions.
However, at the discretion of your instructor, let’s take an historical aside to
examine how the quantizing of atoms began, back when quantization was a revo-
lutionary concept.
1202
CHAPTER 39
MORE ABOUT MATTER WAVES
volved, the associated energy, frequency, wavelength, and
momentum of the photon.
39.39 Sketch an energy-level diagram for hydrogen,
identifying the ground state, several of the excited states,
the nonquantized region, the Paschen series, the Balmer
series, and the Lyman series (including the series limits).
39.40 For each transition series, identify the jumps giving the
longest wavelength, the shortest wavelength for down-
ward jumps, the series limit, and ionization.
39.41 List the quantum numbers for an atom and indicate the
allowed values.
39.42 Given a normalized wave function for a state, find the
radial probability density P(r) and the probability of detect-
ing the electron in a given range of radii.
39.43 For ground-state hydrogen, sketch a graph of the radial
probability density versus radial distance and locate one
Bohr radius a.
39.44 For a given normalized wave function for hydrogen,
verify that it satisfies the Schrödinger equation.
39.45 Distinguish shell from subshell.
39.46 Explain a dot plot of a probability density. 
●The Bohr model of the hydrogen atom successfully derived
the energy levels for the atom, to explain the emission/
absorption spectrum of the atom, but it is incorrect in 
almost every other aspect.
●The Bohr model is a planetary model in which the electron
orbits the central proton with an angular momentum L that is
limited to values given by
L ! n ,
for n ! 1, 2, 3, . . . ,
where n is a quantum number. The value L ! 0 is incorrectly
disallowed.
●Application of the Schrödinger equation gives the correct
values of L and the quantized energies:
En !
for n ! 1, 2, 3, . . . .
●The atom (or the electron in the atom) can change energy
only by jumping between these allowed energies.
●If the jump is by photon absorption (the atom’s energy
increases) or photon emission (the atom’s energy
# me4
8´ 0
2h2
1
n2 ! # 13.60 eV
n2
,
+
decreases), this restriction in energy changes leads to
for the wevelength of the light, where R is the Rydberg
constant,
R !
! 1.097 373 " 107 m#1.
●The radial probability density P(r) for a state of the hydrogen
atom is defined so that P(r) is the probability that the electron
will be detected somewhere in the space between two spheri-
cal shells of radii r and r ' dr that are centered on the nucleus.
●Normalization requires that
●The probability that the electron will be detected between
any two given radii r1 and r2 is
(probability of detection between r1 and r2) !"
r2
r1
P(r) dr.
"
,
0
P(r) dr ! 1.
me4
8´2
0h3c
1
l ! R#
1
n2
low
#
1
n2
high$,
Key Ideas
