derived from Eq. 28-38, is the difference in energy )UB (! 2mBext) between par-
allel alignment and antiparallel alignment of the magnetic dipole moment of an
atom and the external field. (The lower energy state is 'mBext and the higher en-
ergy state is +mBext.) As we shall show below,
, even for ordinary tem-
peratures and field magnitudes. Thus, energy transfers during collisions among
atoms can significantly disrupt the alignment of the atomic dipole moments,
keeping the magnetic dipole moment of a sample much less than Nm.
Magnetization. We can express the extent to which a given paramagnetic
sample is magnetized by finding the ratio of its magnetic dipole moment to its
volume V. This vector quantity, the magnetic dipole moment per unit volume, is
the magnetization
of the sample, and its magnitude is
(32-38)
The unit of 
is the ampere–square meter per cubic meter, or ampere per meter
(A/m). Complete alignment of the atomic dipole moments, called saturation of
the sample, corresponds to the maximum value Mmax ! Nm/V.
In 1895 Pierre Curie discovered experimentally that the magnetization of a
paramagnetic sample is directly proportional to the magnitude of the external
magnetic field 
and inversely proportional to the temperature T in kelvins:
(32-39)
Equation 32-39 is known as Curie’s law, and C is called the Curie constant. Curie’s
law is reasonable in that increasing Bext tends to align the atomic dipole moments
in a sample and thus to increase M, whereas increasing T tends to disrupt the
alignment via thermal agitation and thus to decrease M. However, the law is actu-
ally an approximation that is valid only when the ratio Bext/T is not too large.
Figure 32-14 shows the ratio M/Mmax as a function of Bext/T for a sample of
the salt potassium chromium sulfate, in which chromium ions are the para-
magnetic substance. The plot is called a magnetization curve. The straight line
for Curie’s law fits the experimental data at the left, for Bext/T below about
0.5 T/K. The curve that fits all the data points is based on quantum physics. The
data on the right side, near saturation, are very difficult to obtain because they
require very strong magnetic fields (about 100 000 times Earth’s field), even at
very low temperatures.
M ! C Bext
T .
B
:
ext
M
:
M ! measured magnetic moment
V
.
M
:
K 5 )UB
960
CHAPTER 32
MAXWELL’S EQUATIONS; MAGNETISM OF MATTER
M/Mmax
1.0
0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.25
0.50
0.75
Bext/T (T/K)
Curie’s
law
1.30 K
2.00 K
3.00 K
4.21 K
Greater Bext at same 
T gives greater dipole 
alignment.
Approximately linear
Quantum theory
Figure 32-14 A magnetization curve for potas-
sium chromium sulfate, a paramagnetic salt.
The ratio of magnetization M of the salt to
the maximum possible magnetization Mmax is
plotted versus the ratio of the applied mag-
netic field magnitude Bext to the temperature
T. Curie’s law fits the data at the left; quan-
tum theory fits all the data. Based on mea-
surements by W. E. Henry.
Checkpoint 6
The figure here shows two paramagnetic spheres
located near the south pole of a bar magnet.Are
(a) the magnetic forces on the spheres and (b) the
magnetic dipole moments of the spheres directed toward or away from the bar magnet?
(c) Is the magnetic force on sphere 1 greater than,less than,or equal to that on sphere 2?
S 
N 
1 
2 
