xviii
Links Between Homework Problems and Learning Objectives
In WileyPLUS, every question and prob-
lem at the end of the chapter is linked to a learning objective, to answer the (usually unspoken) ques-
tions, “Why am I working this problem? What am I supposed to learn from it?” By being explicit
about a problem’s purpose, I believe that a student might better transfer the learning objective to
other problems with a different wording but the same key idea. Such transference would help defeat
the common trouble that a student learns to work a particular problem but cannot then apply its key
idea to a problem in a different setting.
Rewritten Chapters
My students have continued to be challenged by several key chapters and by
spots in several other chapters and so, in this edition, I rewrote a lot of the material. For example, I
redesigned the chapters on Gauss’ law and electric potential, which have proved to be tough-going
for my students.The presentations are now smoother and more direct to the key points. In the quan-
tum chapters, I expanded the coverage of the Schrödinger equation, including reflection of matter
waves from a step potential. At the request of several instructors, I decoupled the discussion of the
Bohr atom from the Schrödinger solution for the hydrogen atom so that the historical account of
Bohr’s work can be bypassed. Also, there is now a module on Planck’s blackbody radiation.
New Sample Problems and Homework Questions and Problems
Sixteen new sample problems have
been added to the chapters, written so as to spotlight some of the difficult areas for my students.Also,
about 250 problems and 50 questions have been added to the homework sections of the chapters.
Some of these problems come from earlier editions of the
book, as requested by several instructors.
Video Illustrations
In the eVersion of the text available in
WileyPLUS, David Maiullo of Rutgers University has
created video versions of approximately 30 of the photo-
graphs and figures from the text. Much of physics is the
study of things that move and video can often provide a
better representation than a static photo or figure.
Online Aid
WileyPLUS is not just an online grading pro-
gram. Rather, it is a dynamic learning center stocked with many different learning aids, including
just-in-time problem-solving tutorials, embedded reading quizzes to encourage reading, animated
figures, hundreds of sample problems, loads of simulations and demonstrations, and over 1500 videos
ranging from math reviews to mini-lectures to examples. More of these learning aids are added every
semester. For this 10th edition of HRW, some of the photos involving motion have been converted
into videos so that the motion can be slowed and analyzed.
These thousands of learning aids are available 24/7 and can be repeated as many times as de-
sired. Thus, if a student gets stuck on a homework problem at, say, 2:00 AM (which appears to be a
popular time for doing physics homework), friendly and helpful resources are available at the click of
a mouse.
LEARNINGS TOOLS
When I learned first-year physics in the first edition of
Halliday and Resnick, I caught on by repeatedly reread-
ing a chapter. These days we better understand that
students have a wide range of learning styles. So, I have
produced a wide range of learning tools, both in this new
edition and online in WileyPLUS:
Animations of one of the key figures in each chapter.
Here in the book, those figures are flagged with the
swirling icon. In the online chapter in WileyPLUS, a
mouse click begins the animation. I have chosen the fig-
ures that are rich in information so that a student can see
the physics in action and played out over a minute or two
A
PREFACE
