whether an object’s speed is increasing or decreasing. For example, if a car with an
initial velocity v " $25 m/s is braked to a stop in 5.0 s, then aavg " #5.0 m/s2. The
acceleration is positive, but the car’s speed has decreased. The reason is the differ-
ence in signs:the direction of the acceleration is opposite that of the velocity.
Here then is the proper way to interpret the signs:
22
CHAPTER 2
MOTION ALONG A STRAIGHT LINE
If the signs of the velocity and acceleration of a particle are the same, the speed 
of the particle increases. If the signs are opposite, the speed decreases.
Checkpoint 3
A wombat moves along an x axis.What is the sign of its acceleration if it is moving
(a) in the positive direction with increasing speed, (b) in the positive direction with
decreasing speed, (c) in the negative direction with increasing speed, and (d) in the
negative direction with decreasing speed?
Reasoning: We need to examine the expressions for x(t),
v(t), and a(t).
At t " 0, the particle is at x(0) " #4 m and is moving
with a velocity of v(0) " $27 m/s—that is, in the negative
direction of the x axis. Its acceleration is a(0) " 0 because just
then the particle’s velocity is not changing (Fig.2-8a).
For 0 ( t ( 3 s, the particle still has a negative velocity,
so it continues to move in the negative direction. However,
its acceleration is no longer 0 but is increasing and positive.
Because the signs of the velocity and the acceleration are
opposite, the particle must be slowing (Fig. 2-8b).
Indeed, we already know that it stops momentarily at
t " 3 s. Just then the particle is as far to the left of the origin
in Fig. 2-1 as it will ever get. Substituting t " 3 s into the
expression for x(t), we find that the particle’s position just
then is x " $50 m (Fig. 2-8c). Its acceleration is still positive.
For t . 3 s, the particle moves to the right on the axis.
Its acceleration remains positive and grows progressively
larger in magnitude. The velocity is now positive, and it too
grows progressively larger in magnitude (Fig.2-8d).
Sample Problem 2.03
Acceleration and dv/dt
A particle’s position on the x axis of Fig. 2-1 is given by
x " 4 $ 27t # t3,
with x in meters and t in seconds.
(a) Because position x depends on time t, the particle must
be moving. Find the particle’s velocity function v(t) and ac-
celeration function a(t).
KEY IDEAS
(1) To get the velocity function v(t), we differentiate the po-
sition function x(t) with respect to time. (2) To get the accel-
eration function a(t), we differentiate the velocity function
v(t) with respect to time.
Calculations: Differentiating the position function, we find
v " $27 # 3t2,
(Answer)
with v in meters per second. Differentiating the velocity
function then gives us
a " #6t,
(Answer)
with a in meters per second squared.
(b) Is there ever a time when v " 0?
Calculation: Setting v(t) " 0 yields
0 " $27 # 3t2,
which has the solution
t " %3 s.
(Answer)
Thus, the velocity is zero both 3 s before and 3 s after the
clock reads 0.
(c) Describe the particle’s motion for t , 0.
Figure 2-8 Four stages of the particle’s motion.
x
−50 m
t = 3 s
v = 0
a pos
reversing
(c)
t = 4 s
v pos
a pos
speeding up
(d)
0  4 m
t = 0
v neg
a = 0
leftward
motion
(a)
t = 1 s
v neg
a pos
slowing
(b)
Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
