Fig. 38-15 for potential energy as a function of position x. (Recall that U ! qV.
Here the potential Vb is negative, the electron’s charge q is negative, and so the
potential energy Ub is positive.)
Let’s consider the situation where E > Ub. Classically, the electrons should all
pass through the boundary—they certainly have enough energy. Indeed, we dis-
cussed such motion extensively in Chapters 22 through 24, where electrons
moved into electric potentials and had changes in potential energy and kinetic
energy. We simply conserved mechanical energy and noted that if the potential
energy increases, the kinetic energy decreases by the same amount, and the speed
thus also decreases.What we took for granted is that, because the electron energy
E is greater than the potential energy Ub, all the electrons pass through the
boundary. However, if we apply Schrödinger’s equation, we find a big surprise—
because electrons are matter waves, not tiny solid (classical) particles, some of
them actually reflect from the boundary. Let’s determine what fraction R of the
incoming electrons reflect.
In region 1, where U is zero, Eq. 38-23 tells us that the angular wave number is
(38-29)
and Eq. 38-24 tells us that the general space-dependent solution to Schrodinger’s
equation is
c1(x) ! Aeikx ' Be#ikx
(region 1).
(38-30)
In region 2, where the potential energy is Ub, the angular wave number is
(38-31)
and the general solution, with this angular wave number, is
c2(x) !
' De#ik x
(region 2).
(38-32)
We use coefficients C and D because they are not the same as the coefficients in
region 1.
The terms with positive arguments in an exponential represent particles
moving in the 'x direction; those with negative arguments represent particles
moving in the #x direction. However, because there is no electron source off to
the right in Figs. 38-14 and 38-15, there can be no electrons moving to the left in
region 2. So, we set D ! 0, and the solution in region 2 is then simply
c2(x) !
(region 2).
(38-33)
Next, we must make sure that our solutions are “well behaved” at the
boundary. That is, they must be consistent with each other at x ! 0, both in
value and in slope.These conditions are said to be boundary conditions.We first
substitute x ! 0 into Eqs. 38-30 and 38-33 for the wave functions and then set the
results equal to each other.This gives us our first boundary condition:
A ' B ! C
(matching of values).
(38-34)
The functions have the same value at x ! 0 provided the coefficients have this
relationship.
Next, we take a derivative of Eq. 38-30 with respect to x and then substitute
in x ! 0.Then we take a derivative of Eq. 38-33 with respect to x and then substi-
tute in x ! 0. And then we set the two results equal to each other (one slope
equal to the other slope at x ! 0).We find
Ak # Bk ! Ckb
(matching of slopes).
(38-35)
The slopes at x ! 0 are equal provided that this relationship of coefficients and
angular wave numbers is satisfied.
Ceikbx
b
Ceikbx
kb ! 2p22m(E # Ub)
h
,
k ! 2p22mE
h
1175
38-8 REFLECTION FROM A POTENTIAL STEP
x
Ub
0
E
Energy
Classically, the electron has 
too much energy to be 
reflected by the potential step.
Electron
Figure 38-15 An energy diagram containing
two plots for the situation of Fig. 38-14: (1)
The electron’s mechanical energy E is plot-
ted. (2) The electron’s electric potential en-
ergy U is plotted as a function of the elec-
tron’s position x.The nonzero part of the
plot (the potential step) has height Ub.
