you stand far enough from the painting, the angular separations u are less than
uR and the dots cannot be seen individually. The resulting blend of colors
coming into your eye from any group of dots can then cause your brain to
“make up” a color for that group—a color that may not actually exist in the
group. In this way, a pointillistic painter uses your visual system to create the
colors of the art.
When we wish to use a lens instead of our visual system to resolve objects of
small angular separation, it is desirable to make the diffraction pattern as small as
possible. According to Eq. 36-14, this can be done either by increasing the lens
diameter or by using light of a shorter wavelength. For this reason ultraviolet
light is often used with microscopes because its wavelength is shorter than a visi-
ble light wavelength.
1093
36-3 DIFFRACTION BY A CIRCULAR APERTURE
Checkpoint 4
Suppose that you can barely resolve two red dots because of diffraction by the
pupil of your eye. If we increase the general illumination around you so that the
pupil decreases in diameter, does the resolvability of the dots improve or diminish?
Consider only diffraction. (You might experiment to check your answer.)
Rayleigh’s criterion:
(36-15)
Calculations: Figure 36-13b shows, from the side, the
angular separation u of the dots, their center-to-center
separation D, and your distance L from them. Because
D/L is small, angle u is also small and we can make the
approximation
(36-16)
Setting u of Eq. 36-16 equal to uR of Eq. 36-15 and solv-
ing for L, we then have
(36-17)
Equation 36-17 tells us that L is larger for smaller l.Thus, as
you move away from the painting, adjacent red dots (long
wavelengths) become indistinguishable before adjacent
blue dots do.To find the least distance L at which no colored
dots are distinguishable, we substitute l ! 400 nm (blue or
violet light) into Eq. 36-17:
(Answer)
At this or a greater distance, the color you perceive at
any given spot on the painting is a blended color that may
not actually exist there.
L ! (2.0 ( 10&3 m)(1.5 ( 10&3 m)
(1.22)(400 ( 10&9 m)
! 6.1 m.
L !
Dd
1.22l .
u ! D
L .
uR ! 1.22 l
d .
Sample Problem 36.03
Pointillistic paintings use the diffraction of your eye
Figure 36-13a is a representation of the colored dots on a
pointillistic painting. Assume that the average center-
to-center separation of the dots is D ! 2.0 mm.Also assume
that the diameter of the pupil of your eye is d ! 1.5 mm and
that the least angular separation between dots you can 
resolve is set only by Rayleigh’s criterion. What is the least
viewing distance from which you cannot distinguish any
dots on the painting?
KEY IDEA
Consider any two adjacent dots that you can distinguish
when you are close to the painting. As you move away, you
continue to distinguish the dots until their angular separa-
tion u (in your view) has decreased to the angle given by
D
D
θ 
Dot
Observer
L
(a)
(b)
Figure 36-13 (a) Representation of some dots on a pointillistic paint-
ing, showing an average center-to-center separation D. (b) The
arrangement of separation D between two dots, their angular
separation u, and the viewing distance L.
Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
