646
CHAPTER 22
ELECTRIC FIELDS
Figure 22-18 The metal wires are so charged
that the electric fields they produce in the
surrounding space cause the air there to un-
dergo electrical breakdown.
Adam Hart-Davis/Photo Researchers, Inc.
values of q were always given by
q ! ne,
for n ! 0, .1, .2, .3, . . . ,
(22-29)
in which e turned out to be the fundamental constant we call the elementary
charge, 1.60 $ 10%19 C. Millikan’s experiment is convincing proof that charge is
quantized, and he earned the 1923 Nobel Prize in physics in part for this work.
Modern measurements of the elementary charge rely on a variety of interlocking
experiments, all more precise than the pioneering experiment of Millikan.
Ink-Jet Printing
The need for high-quality, high-speed printing has caused a search for an
alternative to impact printing, such as occurs in a standard typewriter. Building
up letters by squirting tiny drops of ink at the paper is one such alternative.
Figure 22-17 shows a negatively charged drop moving between two conduct-
ing deflecting plates,between which a uniform,downward-directed electric field 
has been set up. The drop is deflected upward according to Eq. 22-28 and then
strikes the paper at a position that is determined by the magnitudes of 
and the
charge q of the drop.
In practice, E is held constant and the position of the drop is determined by
the charge q delivered to the drop in the charging unit, through which the drop
must pass before entering the deflecting system. The charging unit, in turn, is
activated by electronic signals that encode the material to be printed.
Electrical Breakdown and Sparking
If the magnitude of an electric field in air exceeds a certain critical value Ec, the
air undergoes electrical breakdown, a process whereby the field removes elec-
trons from the atoms in the air. The air then begins to conduct electric current
because the freed electrons are propelled into motion by the field. As they
move, they collide with any atoms in their path, causing those atoms to emit
light. We can see the paths, commonly called sparks, taken by the freed elec-
trons because of that emitted light. Figure 22-18 shows sparks above charged
metal wires where the electric fields due to the wires cause electrical break-
down of the air.
E
:
E
:
Checkpoint 3
(a) In the figure, what is the direction of the electro-
static force on the electron due to the external
electric field shown? (b) In which direction will the
electron accelerate if it is moving parallel to the y axis
before it encounters the external field? (c) If, instead,
the electron is initially moving rightward, will its
speed increase, decrease, or remain constant?
x
e
y
E
Input
signals
Deflecting plate 
G 
C 
Deflecting
plate
E
Figure 22-17 Ink-jet printer. Drops shot from generator G receive a charge in charging unit
C.An input signal from a computer controls the charge and thus the effect of field 
on
where the drop lands on the paper.
E
:
