950
CHAPTER 32
MAXWELL’S EQUATIONS; MAGNETISM OF MATTER
32-4 MAGNETS
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
32.16 Identify lodestones.
32.17 In Earth’s magnetic field, identify that the field 
is approximately that of a dipole and also identify in 
which hemisphere the north geomagnetic pole is 
located.
32.18 Identify field declination and field inclination.
Learning Objectives
●Earth is approximately a magnetic dipole with a dipole
axis somewhat off the rotation axis and with the south pole
in the Northern Hemisphere.
●The local field direction is given by the field declination 
(the angle left or right from geographic north) and the field
inclination (the angle up or down from the horizontal).
Key Ideas
explain a diverse range of phenomena, from why a compass needle points north
to why a car starts when you turn the ignition key.They are the basis for the func-
tioning of such electromagnetic devices as electric motors, television transmitters
and receivers, telephones, scanners, radar, and microwave ovens.
Maxwell’s equations are the basis from which many of the equations you
have seen since Chapter 21 can be derived.They are also the basis of many of the
equations you will see in Chapters 33 through 36 concerning optics.
Figure 32-8 Earth’s magnetic field repre-
sented as a dipole field.The dipole axis
MM makes an angle of 11.5° with Earth’s
rotational axis RR.The south pole of the
dipole is in Earth’s Northern Hemisphere.
R
R
M
M
N
S
Geomagnetic
north pole 
Geographic
north pole 
B
For Earth, the south pole
of the dipole is actually
in the north.
Magnets
The first known magnets were lodestones, which are stones that have been mag-
netized (made magnetic) naturally.When the ancient Greeks and ancient Chinese
discovered these rare stones, they were amused by the stones’ ability to attract
metal over a short distance, as if by magic. Only much later did they learn to use
lodestones (and artificially magnetized pieces of iron) in compasses to determine
direction.
Today, magnets and magnetic materials are ubiquitous.Their magnetic prop-
erties can be traced to their atoms and electrons. In fact, the inexpensive magnet
you might use to hold a note on the refrigerator door is a direct result of the
quantum physics taking place in the atomic and subatomic material within the
magnet. Before we explore some of this physics, let’s briefly discuss the largest
magnet we commonly use—namely, Earth itself.
The Magnetism of Earth
Earth is a huge magnet; for points near Earth’s surface, its magnetic field can be 
approximated as the field of a huge bar magnet—a magnetic dipole—that strad-
dles the center of the planet. Figure 32-8 is an idealized symmetric depiction of
the dipole field, without the distortion caused by passing charged particles from
the Sun.
Because Earth’s magnetic field is that of a magnetic dipole, a magnetic dipole
moment 
is associated with the field. For the idealized field of Fig. 32-8, the mag-
nitude of 
is 8.0
1022 J/T and the direction of 
makes an angle of 11.5° with
the rotation axis (RR) of Earth.The dipole axis (MM in Fig. 32-8) lies along 
and
intersects Earth’s surface at the geomagnetic north pole off the northwest coast of
Greenland and the geomagnetic south pole in Antarctica. The lines of the mag-
netic field 
generally emerge in the Southern Hemisphere and reenter Earth in
the Northern Hemisphere. Thus, the magnetic pole that is in Earth’s Northern
Hemisphere and known as a “north magnetic pole” is really the south pole of
Earth’s magnetic dipole.
B
:
m
:
m
:
&
m
:
m
:
