C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
3
1
903
Electromagnetic Oscillations
and Alternating Current
31-1 LC OSCILLATIONS
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
31.01 Sketch an LC oscillator and explain which quantities
oscillate and what constitutes one period of the oscillation.
31.02 For an LC oscillator, sketch graphs of the potential
difference across the capacitor and the current through
the inductor as functions of time, and indicate the period
T on each graph.
31.03 Explain the analogy between a block–spring oscillator
and an LC oscillator.
31.04 For an LC oscillator, apply the relationships between
the angular frequency v (and the related frequency f
and period T ) and the values of the inductance and
capacitance.
31.05 Starting with the energy of a block–spring system,
explain the derivation of the differential equation for charge
q in an LC oscillator and then identify the solution for q(t).
31.06 For an LC oscillator, calculate the charge q on the ca-
pacitor for any given time and identify the amplitude Q of
the charge oscillations.
31.07 Starting from the equation giving the charge q(t)
on the capacitor in an LC oscillator, find the current i(t)
in the inductor as a function of time.
31.08 For an LC oscillator, calculate the current i in the
inductor for any given time and identify the amplitude I
of the current oscillations.
31.09 For an LC oscillator, apply the relationship between
the charge amplitude Q, the current amplitude I, and the
angular frequency v.
31.10 From the expressions for the charge q and the current
i in an LC oscillator, find the magnetic field energy UB(t)
and the electric field energy UE(t) and the total energy.
31.11 For an LC oscillator, sketch graphs of the magnetic
field energy UB(t), the electric field energy UE(t), and the
total energy, all as functions of time.
31.12 Calculate the maximum values of the magnetic field
energy UB and the electric field energy UE and also
calculate the total energy.
Learning Objectives
●In an oscillating LC circuit, energy is shuttled periodically
between the electric field of the capacitor and the magnetic
field of the inductor; instantaneous values of the two forms of
energy are
where q is the instantaneous charge on the capacitor and i is
the instantaneous current through the inductor. 
●The total energy U (! UE $ UB) remains constant.
●The principle of conservation of energy leads to
(LC oscillations)
as the differential equation of LC oscillations (with no
resistance).
L d2q
dt2 $ 1
C q ! 0
UE ! q2
2C   and  UB ! Li2
2 ,
●The solution of this differential equation is
q ! Q cos(vt $ f)
(charge),
in which Q is the charge amplitude (maximum charge 
on the capacitor) and the angular frequency v of the 
oscillations is
●The phase constant f is determined by the initial conditions
(at t ! 0) of the system.
●The current i in the system at any time t is
i ! 'vQ sin(vt $ f)
(current),
in which vQ is the current amplitude I.
v !
1
1LC
.
Key Ideas
