997
33-7 POLARIZATION BY REFLECTION
Ken Kay/Fundamental Photographs
Figure 33-23 (a) Total internal reflection of light from a point source S in glass occurs
for all angles of incidence greater than the critical angle uc.At the critical angle, the
refracted ray points along the air–glass interface. (b) A source in a tank of water.
Air
Glass
S
a b 
c 
d 
e 
g
f
θ c
Critical case 
If the next index is lower
and the incident angle is
large enough, the light
can be trapped inside.
(a)
(b)
which gives us
(critical angle).
(33-45)
Because the sine of an angle cannot exceed unity, n2 cannot exceed n1 in this
equation. This restriction tells us that total internal reflection cannot occur when
the incident light is in the medium of lower index of refraction. If source S were
in the air in Fig. 33-23a, all its rays that are incident on the air–glass interface
(including f and g) would be both reflected and refracted at the interface.
Total internal reflection has found many applications in medical technology.
For example, a physician can view the interior of an artery of a patient by running
two thin bundles of optical fibers through the chest wall and into an artery 
(Fig. 33-24). Light introduced at the outer end of one bundle undergoes repeated
total internal reflection within the fibers so that, even though the bundle provides
a curved path, most of the light ends up exiting the other end and illuminating the
interior of the artery. Some of the light reflected from the interior then comes
back up the second bundle in a similar way, to be detected and converted to an
image on a monitor’s screen for the physician to view. The physician can then
perform a surgical procedure, such as the placement of a stent.
uc ! sin&1 n2
n1
33-7 POLARIZATION BY REFLECTION
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
33.48 With sketches, explain how unpolarized light can be
converted to polarized light by reflection from an interface.
33.49 Identify Brewster’s angle.
33.50 Apply the relationship between Brewster’s angle and
the indexes of refraction on the two sides of an interface.
33.51 Explain the function of polarizing sunglasses.
Learning Objectives
●A reflected wave will be fully polarized, with its 
vectors perpendicular to the plane of incidence, if it strikes a boundary at the
Brewster angle uB, where
(Brewster angle).
uB ! tan&1 n2
n1
E
:
Key Idea
Figure 33-24 An endoscope used to inspect an
artery.
©Laurent/Phototake
