685
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
2
4
Electric Potential
24-1 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
24.01 Identify that the electric force is conservative and thus
has an associated potential energy.
24.02 Identify that at every point in a charged object’s electric
field, the object sets up an electric potential V, which is a
scalar quantity that can be positive or negative depending
on the sign of the object’s charge.
24.03 For a charged particle placed at a point in an object’s
electric field, apply the relationship between the object’s
electric potential V at that point, the particle’s charge q,
and the potential energy U of the particle–object system.
24.04 Convert energies between units of joules and 
electron-volts.
24.05 If a charged particle moves from an initial point to a 
final point in an electric field, apply the relationships 
between the change V in the potential, the particle’s
charge q, the change U in the potential energy, and the
work W done by the electric force.
24.06 If a charged particle moves between two given points
in the electric field of a charged object, identify that the
amount of work done by the electric force is path
independent.
24.07 If a charged particle moves through a change V in
electric potential without an applied force acting on it, relate
V and the change K in the particle’s kinetic energy.
24.08 If a charged particle moves through a change V in
electric potential while an applied force acts on it, relate 
V, the change K in the particle’s kinetic energy, and the
work Wapp done by the applied force.
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
●The electric potential V at a point P in the electric field of a
charged object is
V $
where 
is the work that would be done by the electric 
force on a positive test charge q0 were it brought from an 
infinite distance to P, and U is the electric potential energy
that would then be stored in the test charge–object system.
●If a particle with charge q is placed at a point where the
electric potential of a charged object is V, the electric 
potential energy U of the particle–object system is
U $ qV.
●If the particle moves through a potential difference !V, the
change in the electric potential energy is
W0
'W0
q0
$ U
q0
,
!U $ q !V $ q(Vf ' Vi).
●If a particle moves through a change !V in electric 
potential without an applied force acting on it, applying
the conservation of mechanical energy gives the change in 
kinetic energy as
!K $ 'q !V.
●If, instead, an applied force acts on the particle, doing work
Wapp, the change in kinetic energy is
!K $ 'q !V " Wapp.
●In the special case when !K $ 0, the work of an applied
force involves only the motion of the particle through a
potential difference:
Wapp $ q !V.
Learning Objectives
Key Ideas
What Is Physics?
One goal of physics is to identify basic forces in our world, such as the electric
force we discussed in Chapter 21. A related goal is to determine whether a force
is conservative—that is, whether a potential energy can be associated with it.The
motivation for associating a potential energy with a force is that we can then
