413
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
1
5
Oscillations
15-1 SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
15.01 Distinguish simple harmonic motion from other types of
periodic motion.
15.02 For a simple harmonic oscillator, apply the relationship
between position x and time t to calculate either if given a
value for the other.
15.03 Relate period T, frequency f, and angular frequency v.
15.04 Identify (displacement) amplitude xm, phase constant
(or phase angle) f, and phase vt # f.
15.05 Sketch a graph of the oscillator’s position x versus time
t, identifying amplitude xm and period T.
15.06 From a graph of position versus time, velocity versus
time, or acceleration versus time, determine the amplitude
of the plot and the value of the phase constant f.
15.07 On a graph of position x versus time t describe the ef-
fects of changing period T, frequency f, amplitude xm, or
phase constant f.
15.08 Identify the phase constant f that corresponds to the
starting time (t ! 0) being set when a particle in SHM is
at an extreme point or passing through the center point.
15.09 Given an oscillator’s position x(t) as a function of time,
find its velocity v(t) as a function of time, identify the veloc-
ity amplitude vm in the result, and calculate the velocity at
any given time.
15.10 Sketch a graph of an oscillator’s velocity v versus time t,
identifying the velocity amplitude vm.
15.11 Apply the relationship between velocity amplitude vm,
angular frequency v, and (displacement) amplitude xm.
15.12 Given an oscillator’s velocity v(t) as a function of time,
calculate its acceleration a(t) as a function of time, identify
the acceleration amplitude am in the result, and calculate
the acceleration at any given time.
15.13 Sketch a graph of an oscillator’s acceleration a versus
time t, identifying the acceleration amplitude am.
15.14 Identify that for a simple harmonic oscillator the acceler-
ation a at any instant is always given by the product of a
negative constant and the displacement x just then.
15.15 For any given instant in an oscillation, apply the relation-
ship between acceleration a, angular frequency v, and dis-
placement x.
15.16 Given data about the position x and velocity v at one 
instant, determine the phase vt # f and phase constant f.
15.17 For a spring–block oscillator, apply the relationships be-
tween spring constant k and mass m and either period T or
angular frequency v.
15.18 Apply Hooke’s law to relate the force F on a simple har-
monic oscillator at any instant to the displacement x of the
oscillator at that instant.
●The frequency f of periodic, or oscillatory, motion is the
number of oscillations per second. In the SI system, it is
measured in hertz: 1 Hz ! 1 s%1.
●The period T is the time required for one complete oscilla-
tion, or cycle. It is related to the frequency by T ! 1/f.
●In simple harmonic motion (SHM), the displacement x(t) of a
particle from its equilibrium position is described by the equation
x ! xm cos(vt # f)
(displacement),
in which xm is the amplitude of the displacement, vt # f is
the phase of the motion, and f is the phase constant. The
angular frequency v is related to the period and frequency of
the motion by v ! 2p/T ! 2pf.
●Differentiating x(t) leads to equations for the particle’s
SHM velocity and acceleration as functions of time:
v ! %vxm sin(vt # f)
(velocity)
and
a ! %v2xm cos(vt # f)
(acceleration).
In the velocity function, the positive quantity vxm is the veloc-
ity amplitude vm. In the acceleration function, the positive
quantity v2xm is the acceleration amplitude am.
●A particle with mass m that moves under the influence of a
Hooke’s law restoring force given by F ! %kx is a linear sim-
ple harmonic oscillator with
(angular frequency)
and
(period).
T ! 2p A
m
k
v ! A
k
m
Key Ideas
Learning Objectives
