Avogadro’s Number
When our thinking is slanted toward atoms and molecules, it makes sense to
measure the sizes of our samples in moles. If we do so, we can be certain that we
are comparing samples that contain the same number of atoms or molecules.
The mole is one of the seven SI base units and is defined as follows:
550
CHAPTER 19
THE KINETIC THEORY OF GASES
One mole is the number of atoms in a 12 g sample of carbon-12.
The obvious question now is: “How many atoms or molecules are there in a
mole?”The answer is determined experimentally and, as you saw in Chapter 18, is
NA # 6.02 ' 1023 mol$1
(Avogadro’s number),
(19-1)
where mol$1 represents the inverse mole or “per mole,” and mol is the abbre-
viation for mole. The number NA is called Avogadro’s number after Italian sci-
entist Amedeo Avogadro (1776–1856), who suggested that all gases occupying
the same volume under the same conditions of temperature and pressure contain
the same number of atoms or molecules.
The number of moles n contained in a sample of any substance is equal to the
ratio of the number of molecules N in the sample to the number of molecules
NA in 1 mol:
.
(19-2)
(Caution: The three symbols in this equation can easily be confused with one
another, so you should sort them with their meanings now, before you end in
“N-confusion.”) We can find the number of moles n in a sample from the mass
Msam of the sample and either the molar mass M (the mass of 1 mol) or the
molecular mass m (the mass of one molecule):
.
(19-3)
In Eq. 19-3, we used the fact that the mass M of 1 mol is the product of the mass
m of one molecule and the number of molecules NA in 1 mol:
M # mNA.
(19-4)
n # M sam
M
# M sam
mN A
n #
N
N A
19-2 IDEAL GASES
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
19.04 Identify why an ideal gas is said to be ideal.
19.05 Apply either of the two forms of the ideal gas law, writ-
ten in terms of the number of moles n or the number of
molecules N.
19.06 Relate the ideal gas constant R and the Boltzmann
constant k.
19.07 Identify that the temperature in the ideal gas law must
be in kelvins.
19.08 Sketch p-V diagrams for a constant-temperature
expansion of a gas and a constant-temperature 
contraction.
19.09 Identify the term isotherm.
19.10 Calculate the work done by a gas, including the al-
gebraic sign, for an expansion and a contraction along
an isotherm.
19.11 For an isothermal process, identify that the change in
internal energy %E is zero and that the energy Q trans-
ferred as heat is equal to the work W done.
19.12 On a p-V diagram, sketch a constant-volume process
and identify the amount of work done in terms of area on
the diagram.
19.13 On a p-V diagram, sketch a constant-pressure
process and determine the work done in terms of area
on the diagram.
Learning Objectives
