1072
CHAPTER 35
INTERFERENCE
Huygens’ Principle
The three-dimensional transmission of
waves, including light, may often be predicted by Huygens’ princi-
ple, which states that all points on a wavefront serve as point
sources of spherical secondary wavelets.After a time t, the new po-
sition of the wavefront will be that of a surface tangent to these
secondary wavelets.
The law of refraction can be derived from Huygens’ principle
by assuming that the index of refraction of any medium is n ! c/v,
in which v is the speed of light in the medium and c is the speed of
light in vacuum.
Wavelength and Index of Refraction
The wavelength ln
of light in a medium depends on the index of refraction n of the
medium:
(35-6)
in which l is the wavelength in vacuum. Because of this dependency,
the phase difference between two waves can change if they pass
through different materials with different indexes of refraction.
Young’s Experiment
In Young’s interference experiment,
light passing through a single slit falls on two slits in a screen. The
light leaving these slits flares out (by diffraction), and interference
occurs in the region beyond the screen.A fringe pattern, due to the
interference, forms on a viewing screen.
The light intensity at any point on the viewing screen depends
in part on the difference in the path lengths from the slits to that
point. If this difference is an integer number of wavelengths, the
waves interfere constructively and an intensity maximum results.
If it is an odd number of half-wavelengths, there is destructive in-
terference and an intensity minimum occurs. The conditions for
maximum and minimum intensity are
d sin u ! ml,
for m ! 0, 1, 2, . . .
(maxima—bright fringes),
(35-14)
(minima—dark fringes),
(35-16)
where u is the angle the light path makes with a central axis and d
is the slit separation.
d sin u ! (m ' 1
2)l,  for m ! 0, 1, 2, . . .
ln ! l
n ,
Review & Summary
Coherence
If two light waves that meet at a point are to interfere
perceptibly, the phase difference between them must remain constant
with time; that is, the waves must be coherent. When two coherent
waves meet,the resulting intensity may be found by using phasors.
Intensity in Two-Slit Interference
In Young’s interference
experiment, two waves, each with intensity I 0, yield a resultant
wave of intensity I at the viewing screen, with
(35-22, 35-23)
Equations 35-14 and 35-16, which identify the positions of the
fringe maxima and minima, are contained within this relation.
Thin-Film Interference
When light is incident on a thin
transparent film, the light waves reflected from the front and back
surfaces interfere. For near-normal incidence, the wavelength con-
ditions for maximum and minimum intensity of the light reflected
from a film in air are
(maxima—bright film in air),
(35-36)
(minima—dark film in air),
(35-37)
where n2 is the index of refraction of the film, L is its thickness, and
l is the wavelength of the light in air.
If the light incident at an interface between media with dif-
ferent indexes of refraction is in the medium with the smaller
index of refraction, the reflection causes a phase change of p
rad, or half a wavelength, in the reflected wave. Otherwise, there
is no phase change due to the reflection. Refraction causes no
phase shift.
The Michelson Interferometer
In Michelson’s interferom-
eter a light wave is split into two beams that, after traversing paths
of different lengths, are recombined so they interfere and form a
fringe pattern. Varying the path length of one of the beams allows
distances to be accurately expressed in terms of wavelengths of
light, by counting the number of fringes through which the pattern
shifts because of the change.
2L ! m l
n2
,  for m ! 0, 1, 2, . . .
2L ! (m ' 1
2) l
n2
,  for m ! 0, 1, 2, . . .
I ! 4I0 cos2 1
2f,  where f ! 2pd
l
 sin u.
1
Does the spacing between fringes in a two-slit interference pat-
tern increase, decrease, or stay the same if (a) the slit separation is
increased, (b) the color of the light is switched from red to blue,
and (c) the whole apparatus is submerged in cooking sherry? (d) If
the slits are illuminated with white light, then at any side maxi-
mum, does the blue component or the red component peak closer
to the central maximum?
2
(a) If you move from one bright fringe in a two-slit interference
pattern to the next one farther out, (b) does the path length differ-
ence 2L increase or decrease and (c) by how much does it change,
in wavelengths l?
3
Figure 35-22 shows two light rays that are initially exactly in
phase and that reflect from several glass surfaces. Neglect the
Questions
slight slant in the path of the light in
the second arrangement. (a) What is
the path length difference of the
rays? In wavelengths l, (b) what
should that path length difference
equal if the rays are to be exactly
out of phase when they emerge,
and (c) what is the smallest value of
d that will allow that final phase
difference?
4
In Fig. 35-23, three pulses of
light—a, b, and c—of the same
wavelength are sent through layers
Figure 35-22 Question 3.
d
d
d
Figure 35-23 Question 4.
a
b
c
1.60
1.50
1.55
