703
24-7 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL ENERGY OF A SYSTEM OF CHARGED PARTICLES
Electric Potential Energy of a System of Charged Particles
In this module we are going to calculate the potential energy of a system of two
charged particles and then briefly discuss how to expand the result to a system of
more than two particles. Our starting point is to examine the work we must do (as
an external agent) to bring together two charged particles that are initially infi-
nitely far apart and that end up near each other and stationary. If the two parti-
cles have the same sign of charge, we must fight against their mutual repulsion.
Our work is then positive and results in a positive potential energy for the final
two-particle system. If, instead, the two particles have opposite signs of charge,
our job is easy because of the mutual attraction of the particles. Our work is then
negative and results in a negative potential energy for the system.
Let’s follow this procedure to build the two-particle system in Fig. 24-18, where
particle 1 (with positive charge q1) and particle 2 (with positive charge q2) have sep-
aration r.Although both particles are positively charged, our result will apply also
to situations where they are both negatively charged or have different signs.
We start with particle 2 fixed in place and particle 1 infinitely far away, with
an initial potential energy Ui for the two-particle system. Next we bring particle 1
to its final position, and then the system’s potential energy is Uf. Our work
changes the system’s potential energy by !U $ Uf ' Ui.
With Eq. 24-4 (!U $ q(Vf ' Vi)), we can relate !U to the change in potential
through which we move particle 1:
Uf ' Ui $ q1(Vf ' Vi).
(24-43)
Let’s evaluate these terms.The initial potential energy is Ui $ 0 because the parti-
cles are in the reference configuration (as discussed in Module 24-1). The two
potentials in Eq. 24-43 are due to particle 2 and are given by Eq. 24-26:
(24-44)
This tells us that when particle 1 is initially at distance r $ 0, the potential at its
location is Vi $ 0. When we move it to the final position at distance r, the poten-
tial at its location is
(24-45)
Vf $
1
4p´0
q2
r .
V $
1
4p´0
q2
r .
r
q1
q2
+
+
Figure 24-18 Two charges held a fixed
distance r apart.
24-7 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL ENERGY OF A SYSTEM OF CHARGED PARTICLES
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
24.27 Identify that the total potential energy of a system of
charged particles is equal to the work an applied force
must do to assemble the system, starting with the particles
infinitely far apart.
24.28 Calculate the potential energy of a pair of charged
particles.
24.29 Identify that if a system has more than two charged parti-
cles, then the system’s total potential energy is equal to the
sum of the potential energies of every pair of the particles.
24.30 Apply the principle of the conservation of mechanical
energy to a system of charged particles.
24.31 Calculate the escape speed of a charged particle 
from a system of charged particles (the minimum initial
speed required to move infinitely far from the system).
Learning Objectives
●The electric potential energy of a system of charged particles is equal to the work needed to assemble the system with the
particles initially at rest and infinitely distant from each other. For two particles at separation r,
U $ W $
1
4p´0
q1q2
r
.
Key Idea
