Thermal Expansion
You can often loosen a tight metal jar lid by holding it under a stream of hot water.
Both the metal of the lid and the glass of the jar expand as the hot water adds en-
ergy to their atoms. (With the added energy, the atoms can move a bit farther from
one another than usual, against the spring-like interatomic forces that hold every
solid together.) However, because the atoms in the metal move farther apart than
those in the glass,the lid expands more than the jar and thus is loosened.
Such thermal expansion of materials with an increase in temperature must be
anticipated in many common situations. When a bridge is subject to large
seasonal changes in temperature, for example, sections of the bridge are
separated by expansion slots so that the sections have room to expand on hot
days without the bridge buckling. When a dental cavity is filled, the filling mate-
rial must have the same thermal expansion properties as the surrounding tooth;
otherwise, consuming cold ice cream and then hot coffee would be very painful.
When the Concorde aircraft (Fig. 18-9) was built, the design had to allow for the
thermal expansion of the fuselage during supersonic flight because of frictional
heating by the passing air.
The thermal expansion properties of some materials can be put to common
use.Thermometers and thermostats may be based on the differences in expansion
between the components of a bimetal strip (Fig. 18-10).Also, the familiar liquid-in-
glass thermometers are based on the fact that liquids such as mercury and alcohol
expand to a different (greater) extent than their glass containers.
Linear Expansion
If the temperature of a metal rod of length L is raised by an amount %T, its length
is found to increase by an amount
%L # La %T,
(18-9)
520
CHAPTER 18
TEMPERATURE, HEAT, AND THE FIRST LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS
18-3 THERMAL EXPANSION
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
18.08 For one-dimensional thermal expansion, apply the rela-
tionship between the temperature change %T, the length
change %L, the initial length L, and the coefficient of linear
expansion a.
18.09 For two-dimensional thermal expansion, use one-
dimensional thermal expansion to find the change in area.
18.10 For three-dimensional thermal expansion, apply the re-
lationship between the temperature change %T, the vol-
ume change %V, the initial volume V, and the coefficient of
volume expansion b.
Learning Objectives
●All objects change size with changes in temperature. For a
temperature change %T, a change %L in any linear dimension
L is given by
%L # La %T,
in which a is the coefficient of linear expansion.
Key Ideas
●The change 
in the volume V of a solid or liquid is
%V # Vb %T.
Here b # 3a is the material’s coefficient of volume 
expansion.
%V
Figure 18-9 When a Concorde flew faster
than the speed of sound, thermal expan-
sion due to the rubbing by passing air
increased the aircraft’s length by about
12.5 cm. (The temperature increased to
about 128 C at the aircraft nose and about
90 C at the tail, and cabin windows were
noticeably warm to the touch.) 
-
-
Hugh Thomas/BWP Media/Getty Images, Inc.
Figure 18-10 (a) A bimetal strip, consisting
of a strip of brass and a strip of steel
welded together, at temperature T0.
(b) The strip bends as shown at tempera-
tures above this reference temperature.
Below the reference temperature the
strip bends the other way. Many thermo-
stats operate on this principle, making
and breaking an electrical contact as the
temperature rises and falls.
Brass
Steel
T = T0
(a)
T  > T0
(b)
Different amounts of
expansion or contraction
can produce bending.
