1032
CHAPTER 34
IMAGES
From Fig. 34-19, assuming that O is at the focal point of the lens, and approxi-
mating tan u as u and tan u# as u# for small angles, we have
u % h/25 cm
and
u# % h/f.
We then find that
(simple magnifier).
(34-12)
Compound Microscope
Figure 34-20 shows a thin-lens version of a compound microscope. The instru-
ment consists of an objective (the front lens) of focal length fob and an eyepiece
(the lens near the eye) of focal length fey. It is used for viewing small objects that
are very close to the objective.
The object O to be viewed is placed just outside the first focal point F1 of the
objective, close enough to F1 that we can approximate its distance p from the lens
as being fob. The separation between the lenses is then adjusted so that the
enlarged, inverted, real image I produced by the objective is located just inside
the first focal point F#1 of the eyepiece. The tube length s shown in Fig. 34-20 is
actually large relative to fob, and therefore we can approximate the distance i
between the objective and the image I as being length s.
From Eq. 34-6, and using our approximations for p and i, we can write the
lateral magnification produced by the objective as
(34-13)
Because the image I is located just inside the focal point F#1 of the eyepiece, the
eyepiece acts as a simple magnifying lens, and an observer sees a final (virtual,
inverted) image I# through it. The overall magnification of the instrument is
the product of the lateral magnification m produced by the objective, given by
Eq. 34-13, and the angular magnification mu produced by the eyepiece, given
by Eq. 34-12; that is,
(microscope).
(34-14)
Refracting Telescope
Telescopes come in a variety of forms. The form we describe here is the simple
refracting telescope that consists of an objective and an eyepiece; both are repre-
sented in Fig. 34-21 with simple lenses, although in practice, as is also true for
most microscopes, each lens is actually a compound lens system.
M ! mmu ! & s
fob
 25 cm
fey
m ! & i
p ! & s
fob
.
mu % 25 cm
f
fob
F1
fob
fey
s
Objective
To distant virtual image 
Eyepiece
Parallel
rays
F2
O
I
F1'
I'
Figure 34-20 A thin-lens representation of a compound microscope (not to scale). The
objective produces a real image I of object O just inside the focal point F#1 of the eye-
piece. Image I then acts as an object for the eyepiece, which produces a virtual final
image I# that is seen by the observer. The objective has focal length fob; the eyepiece has
focal length fey; and s is the tube length.
