covered that the predicted Fresnel bright spot, as we call it today, was indeed there
(Fig.36-3).Nothing builds confidence in a theory so much as having one of its unex-
pected and counterintuitive predictions verified by experiment.
Diffraction by a Single Slit: Locating the Minima
Let us now examine the diffraction pattern of plane waves of light of wavelength
l that are diffracted by a single long, narrow slit of width a in an otherwise
opaque screen B, as shown in cross section in Fig. 36-4. (In that figure, the slit’s
length extends into and out of the page, and the incoming wavefronts are parallel
to screen B.) When the diffracted light reaches viewing screen C, waves from
different points within the slit undergo interference and produce a diffraction
pattern of bright and dark fringes (interference maxima and minima) on the
screen. To locate the fringes, we shall use a procedure somewhat similar to the
one we used to locate the fringes in a two-slit interference pattern. However,
diffraction is more mathematically challenging, and here we shall be able to find
equations for only the dark fringes.
Before we do that, however, we can justify the central bright fringe seen in
Fig. 36-1 by noting that the Huygens wavelets from all points in the slit travel
about the same distance to reach the center of the pattern and thus are in phase
there.As for the other bright fringes, we can say only that they are approximately
halfway between adjacent dark fringes.
Pairings. To find the dark fringes, we shall use a clever (and simplifying)
strategy that involves pairing up all the rays coming through the slit and then
finding what conditions cause the wavelets of the rays in each pair to cancel each
other.We apply this strategy in Fig. 36-4 to locate the first dark fringe, at point P1.
First, we mentally divide the slit into two zones of equal widths a/2. Then we ex-
tend to P1 a light ray r1 from the top point of the top zone and a light ray r2 from
the top point of the bottom zone. We want the wavelets along these two rays to
cancel each other when they arrive at P1. Then any similar pairing of rays from
the two zones will give cancellation.A central axis is drawn from the center of the
slit to screen C, and P1 is located at an angle u to that axis.
Path Length Difference. The wavelets of the pair of rays r1 and r2 are in
phase within the slit because they originate from the same wavefront passing
through the slit, along the width of the slit. However, to produce the first dark
fringe they must be out of phase by l/2 when they reach P1; this phase difference
is due to their path length difference, with the path traveled by the wavelet of r2
to reach P1 being longer than the path traveled by the wavelet of r1. To display
this path length difference, we find a point b on ray r2 such that the path length
from b to P1 matches the path length of ray r1.Then the path length difference be-
tween the two rays is the distance from the center of the slit to b.
When viewing screen C is near screen B, as in Fig. 36-4, the diffraction
pattern on C is difficult to describe mathematically. However, we can simplify the
mathematics considerably if we arrange for the screen separation D to be much
larger than the slit width a.Then, as in Fig. 36-5, we can approximate rays r1 and r2
1083
36-1 SINGLE-SLIT DIFFRACTION
Courtesy Jearl Walker
Figure 36-3 A photograph of the diffraction
pattern of a disk. Note the concentric
diffraction rings and the Fresnel bright
spot at the center of the pattern.This
experiment is essentially identical to
that arranged by the committee testing
Fresnel’s theories, because both the sphere
they used and the disk used here have a
cross section with a circular edge.
P1
D
P0
r1
r2
a/2
a/2
B
Viewing
screen
C
Central axis
Incident
wave
θ 
Totally destructive
interference
b
This pair of rays cancel
each other at P1. So 
do all such pairings.
Figure 36-4 Waves from the top points of two
zones of width a/2 undergo fully destructive
interference at point P1 on viewing screen C.
Figure 36-5 For D
a, we can
approximate rays r1 and r2 as
being parallel, at angle u to the
central axis.
4
θ 
r1
r2
a/2
b
θ 
Path length
difference
θ 
This path length 
difference shifts 
one wave from the
other, which 
determines
the interference.
This path length 
difference shifts 
one wave from the
other, which 
determines
the interference.
This path length 
difference shifts 
one wave from the
other, which 
determines
the interference.
