914
CHAPTER 31
ELECTROMAGNETIC OSCILLATIONS AND ALTERNATING CURRENT
Figure 31-7 A single-loop circuit containing a
resistor, a capacitor, and an inductor.A
generator, represented by a sine wave in a
circle, produces an alternating emf that es-
tablishes an alternating current; the direc-
tions of the emf and current are indicated
here at only one instant.
i
i
i
C
R
L
Figure 31-8 A resistor is connected across an
alternating-current generator.
iR
R
vR
The angular frequency vd of the emf is equal to the angular speed with which the
loop rotates in the magnetic field, the phase of the emf is vdt, and the amplitude of
the emf is #m (where the subscript stands for maximum).When the rotating loop
is part of a closed conducting path, this emf produces (drives) a sinusoidal (alter-
nating) current along the path with the same angular frequency vd, which then is
called the driving angular frequency. We can write the current as
i ! I sin(vdt ' f),
(31-29)
in which I is the amplitude of the driven current. (The phase vdt ' f of the cur-
rent is traditionally written with a minus sign instead of as vdt $ f.) We include
a phase constant f in Eq. 31-29 because the current i may not be in phase with
the emf #. (As you will see, the phase constant depends on the circuit to which
the generator is connected.) We can also write the current i in terms of the
driving frequency fd of the emf, by substituting 2pfd for vd in Eq. 31-29.
Forced Oscillations
We have seen that once started, the charge, potential difference, and current in
both undamped LC circuits and damped RLC circuits (with small enough R)
oscillate at angular frequency 
. Such oscillations are said to be free
oscillations (free of any external emf), and the angular frequency v is said to be
the circuit’s natural angular frequency.
When the external alternating emf of Eq. 31-28 is connected to an RLC
circuit, the oscillations of charge, potential difference, and current are said to be
driven oscillations or forced oscillations. These oscillations always occur at the
driving angular frequency vd:
v ! 1/1LC
Whatever the natural angular frequency v of a circuit may be, forced oscillations
of charge, current, and potential difference in the circuit always occur at the driv-
ing angular frequency vd.
However,as you will see in Module 31-4,the amplitudes of the oscillations very much
depend on how close vd is to v.When the two angular frequencies match—a condi-
tion known as resonance—the amplitude I of the current in the circuit is maximum.
Three Simple Circuits
Later in this chapter, we shall connect an external alternating emf device to 
a series RLC circuit as in Fig. 31-7. We shall then find expressions for the
amplitude I and phase constant f of the sinusoidally oscillating current in
terms of the amplitude #m and angular frequency vd of the external emf. First,
let’s consider three simpler circuits, each having an external emf and only one
other circuit element: R, C, or L. We start with a resistive element (a purely re-
sistive load).
A Resistive Load
Figure 31-8 shows a circuit containing a resistance element of value R and an
ac generator with the alternating emf of Eq. 31-28. By the loop rule, we have
# ' vR ! 0.
With Eq. 31-28, this gives us
vR ! #m sin vdt.
Because the amplitude VR of the alternating potential difference (or voltage)
across the resistance is equal to the amplitude #m of the alternating emf, we can
