880
CHAPTER 30
INDUCTION AND INDUCTANCE
The crude inductors with which Michael
Faraday discovered the law of induction. In
those days amenities such as insulated wire
were not commercially available. It is said
that Faraday insulated his wires by wrap-
ping them with strips cut from one of his
wife’s petticoats.
The Royal Institution/Bridgeman Art Library/NY
in which N is the number of turns. The windings of the inductor are said to be
linked by the shared flux, and the product N0B is called the magnetic flux linkage.
The inductance L is thus a measure of the flux linkage produced by the inductor
per unit of current.
Because the SI unit of magnetic flux is the tesla–square meter, the SI unit of
inductance is the tesla–square meter per ampere (T)m2/A). We call this the
henry (H), after American physicist Joseph Henry, the codiscoverer of the law of
induction and a contemporary of Faraday.Thus,
1 henry ! 1 H ! 1 T)m2/A.
(30-29)
Through the rest of this chapter we assume that all inductors, no matter what
their geometric arrangement, have no magnetic materials such as iron in their
vicinity. Such materials would distort the magnetic field of an inductor.
Inductance of a Solenoid
Consider a long solenoid of cross-sectional area A. What is the inductance
per unit length near its middle? To use the defining equation for inductance
(Eq. 30-28), we must calculate the flux linkage set up by a given current in the so-
lenoid windings. Consider a length l near the middle of this solenoid. The flux
linkage there is
N0B ! (nl)(BA),
in which n is the number of turns per unit length of the solenoid and B is the 
magnitude of the magnetic field within the solenoid.
The magnitude B is given by Eq. 29-23,
B ! m0in,
and so from Eq. 30-28,
(30-30)
Thus, the inductance per unit length near the center of a long solenoid is
(solenoid).
(30-31)
Inductance—like capacitance—depends only on the geometry of the device.
The dependence on the square of the number of turns per unit length is to be
expected. If you, say, triple n, you not only triple the number of turns (N) but you
also triple the flux (0B ! BA ! m0inA) through each turn, multiplying the flux
linkage N0B and thus the inductance L by a factor of 9.
If the solenoid is very much longer than its radius, then Eq. 30-30 gives its
inductance to a good approximation. This approximation neglects the spreading
of the magnetic field lines near the ends of the solenoid, just as the parallel-plate
capacitor formula (C ! ´0A/d) neglects the fringing of the electric field lines near
the edges of the capacitor plates.
From Eq. 30-30, and recalling that n is a number per unit length, we can see
that an inductance can be written as a product of the permeability constant m0
and a quantity with the dimensions of a length. This means that m0 can be ex-
pressed in the unit henry per meter:
(30-32)
The latter is the more common unit for the permeability constant.
! 4p $ 10 %7 H/m.
m0 ! 4p $ 10 %7 T)m/A
L
l ! m0n2A
! m0n2lA.
L ! N0B
i
! (nl)(BA)
i
! (nl)(m 0in)(A)
i
