These two types of neutrino are known to be different particles because, if
a beam of muon neutrinos (produced from pion decay as in Eq. 44-7) strikes a
solid target, only muons—and never electrons—are produced. On the other
hand, if electron neutrinos (produced by the beta decay of fission products in
a nuclear reactor) strike a solid target, only electrons—and never muons—are
produced.
Another lepton, the tau, was discovered at SLAC in 1975; its discoverer,
Martin Perl, shared the 1995 Nobel Prize in physics. The tau has its own associ-
ated neutrino, different still from the other two. Table 44-2 lists all the leptons
(both particles and antiparticles); all have a spin quantum number s of .
There are reasons for dividing the leptons into three families, each consist-
ing of a particle (electron, muon, or tau), its associated neutrino, and the corre-
sponding antiparticles. Furthermore, there are reasons to believe that there are
only the three families of leptons shown in Table 44-2. Leptons have no internal
structure and no measurable dimensions; they are believed to be truly pointlike
fundamental particles when they interact with other particles or with electro-
magnetic waves.
The Conservation of Lepton Number
According to experiment, particle interactions involving leptons obey a conser-
vation law for a quantum number called the lepton number L. Each (normal)
particle in Table 44-2 is assigned L ! '1, and each antiparticle is assigned 
L ! #1. All other particles, which are not leptons, are assigned L ! 0. Also 
according to experiment,
1
2
1344
CHAPTER 44
QUARKS, LEPTONS, AND THE BIG BANG
Table 44-2 The Leptonsa
Mass
Family
Particle
Symbol
(MeV/c 2)
Charge q
Antiparticle
Electron
Electron
e#
0.511
#1
e'
Electron neutrinob
ne
% 1 " 10#7
0
n¯ e
Muon
Muon
m#
105.7
#1
m'
Muon neutrinob
nm
% 1 " 10#7
0
n¯m
Tau
Tau
t#
1777
#1
t'
Tau neutrinob
nt
% 1 " 10#7
0
n¯t
aAll leptons have spin quantum numbers of  and are thus fermions.
bThe neutrino masses have not been well determined.Also, because of neutrino oscillations, we might
not be able to associate a particular mass with a particular neutrino.
1
2
In all particle interactions, the net lepton number is conserved.
This experimental fact is called the law of conservation of lepton number. We do
not know why the law must be obeyed; we only know that this conservation law is
part of the way our universe works.
There are actually three types of lepton number, one for each lepton family:
the electron lepton number Le, the muon lepton number Lm, and the tau lepton
number Lt. In nearly all observed interactions, these three quantum numbers are
separately conserved. An important exception involves the neutrinos. For rea-
sons that we cannot explore here, the fact that neutrinos are not massless means
that they can “oscillate” between different types as they travel long distances.
Such oscillations were proposed to explain why only about a third of the 
expected number of electron neutrinos arrive at Earth from the proton-proton
fusion mechanism in the Sun (Fig. 43-11).The rest change on the way.The oscilla-
