672
CHAPTER 23
GAUSS’ LAW
Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
Figure 23-16 (a) Some of the conduction electrons in the woman’s
body are driven into the ground, leaving her positively charged. (b)
An upward streamer develops if the air undergoes electrical break-
down, which provides a path for electrons freed from molecules in
the air to move to the woman. (c) A cylinder represents the woman.
+Q
R
L
e 
e 
e
Upward
streamer
(a) 
(b) 
(c)
from the line of charge if the charge is positive, and radially inward if it is nega-
tive. Equation 23-12 also approximates the field of a finite line of charge at points
that are not too near the ends (compared with the distance from the line).
If the rod has a uniform volume charge density r, we could use a similar pro-
cedure to find the electric field magnitude inside the rod. We would just shrink
the Gaussian cylinder shown in Fig. 23-14 until it is inside the rod.The charge qenc
enclosed by the cylinder would then be proportional to the volume of the rod en-
closed by the cylinder because the charge density is uniform.
Sample Problem 23.06 Gauss’ law and an upward streamer in a lightning storm
Upward streamer in a lightning
storm. The woman in Fig. 23-
15 was standing on a lookout
platform high in the Sequoia
National Park when a large
storm cloud moved overhead.
Some of the conduction elec-
trons in her body were driven
into the ground by the cloud’s
negatively charged base (Fig.
23-16a), leaving her positively
charged. You can tell she was
highly charged because her
hair strands repelled one an-
other and extended away from
her along the electric field
lines produced by the charge
on her.
Lightning did not strike
the woman, but she was in
extreme danger because that
Figure 23-15 This woman has
become positively charged by
an overhead storm cloud.
Courtesy NOAA
field magnitude along her body had exceeded the critical value
Ec $ 2.4 MN/C.What value of Q would have put the air along
her body on the verge of breakdown?
KEY IDEA
Because R * L, we can approximate the charge distribution
as a long line of charge. Further, because we assume that the
charge is uniformly distributed along this line, we can
approximate the magnitude of the electric field along the
side of her body with Eq. 23-12 (E $ l/2p´0r).
Calculations: Substituting the critical value Ec for E, the
cylinder radius R for radial distance r, and the ratio Q/L for
linear charge density l, we have
or
.
Substituting given data then gives us
(Answer)
$ 2.402 ( 10 '5 C % 24 mC.
( (1.8 m)(2.4 ( 10 6 N/C)
Q $ (2p)(8.85 ( 10 '12 C 2 /N#m2)(0.10 m)
Q $ 2p´0RLEc
Ec $
Q/L
2p´0R ,
electric field was on the verge of causing electrical break-
down in the surrounding air. Such a breakdown would
have occurred along a path extending away from her in
what is called an upward streamer. An upward streamer is
dangerous because the resulting ionization of molecules
in the air suddenly frees a tremendous number of elec-
trons from those molecules. Had the woman in Fig. 23-15
developed an upward streamer, the free electrons in the
air would have moved to neutralize her (Fig. 23-16b), pro-
ducing a large, perhaps fatal, charge flow through her
body. That charge flow is dangerous because it could have
interfered with or even stopped her breathing (which is
obviously necessary for oxygen) and the steady beat of
her heart (which is obviously necessary for the blood flow
that carries the oxygen). The charge flow could also have
caused burns.
Let’s model her body as a narrow vertical cylinder of
height L $ 1.8 m and radius R $ 0.10 m (Fig. 23-16c).Assume
that charge Q was uniformly distributed along the cylinder and
that electrical breakdown would have occurred if the electric
