Conservation of Energy
We now have discussed several situations in which energy is transferred to or
from objects and systems, much like money is transferred between accounts.
In each situation we assume that the energy that was involved could always be
accounted for; that is, energy could not magically appear or disappear. In more
formal language, we assumed (correctly) that energy obeys a law called the law of
conservation of energy, which is concerned with the total energy E of a system.
That total is the sum of the system’s mechanical energy, thermal energy, and any
type of internal energy in addition to thermal energy. (We have not yet discussed
other types of internal energy.) The law states that
195
8-5 CONSERVATION OF ENERGY
The total energy E of a system can change only by amounts of energy that are
transferred to or from the system.
8-5 CONSERVATION OF ENERGY
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
8.15 For an isolated system (no net external force), apply the
conservation of energy to relate the initial total energy 
(energies of all kinds) to the total energy at a later instant.
8.16 For a nonisolated system, relate the work done on the
system by a net external force to the changes in the vari-
ous types of energies within the system.
8.17 Apply the relationship between average power, the 
associated energy transfer, and the time interval in which
that transfer is made.
8.18 Given an energy transfer as a function of time (either as
an equation or a graph), determine the instantaneous
power (the transfer at any given instant).   
Learning Objectives
●The total energy E of a system (the sum of its mechanical
energy and its internal energies, including thermal energy)
can change only by amounts of energy that are transferred to
or from the system. This experimental fact is known as the law
of conservation of energy. 
●If work W is done on the system, then
W ! %E ! %Emec " %Eth " %Eint.
If the system is isolated (W ! 0), this gives
%Emec " %Eth " %Eint ! 0
and
Emec,2 ! Emec,1 $ %Eth $ %Eint,
where the subscripts 1 and 2 refer to two different instants.
●The power due to a force is the rate at which that force
transfers energy. If an amount of energy %E is transferred by
a force in an amount of time %t, the average power of the
force is
●The instantaneous power due to a force is
On a graph of energy E versus time t, the power is the slope
of the plot at any given time.
P ! dE
dt .
Pavg ! %E
%t .
Key Ideas
The only type of energy transfer that we have considered is work W done on a
system by an external force.Thus, for us at this point, this law states that
W ! %E ! %Emec " %Eth " %Eint,
(8-35)
where %Emec is any change in the mechanical energy of the system, %Eth is any
change in the thermal energy of the system, and %Eint is any change in any
other type of internal energy of the system. Included in %Emec are changes %K in
kinetic energy and changes %U in potential energy (elastic, gravitational, or any
other type we might find).
This law of conservation of energy is not something we have derived from
basic physics principles. Rather, it is a law based on countless experiments.
