930
CHAPTER 31
ELECTROMAGNETIC OSCILLATIONS AND ALTERNATING CURRENT
Transformers
Energy Transmission Requirements
When an ac circuit has only a resistive load, the power factor in Eq. 31-76 is 
cos 0° ! 1 and the applied rms emf #rms is equal to the rms voltage Vrms across the
load. Thus, with an rms current Irms in the load, energy is supplied and dissipated
at the average rate of
Pavg ! #I ! IV.
(31-77)
(In Eq. 31-77 and the rest of this module, we follow conventional practice and drop
the subscripts identifying rms quantities. Engineers and scientists assume that all
time-varying currents and voltages are reported as rms values; that is what the me-
ters read.) Equation 31-77 tells us that, to satisfy a given power requirement, we
have a range of choices for I and V, provided only that the product IV is as required.
In electrical power distribution systems it is desirable for reasons of safety
and for efficient equipment design to deal with relatively low voltages at both the
generating end (the electrical power plant) and the receiving end (the home or
factory). Nobody wants an electric toaster to operate at, say, 10 kV. However, in
the transmission of electrical energy from the generating plant to the consumer,
we want the lowest practical current (hence the largest practical voltage) to mini-
mize I 2R losses (often called ohmic losses) in the transmission line.
As an example, consider the 735 kV line used to transmit electrical energy
from the La Grande 2 hydroelectric plant in Quebec to Montreal, 1000 km away.
Suppose that the current is 500 A and the power factor is close to unity. Then
from Eq. 31-77, energy is supplied at the average rate
Pavg ! #I ! (7.35 & 10 5 V)(500 A) ! 368 MW.
31-6 TRANSFORMERS
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
31.49 For power transmission lines, identify why the
transmission should be at low current and high voltage.
31.50 Identify the role of transformers at the two ends of a
transmission line.
31.51 Calculate the energy dissipation in a transmission line.
31.52 Identify a transformer’s primary and secondary.
31.53 Apply the relationship between the voltage and
number of turns on the two sides of a transformer.
31.54 Distinguish between a step-down transformer and a
step-up transformer.
31.55 Apply the relationship between the current and number
of turns on the two sides of a transformer.
31.56 Apply the relationship between the power into and out
of an ideal transformer.
31.57 Identify the equivalent resistance as seen from the
primary side of a transformer.
31.58 Apply the relationship between the equivalent
resistance and the actual resistance.
31.59 Explain the role of a transformer in impedance
matching.
Learning Objectives
●A transformer (assumed to be ideal) is an iron core on
which are wound a primary coil of Np turns and a secondary
coil of Ns turns. If the primary coil is connected across an
alternating-current generator, the primary and secondary
voltages are related by
(transformation of voltage).
●The currents through the coils are related by
Vs ! Vp
Ns
Np
(transformation of currents).
●The equivalent resistance of the secondary circuit, as seen
by the generator, is
where R is the resistive load in the secondary circuit. The
ratio Np/Ns is called the transformer’s turns ratio.
Req !#
Np
Ns $
2
R,
Is ! Ip
Np
Ns
Key Ideas
