tions, then, mean that the individual family lepton numbers are not conserved for
neutrinos. In this book we shall not consider such violations and shall always con-
serve the individual family lepton numbers.
Let’s illustrate such conservation by reconsidering the antimuon decay
process shown in Eq. 44-8, which we now write more fully as
(44-13)
Consider this first in terms of the muon family of leptons.The m' is an antiparticle
(see Table 44-2) and thus has the muon lepton number Lm ! #1.The two particles
e' and ne do not belong to the muon family and thus have Lm ! 0.This leaves n¯m on
the right which, being an antiparticle, also has the muon lepton number Lm ! #1.
Thus, both sides of Eq. 44-13 have the same net muon lepton number—namely,
Lm ! #1;if they did not,the m' would not decay by this process.
No members of the electron family appear on the left in Eq. 44-13; so there
the net electron lepton number must be Le ! 0. On the right side of Eq. 44-13, the
positron, being an antiparticle (again see Table 44-2), has the electron lepton
number Le ! #1.The electron neutrino ne, being a particle, has the electron num-
ber Le ! '1. Thus, the net electron lepton number for these two particles on the
right in Eq. 44-13 is also zero; the electron lepton number is also conserved in the
process.
Because no members of the tau family appear on either side of Eq. 44-13,
we must have Lt ! 0 on each side. Thus, each of the lepton quantum numbers
Lm, Le, and Lt remains unchanged during the decay process of Eq. 44-13, their
constant values being #1, 0, and 0, respectively.
m' : e' ' ne ' ¯nm.
1345
44-2 LEPTONS, HADRONS, AND STRANGENESS
Checkpoint 1
(a) The p' meson decays by the process 
.To what lepton family does
the neutrino n belong? (b) Is this neutrino a particle or an antiparticle? (c) What is its
lepton number?
p' : m' ' n
The Hadrons
We are now ready to consider hadrons (baryons and mesons), those particles
whose interactions are governed by the strong force. We start by adding another
conservation law to our list: conservation of baryon number.
To develop this conservation law, let us consider the proton decay process
(44-14)
This process never happens.We should be glad that it does not because otherwise
all protons in the universe would gradually change into positrons, with disastrous
consequences for us. Yet this decay process does not violate the conservation
laws involving energy, linear momentum, or lepton number.
We account for the apparent stability of the proton—and for the absence of
many other processes that might otherwise occur—by introducing a new quan-
tum number, the baryon number B, and a new conservation law, the conservation
of baryon number:
p : e' ' ne.
To every baryon we assign B ! '1. To every antibaryon we assign B ! #1. To all
particles of other types we assign B ! 0. A particle process cannot occur if it
changes the net baryon number.
In the process of Eq. 44-14, the proton has a baryon number of B ! '1 and
the positron and neutrino both have a baryon number of B ! 0.Thus, the process
does not conserve baryon number and cannot occur.
