851
29-5 A CURRENT-CARRYING COIL AS A MAGNETIC DIPOLE 
Calculation: Because B does not depend on the diameter of
the windings, the value of n for five identical layers is simply
five times the value for each layer.Equation 29-23 then tells us
(Answer)
To a good approximation, this is the field magnitude through-
out most of the solenoid.
! 2.42 $ 10 %2 T ! 24.2 mT.
B ! m0in ! (4p $ 10 %7 T)m/A)(5.57 A) 5 $ 850 turns
1.23 m
Sample Problem 29.04
The field inside a solenoid (a long coil of current)
A solenoid has length L ! 1.23 m and inner diameter 
d ! 3.55 cm, and it carries a current i ! 5.57 A. It consists of
five close-packed layers, each with 850 turns along length L.
What is B at its center?
KEY IDEA
The magnitude B of the magnetic field along the solenoid’s
central axis is related to the solenoid’s current i and number
of turns per unit length n by Eq. 29-23 (B ! m0 in).
Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
29-5 A CURRENT-CARRYING COIL AS A MAGNETIC DIPOLE
Learning Objectives
current i, number of turns N, and area per turn A.
29.24 For a point along the central axis, apply the relationship
between the magnetic field magnitude B, the magnetic
moment m, and the distance z from the center of the coil.
●The magnetic field produced by a current-carrying coil, which is a magnetic dipole, at a point P located a distance z along the
coil’s perpendicular central axis is parallel to the axis and is given by
where 
is the dipole moment of the coil. This equation applies only when z is much greater than the dimensions of the coil.
m
:
B
:(z) ! m 0
2p
m
:
z3 ,
After reading this module, you should be able to . . . 
29.22 Sketch the magnetic field lines of a flat coil that is
carrying current.
29.23 For a current-carrying coil, apply the relationship be-
tween the dipole moment magnitude m and the coil’s
Key Idea
A Current-Carrying Coil as a Magnetic Dipole
So far we have examined the magnetic fields produced by current in a long
straight wire, a solenoid, and a toroid. We turn our attention here to the field
produced by a coil carrying a current. You saw in Module 28-8 that such a coil
behaves as a magnetic dipole in that, if we place it in an external magnetic field ,
a torque 
given by
(29-25)
acts on it. Here 
is the magnetic dipole moment of the coil and has the magni-
tude NiA, where N is the number of turns, i is the current in each turn, and A is
the area enclosed by each turn. (Caution: Don’t confuse the magnetic dipole
moment 
with the permeability constant m0.)
Recall that the direction of 
is given by a curled–straight right-hand rule:
Grasp the coil so that the fingers of your right hand curl around it in the direction
of the current; your extended thumb then points in the direction of the dipole
moment .
m
:
m
:
m
:
m
:
t
: ! m
: $ B
:
t
:
B
:
