1058
CHAPTER 35
INTERFERENCE
Internal wavelength: The wavelength ln of light in a mate-
rial with index of refraction n is smaller than the wavelength
in vacuum, as given by Eq. 35-6 (ln ! l/n). Here, this means
that the wavelength of the light is smaller in the plastic than
in the air. Thus, the ray that passes through the plastic will
have more wavelengths along it than the ray that passes
through only air—so we do get the one extra wavelength
we need along ray r2 by placing the plastic over the top slit,
as drawn in Fig. 35-11b.
Thickness: To determine the required thickness L of the
plastic, we first note that the waves are initially in phase and
travel equal distances L through different materials (plastic
and air). Because we know the phase difference and require
L, we use Eq. 35-9,
(35-19)
We know that N2 & N1 is 1 for a phase difference of one
wavelength, n2 is 1.50 for the plastic in front of the top slit,
n1 is 1.00 for the air in front of the bottom slit, and l is
600 ( 10&9 m.Then Eq. 35-19 tells us that, to shift the lower
m = 1 bright fringe up to the center of the interference pat-
tern, the plastic must have the thickness
(Answer)
! 1.2 ( 10&6 m.
L ! l(N2 & N1)
n2 & n1
! (600 ( 10&9 m)(1)
1.50 & 1.00
N2 & N1 ! L
3  (n2 & n1).
Sample Problem 35.03
Double-slit interference pattern with plastic over one slit
A double-slit interference pattern is produced on a screen,
as in Fig. 35-10; the light is monochromatic at a wavelength
of 600 nm.A strip of transparent plastic with index of refrac-
tion n ! 1.50 is to be placed over one of the slits. Its pres-
ence changes the interference between light waves from the
two slits, causing the interference pattern to be shifted
across the screen from the original pattern. Figure 35-11a
shows the original locations of the central bright fringe
(m ! 0) and the first bright fringes (m ! 1) above and be-
low the central fringe. The purpose of the plastic is to shift
the pattern upward so that the lower m ! 1 bright fringe
is shifted to the center of the pattern. Should the plastic be
placed over the top slit (as arbitrarily drawn in Fig. 35-
11b) or the bottom slit, and what thickness L should it
have?
KEY IDEA
The interference at a point on the screen depends on the
phase difference of the light rays arriving from the two slits.
The light rays are in phase at the slits because they derive
from the same wave, but their relative phase can shift on the
way to the screen due to (1) a difference in the length of the
paths they follow and (2) a difference in the number of their
internal wavelengths ln in the materials through which they
pass. The first condition applies to any off-center point, and
the second condition applies when the plastic covers one of
the slits.
Path length difference: Figure 35-11a shows rays r1 and r2
along which waves from the two slits travel to reach the
lower m ! 1 bright fringe. Those waves start in phase at the
slits but arrive at the fringe with a phase difference of
exactly 1 wavelength.To remind ourselves of this main char-
acteristic of the fringe, let us call it the 1l fringe. The one-
wavelength phase difference is due to the one-wavelength
path length difference between the rays reaching the fringe;
that is, there is exactly one more wavelength along ray r2
than along r1.
Figure 35-11b shows the 1l fringe shifted up to the
center of the pattern with the plastic strip over the top slit
(we still do not know whether the plastic should be there
or over the bottom slit).The figure also shows the new ori-
entations of rays r1 and r2 to reach that fringe. There still
must be one more wavelength along r2 than along r1 (be-
cause they still produce the 1l fringe), but now the path
length difference between those rays is zero, as we can tell
from the geometry of Fig. 35-11b. However, r2 now passes
through the plastic.
Figure 35-11 (a) Arrangement for two-slit interference (not to scale).
The locations of three bright fringes (or maxima) are indicated.
(b) A strip of plastic covers the top slit.We want the 1l fringe to be
at the center of the pattern.
r1
r2
m = 1
m = 0
m = 1
1l fringe
(a)
r1
r2
1l fringe
(b)
The difference in indexes
causes a phase shift
between the rays, moving
the 1l fringe upward.
Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
