xx
Tutoring problem available (at instructor’s discretion) in WileyPLUS and WebAssign
SSM
Worked-out solution available in Student Solutions Manual      
• – •••
Number of dots indicates level of problem difficulty
Additional information available in The Flying Circus of Physics and at flyingcircusofphysics.com
WWW Worked-out solution is at
ILW
Interactive solution is at 
http://www.wiley.com/college/halliday
PREFACE
Evaluation Materials
• Reading questions are available within each online section. I wrote these so that they do not
require analysis or any deep understanding; rather they simply test whether a student has read the
section. When a student opens up a section, a randomly chosen reading question (from a bank of
questions) appears at the end. The instructor can decide whether the question is part of the grading
for that section or whether it is just for the benefit of the student.
• Checkpoints are available within most sections. I wrote these so that they require analysis and deci-
sions about the physics in the section. Answers to all checkpoints are in the back of the book.
VERSIONS OF THE TEXT
To accommodate the individual needs of instructors and students, the ninth edition of Fundamentals
of Physics is available in a number of different versions.
The Regular Edition consists of Chapters 1 through 37 (ISBN 9781118230718).
The Extended Edition contains seven additional chapters on quantum physics and cosmology,
Chapters 1–44 (ISBN 9781118230725).
Volume 1 –– Chapters 1–20 (Mechanics and Thermodynamics), hardcover,
ISBN 9781118233764
Volume 2 –– Chapters 21–44 (E&M, Optics, and Quantum Physics), hardcover,
ISBN 9781118230732
• All end-of-chapter homework Problems in the book (and many more problems) are available in
WileyPLUS.The instructor can construct a homework assignment and control how it is graded when
the answers are submitted online. For example, the instructor controls the deadline for submission
and how many attempts a student is allowed on an answer.The instructor also controls which, if any,
learning aids are available with each homework problem. Such links can include hints, sample prob-
lems, in-chapter reading materials, video tutorials, video math reviews, and even video solutions
(which can be made available to the students after, say, a homework deadline).
• Symbolic notation problems that require algebraic answers are available in every chapter.
• All end-of-chapter homework Questions in the book are available for assignment in WileyPLUS.
These Questions (in a multiple choice format) are designed to evaluate the students’ conceptual un-
derstanding.
Icons for Additional Help
When worked-out solutions are provided either in print or electronically
for certain of the odd-numbered problems, the statements for those problems include an icon to alert
both student and instructor as to where the solutions are located. There are also icons indicating
which problems have GO Tutorial, an Interactive LearningWare, or a link to the The Flying Circus
of Physics. An icon guide is provided here and at the beginning of each set of problems.
Checkpoint 1
Here are three pairs of initial and final positions, respectively, along an x axis.Which
pairs give a negative displacement: (a) $3 m, #5 m; (b) $3 m, $7 m; (c) 7 m, $3 m?
