1100
CHAPTER 36
DIFFRACTION
0°
10°
20°
30°
40°
80°
70°
60°
50°
m = 4
m = 1
m = 2
m = 0
This is the center
of the pattern.
The higher orders are
spread out more in angle.
Figure 36-24 The zeroth, first, second, and fourth orders of the visible emission lines from
hydrogen. Note that the lines are farther apart at greater angles. (They are also dimmer
and wider, although that is not shown here.)
We state without proof that the half-width of any other line depends on its loca-
tion relative to the central axis and is
(half-width of line at u).
(36-28)
Note that for light of a given wavelength l and a given ruling separation d, the
widths of the lines decrease with an increase in the number N of rulings. Thus, of
two diffraction gratings, the grating with the larger value of N is better able to 
distinguish between wavelengths because its diffraction lines are narrower and so
produce less overlap.
Grating Spectroscope
Diffraction gratings are widely used to determine the wavelengths that are emit-
ted by sources of light ranging from lamps to stars. Figure 36-23 shows a simple
grating spectroscope in which a grating is used for this purpose. Light from
source S is focused by lens L1 on a vertical slit S1 placed in the focal plane of lens
L2. The light emerging from tube C (called a collimator) is a plane wave and is
incident perpendicularly on grating G, where it is diffracted into a diffraction
pattern, with the m ! 0 order diffracted at angle u ! 0 along the central axis of
the grating.
We can view the diffraction pattern that would appear on a viewing screen at
any angle u simply by orienting telescope T in Fig. 36-23 to that angle. Lens L3 of
the telescope then focuses the light diffracted at angle u (and at slightly smaller
and larger angles) onto a focal plane FF# within the telescope. When we look
through eyepiece E, we see a magnified view of this focused image.
By changing the angle u of the telescope, we can examine the entire diffraction
pattern. For any order number other than m ! 0, the original light is spread out ac-
cording to wavelength (or color) so that we can determine,with Eq.36-25,just what
wavelengths are being emitted by the source. If the source emits discrete wave-
lengths, what we see as we rotate the telescope horizontally through the angles
corresponding to an order m is a vertical line of color for each wavelength, with the
shorter-wavelength line at a smaller angle u than the longer-wavelength line.
Hydrogen. For example, the light emitted by a hydrogen lamp, which con-
tains hydrogen gas, has four discrete wavelengths in the visible range. If our eyes
intercept this light directly, it appears to be white. If, instead, we view it through a
grating spectroscope, we can distinguish, in several orders, the lines of the four
colors corresponding to these visible wavelengths. (Such lines are called emission
lines.) Four orders are represented in Fig. 36-24. In the central order (m ! 0), the
lines corresponding to all four wavelengths are superimposed, giving a single
white line at u ! 0.The colors are separated in the higher orders.
The third order is not shown in Fig. 36-24 for the sake of clarity; it actually
overlaps the second and fourth orders. The fourth-order red line is missing
because it is not formed by the grating used here. That is, when we attempt to
2uhw !
l
Nd cos u
Figure 36-23 A simple type of grating spec-
troscope used to analyze the wavelengths
of light emitted by source S.
F
F' E
S
L1
S1
L2
C
G
L3
T
θ
θ
