454
CHAPTER 16
WAVES—I
Energy and Power of a Wave Traveling Along a String
When we set up a wave on a stretched string, we provide energy for the motion of
the string. As the wave moves away from us, it transports that energy as both
kinetic energy and elastic potential energy. Let us consider each form in turn.
Kinetic Energy
A string element of mass dm, oscillating transversely in simple harmonic motion
as the wave passes through it, has kinetic energy associated with its transverse
velocity . When the element is rushing through its y # 0 position (element b in
Fig. 16-10), its transverse velocity—and thus its kinetic energy—is a maximum.
When the element is at its extreme position y # ym (as is element a), its trans-
verse velocity—and thus its kinetic energy—is zero.
Elastic Potential Energy
To send a sinusoidal wave along a previously straight string, the wave must neces-
sarily stretch the string.As a string element of length dx oscillates transversely, its
length must increase and decrease in a periodic way if the string element is to fit
the sinusoidal wave form. Elastic potential energy is associatzed with these
length changes, just as for a spring.
When the string element is at its y # ym position (element a in Fig. 16-10), its
length has its normal undisturbed value dx, so its elastic potential energy is zero.
However, when the element is rushing through its y # 0 position, it has maximum
stretch and thus maximum elastic potential energy.
Energy Transport
The oscillating string element thus has both its maximum kinetic energy and its
maximum elastic potential energy at y # 0. In the snapshot of Fig. 16-10, the
regions of the string at maximum displacement have no energy, and the regions at
zero displacement have maximum energy. As the wave travels along the string,
forces due to the tension in the string continuously do work to transfer energy
from regions with energy to regions with no energy.
As in Fig. 16-1b, let’s set up a wave on a string stretched along a horizontal x
axis such that Eq. 16-2 applies. As we oscillate one end of the string, we continu-
ously provide energy for the motion and stretching of the string—as the string
sections oscillate perpendicularly to the x axis, they have kinetic energy and elas-
tic potential energy.As the wave moves into sections that were previously at rest,
energy is transferred into those new sections. Thus, we say that the wave trans-
ports the energy along the string.
The Rate of Energy Transmission
The kinetic energy dK associated with a string element of mass dm is given by
dK #
dm u2,
(16-27)
1
2
u
:
16-3 ENERGY AND POWER OF A WAVE TRAVELING ALONG A STRING
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
16.16 Calculate the average rate at which energy is transported by a transverse wave.
●The average power of, or average rate at which energy is
transmitted by, a sinusoidal wave on a stretched string is
Learning Objective
Key Idea
Figure 16-10 A snapshot of a traveling wave
on a string at time t # 0. String element a is
at displacement y # ym, and string element
b is at displacement y # 0.The kinetic en-
ergy of the string element at each position
depends on the transverse velocity of the
element.The potential energy depends on
the amount by which the string element is
stretched as the wave passes through it.
y
ym
0
dx
b
dx
a
λ 
x
v
given by
Pavg # 1
2mvv2y2
m.
