418
CHAPTER 15
OSCILLATIONS
determine the extent of the variation in the velocity, between #vxm and %vxm.
We say that vxm is the velocity amplitude vm of the velocity variation. When the
particle is moving rightward through x ! 0, its velocity is positive and the magni-
tude is at this greatest value.When it is moving leftward through x ! 0, its veloc-
ity is negative and the magnitude is again at this greatest value. This variation
with time (a negative sine function) is displayed in the graph of Fig. 15-6b for a
phase constant of f ! 0, which corresponds to the cosine function for the dis-
placement versus time shown in Fig. 15-6a.
Recall that we use a cosine function for x(t) regardless of the particle’s posi-
tion at t ! 0.We simply choose an appropriate value of f so that Eq. 15-3 gives us
the correct position at t ! 0.That decision about the cosine function leads us to a
negative sine function for the velocity in Eq. 15-6, and the value of f now gives
the correct velocity at t ! 0.
The Acceleration of SHM
Let’s go one more step by differentiating the velocity function of Eq. 15-6 with
respect to time to get the acceleration function of the particle in simple harmonic
motion:
or
a(t) ! %v2xm cos(vt # f)
(acceleration).
(15-7)
We are back to a cosine function but with a minus sign out front. We know the
drill by now.The acceleration varies because the cosine function varies with time,
between #1 and %1. The variation in the magnitude of the acceleration is set by
the acceleration amplitude am, which is the product v2xm that multiplies the co-
sine function.
Figure 15-6c displays Eq. 15-7 for a phase constant f ! 0, consistent with
Figs. 15-6a and 15-6b. Note that the acceleration magnitude is zero when the 
cosine is zero, which is when the particle is at x ! 0. And the acceleration mag-
nitude is maximum when the cosine magnitude is maximum, which is when the
particle is at an extreme point, where it has been slowed to a stop so that its 
motion can be reversed. Indeed, comparing Eqs. 15-3 and 15-7 we see an extremely
neat relationship:
a(t) ! %v2x(t).
(15-8)
This is the hallmark of SHM: (1) The particle’s acceleration is always oppo-
site its displacement (hence the minus sign) and (2) the two quantities are al-
ways related by a constant (v2). If you ever see such a relationship in an oscil-
lating situation (such as with, say, the current in an electrical circuit, or the
rise and fall of water in a tidal bay), you can immediately say that the motion
is SHM and immediately identify the angular frequency v of the motion. In a
nutshell:
a(t) ! dv(t)
dt
! d
dt  [%vxm sin(vt # f)]
In SHM, the acceleration a is proportional to the displacement x but opposite in
sign, and the two quantities are related by the square of the angular frequency v.
Checkpoint 2
Which of the following relationships between a particle’s acceleration a and its
position x indicates simple harmonic oscillation: (a) a ! 3x2, (b) a ! 5x, (c) a ! %4x,
(d) a ! %2/x? For the SHM, what is the angular frequency (assume the unit of rad/s)?
Figure 15-6 (a) The displacement x(t) of a
particle oscillating in SHM with phase
angle f equal to zero. The period T marks
one complete oscillation. (b) The velocity
v(t) of the particle. (c) The acceleration
a(t) of the particle.
x
+xm
–xm
0
Displacement
t
T
(a)
v
+   xm
– xm
0
Velocity
t
(b)
ω 
ω 
a
+
2xm
–
2xm
0
Acceleration
t
(c)
ω 
ω 
Extreme
values
here
mean ...
zero
values
here
and ...
extreme
values
here.
