1025
34-4 THIN LENSES
double refraction causes the rays to converge and pass through a common point
F2 at a distance f from the center of the lens. Hence, this lens is a converging lens;
further, a real focal point (or focus) exists at F2 (because the rays really do pass
through it), and the associated focal length is f. When rays parallel to the central
axis are sent in the opposite direction through the lens, we find another real focal
point at F1 on the other side of the lens. For a thin lens, these two focal points are
equidistant from the lens.
Signs, Signs, Signs. Because the focal points of a converging lens are real,
we take the associated focal lengths f to be positive, just as we do with a real fo-
cus of a concave mirror. However, signs in optics can be tricky; so we had better
check this in Eq. 34-10. The left side of that equation is positive if f is positive;
how about the right side? We examine it term by term. Because the index of re-
fraction n of glass or any other material is greater than 1, the term (n & 1) must
be positive. Because the source of the light (which is the object) is at the left and
faces the convex left side of the lens, the radius of curvature r1 of that side
must be positive according to the sign rule for refracting surfaces. Similarly, be-
cause the object faces a concave right side of the lens, the radius of curvature r2
of that side must be negative according to that rule. Thus, the term (1/r1 & 1/r2)
is positive, the whole right side of Eq. 34-10 is positive, and all the signs are
consistent.
Figure 34-14c shows a thin lens with concave sides.When rays that are paral-
lel to the central axis of the lens are sent through this lens, they refract twice, as
is shown enlarged in Fig. 34-14d; these rays diverge, never passing through any
common point, and so this lens is a diverging lens. However, extensions of the
rays do pass through a common point F2 at a distance f from the center of the
lens. Hence, the lens has a virtual focal point at F2. (If your eye intercepts some of
the diverging rays, you perceive a bright spot to be at F2, as if it is the source of
the light.) Another virtual focus exists on the opposite side of the lens at F1, sym-
metrically placed if the lens is thin. Because the focal points of a diverging lens
are virtual, we take the focal length f to be negative.
Images from Thin Lenses
We now consider the types of image formed by converging and diverging lenses.
Figure 34-15a shows an object O outside the focal point F1 of a converging lens.
The two rays drawn in the figure show that the lens forms a real, inverted image I
of the object on the side of the lens opposite the object.
When the object is placed inside the focal point F1, as in Fig. 34-15b, the lens
forms a virtual image I on the same side of the lens as the object and with the same
orientation.Hence,a converging lens can form either a real image or a virtual image,
depending on whether the object is outside or inside the focal point,respectively.
Figure 34-15c shows an object O in front of a diverging lens. Regardless of
the object distance (regardless of whether O is inside or outside the virtual focal
point), this lens produces a virtual image that is on the same side of the lens as the
object and has the same orientation.
As with mirrors, we take the image distance i to be positive when the image is
real and negative when the image is virtual. However, the locations of real and
virtual images from lenses are the reverse of those from mirrors:
i
F1
(b)
O
I
p
f
r1
i
f
F1
C2
C1
(a)
O
I
p
r2
Converging lenses can
give either type of image.
(c)
r2
i
C1
C2
O
I
p
r1
Diverging lenses can
give only virtual images.
Figure 34-15 (a) A real, inverted image I is
formed by a converging lens when the
object O is outside the focal point F1. (b)
The image I is virtual and has the same ori-
entation as O when O is inside the focal
point. (c) A diverging lens forms a virtual
image I, with the same orientation as the
object O, whether O is inside or outside the
focal point of the lens.
Real images form on the side of a lens that is opposite the object, and virtual
images form on the side where the object is.
The lateral magnification m produced by converging and diverging lenses is
given by Eqs. 34-5 and 34-6, the same as for mirrors.
You have been asked to absorb a lot of information in this module, and you
should organize it for yourself by filling in Table 34-2 for thin symmetric lenses (both
