Questions
1
An electron cannot decay into two neutrinos. Which of the
following conservation laws would be violated if it did: (a) energy,
(b) angular momentum, (c) charge, (d) lepton number, (e) linear
momentum, (f) baryon number?
2
Which of the eight pions in Fig. 44-2b
has the least kinetic energy?
3
Figure 44-10 shows the paths of two par-
ticles circling in a uniform magnetic field.
The particles have the same magnitude of
charge but opposite signs. (a) Which path
corresponds to the more massive particle?
(b) If the magnetic field is directed into the
plane of the page, is the more massive parti-
cle positively or negatively charged?
4
A proton has enough mass energy to decay into a shower made
up of electrons, neutrinos, and their antiparticles. Which of the fol-
lowing conservation laws would necessarily be violated if it did:
electron lepton number or baryon number?
5
A proton cannot decay into a neutron and a neutrino. Which of
the following conservation laws would be violated if it did:(a) energy
(assume the proton is stationary),(b) angular momentum,(c) charge,
(d) lepton number,(e) linear momentum,(f) baryon number?
6
Does the proposed decay ?0 : p ' K# conserve (a) electric
charge, (b) spin angular momentum, and (c) strangeness? (d) If the
original particle is stationary, is there enough energy to create the
decay products?
7
Not only particles such as electrons and protons but also entire
Figure 44-10
Question 3.
Our Earth has existed for perhaps only a third of the age of the universe and will
surely disappear when our Sun burns up its fuel and becomes a red giant.
Our species has inhabited Earth for less than a million years—a blink in cosmo-
logical time.
Although our position in the universe may be insignificant, the laws of physics that
we have discovered (uncovered?) seem to hold throughout the universe and—as
far as we know—have held since the universe began and will continue to hold for
all future time. At least, there is no evidence that other laws hold in other parts of
the universe. Thus, until someone complains, we are entitled to stamp the laws of
physics “Discovered on Earth.” Much remains to be discovered. In the words of
writer Eden Phillpotts, “The universe is full of magical things, patiently waiting for
our wits to grow sharper.” That declaration allows us to answer one last time the
question “What is physics?” that we have explored repeatedly in this book. Physics
is the gateway to those magical things.
1362
CHAPTER 44
QUARKS, LEPTONS, AND THE BIG BANG
Leptons and Quarks
Current research supports the view that
all matter is made of six kinds of leptons (Table 44-2), six kinds of
quarks (Table 44-5), and 12 antiparticles, one corresponding to
each lepton and each quark.All these particles have spin quantum
numbers equal to 
and are thus fermions (particles with half-
integer spin quantum numbers).
The Interactions
Particles with electric charge interact
through the electromagnetic force by exchanging virtual photons.
Leptons can also interact with each other and with quarks through
the weak force, via massive W and Z particles as messengers. In ad-
dition, quarks interact with each other through the color force. The
electromagnetic and weak forces are different manifestations of
the same force, called the electroweak force.
Leptons
Three of the leptons (the electron, muon, and tau)
have electric charge equal to #1e. There are also three uncharged
neutrinos (also leptons), one corresponding to each of the charged
leptons. The antiparticles for the charged leptons have positive
charge.
Quarks
The six quarks (up, down, strange, charm, bottom, and
top, in order of increasing mass) each have baryon number 
and
charge equal to either 
or 
. The strange quark has strange-
#1
3 e
'2
3 e
'1
3
1
2
Review & Summary
ness #1, whereas the others all have strangeness 0.These four alge-
braic signs are reversed for the antiquarks.
Hadrons: Baryons and Mesons
Quarks combine into
strongly interacting particles called hadrons. Baryons are hadrons
with half-integer spin quantum numbers (
or ). Mesons are
hadrons with integer spin quantum numbers (0 or 1) and thus are
bosons. Baryons are fermions. Mesons have baryon number equal
to zero; baryons have baryon number equal to '1 or #1. Quantum
chromodynamics predicts that the possible combinations of quarks
are either a quark with an antiquark, three quarks, or three anti-
quarks (this prediction is consistent with experiment).
Expansion of the Universe
Current evidence strongly sug-
gests that the universe is expanding, with the distant galaxies mov-
ing away from us at a rate v given by Hubble’s law:
v ! Hr
(Hubble’s law).
(44-19)
Here we take H, the Hubble constant, to have the value
H ! 71.0 km/s$Mpc ! 21.8 mm/s$ly.
(44-21)
The expansion described by Hubble’s law and the presence of
ubiquitous background microwave radiation reveal that the uni-
verse began in a “big bang” 13.7 billion years ago.
3
2
1
2
