1186
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
3
9
More About Matter Waves
39-1 ENERGIES OF A TRAPPED ELECTRON
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
39.01 Identify the confinement principle: Confinement of a
wave (including a matter wave) leads to the quantization of
wavelengths and energy values.
39.02 Sketch a one-dimensional infinite potential well, indicating
the length (or width) and the potential energy of the walls.
39.03 For an electron, apply the relationship between the
de Broglie wavelength l and the kinetic energy.
39.04 For an electron in a one-dimensional infinite potential
well, apply the relationship between the de Broglie wave-
length l, the well’s length, and the quantum number n.
39.05 For an electron in a one-dimensional infinite potential
well, apply the relationship between the allowed energies
En, the well length L, and the quantum number n.
39.06 Sketch an energy-level diagram for an electron in a
one-dimensional infinite potential well, indicating the
ground state and several excited states.
39.07 Identify that a trapped electron tends to be in its
ground state, can be excited to a higher-energy state, and
cannot exist between the allowed states.
39.08 Calculate the energy change required for an electron
to move between states: a quantum jump up or down an
energy-level diagram.
39.09 If a quantum jump involves light, identify that an
upward jump requires the absorption of a photon (to
increase the electron’s energy) and a downward jump
requires the emission of a photon (to reduce the
electron’s energy).
39.10 If a quantum jump involves light, apply the relationships
between the energy change and the frequency and wave-
length associated with the photon.
39.11 Identify the emission and absorption spectra of an
electron in a one-dimensional infinite potential well.
Learning Objectives
●Confinement of waves (string waves, matter waves—any
type of wave) leads to quantization—that is, discrete states
with certain energies. States with intermediate energies are
not allowed.
●Because it is a matter wave, an electron confined to an
infinite potential well can exist in only certain discrete states.
If the well is one-dimensional with length L, the energies as-
sociated with these quantum states are
for n ! 1, 2, 3, . . . ,
where m is the electron mass and n is a quantum number.
●The lowest energy is not zero but is given by n ! 1.
En !#
h2
8mL2$n2,
●The electron can change (jump) from one quantum state to
another only if its energy change is
)E ! Ehigh # Elow,
where Ehigh is the higher energy and Elow is the lower energy.
●If the change is done by photon absorption or emission, the
energy of the photon must be equal to the change in the elec-
tron’s energy:
,
where frequency f and wavelength l are associated with the
photon.
hf ! hc
l ! )E ! Ehigh # Elow
Key Ideas
What Is Physics?
One of the long-standing goals of physics has been to understand the nature of
atoms. Early in the 20th century nobody knew how the electrons in an atom are
arranged, what their motions are, how atoms emit or absorb light, or even why
atoms are stable. Without this knowledge it was not possible to understand how
atoms combine to form molecules or stack up to form solids.As a consequence, the
foundations of chemistry—including biochemistry, which underlies the nature of
life itself—were more or less a mystery.
