the working substance to the low-temperature reservoir as the gas undergoes an
isothermal compression from volume Vc to volume Vd (Fig. 20-9b).
In the engine of Fig. 20-8, we assume that heat transfers to or from the work-
ing substance can take place only during the isothermal processes ab and cd of
Fig. 20-9. Therefore, processes bc and da in that figure, which connect the two
isotherms at temperatures TH and TL, must be (reversible) adiabatic processes;
that is, they must be processes in which no energy is transferred as heat.To ensure
this, during processes bc and da the cylinder is placed on an insulating slab as the
volume of the working substance is changed.
During the processes ab and bc of Fig. 20-9a, the working substance is
expanding and thus doing positive work as it raises the weighted piston. This
work is represented in Fig. 20-9a by the area under curve abc. During the
processes cd and da (Fig. 20-9b), the working substance is being compressed,
which means that it is doing negative work on its environment or, equivalently,
that its environment is doing work on it as the loaded piston descends.This work
is represented by the area under curve cda. The net work per cycle, which is repre-
sented by W in both Figs. 20-8 and 20-9, is the difference between these two areas
and is a positive quantity equal to the area enclosed by cycle abcda in Fig. 20-9.
This work W is performed on some outside object, such as a load to be lifted.
Equation 20-1 (%S # * dQ/T) tells us that any energy transfer as heat must
involve a change in entropy. To see this for a Carnot engine, we can plot the
Carnot cycle on a temperature–entropy (T-S) diagram as in Fig. 20-10. The
lettered points a, b, c, and d there correspond to the lettered points in the p-V
diagram in Fig. 20-9. The two horizontal lines in Fig. 20-10 correspond to the two
isothermal processes of the cycle. Process ab is the isothermal expansion of the
cycle. As the working substance (reversibly) absorbs energy +QH+ as heat at
constant temperature TH during the expansion, its entropy increases. Similarly,
during the isothermal compression cd, the working substance (reversibly) loses
energy +QL+ as heat at constant temperature TL, and its entropy decreases.
The two vertical lines in Fig. 20-10 correspond to the two adiabatic processes
of the Carnot cycle. Because no energy is transferred as heat during the two
processes, the entropy of the working substance is constant during them.
The Work To calculate the net work done by a Carnot engine during a cycle, let
us apply Eq. 18-26, the first law of thermodynamics (%Eint # Q $ W), to the work-
ing substance.That substance must return again and again to any arbitrarily selected
state in the cycle.Thus, if X represents any state property of the working substance,
such as pressure, temperature, volume, internal energy, or entropy, we must have
%X # 0 for every cycle. It follows that %Eint # 0 for a complete cycle of the working
substance.Recalling that Q in Eq.18-26 is the net heat transfer per cycle and W is the
net work, we can write the first law of thermodynamics for the Carnot cycle as
(20-8)
Entropy Changes In a Carnot engine, there are two (and only two) reversible 
energy transfers as heat, and thus two changes in the entropy of the working
substance—one at temperature TH and one at TL. The net entropy change per
cycle is then
(20-9)
Here %SH is positive because energy +QH+ is added to the working substance as
heat (an increase in entropy) and %SL is negative because energy +QL+ is removed
from the working substance as heat (a decrease in entropy). Because entropy is
a state function, we must have %S # 0 for a complete cycle. Putting %S # 0 in
Eq. 20-9 requires that
(20-10)
Note that, because TH 4 TL, we must have +QH+ 4 +QL+; that is, more energy is
!QH!
TH
# !QL!
TL
.
%S # %SH " %SL # !QH!
TH
$ !QL!
TL
.
W # !QH!$!QL!.
592
CHAPTER 20
ENTROPY AND THE SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS
Figure 20-10 The Carnot cycle of Fig. 20-9
plotted on a temperature–entropy
diagram. During processes ab and cd the
temperature remains constant. During
processes bc and da the entropy remains
constant.
Temperature T
TH
Q H
a 
b 
d 
c 
TL
Q L
Entropy S 
