Today there are several hundred known particles. Naming them has strained
the resources of the Greek alphabet, and most are known only by an assigned
number in a periodically issued compilation. To make sense of this array of par-
ticles, we look for simple physical criteria by which we can place the particles in
categories. The result is known as the Standard Model of particles. Although
this model is continuously challenged by theorists, it remains our best scheme of
understanding all the particles discovered to date.
To explore the Standard Model, we make the following three rough cuts
among the known particles: fermion or boson, hadron or lepton, particle or
antiparticle? Let’s now look at the categories one by one.
Fermion or Boson?
All particles have an intrinsic angular momentum called spin, as we discussed for
electrons, protons, and neutrons in Module 32-5. Generalizing the notation of
that section, we can write the component of spin 
in any direction (assume the
component to be along a z axis) as
(44-4)
in which 
is h/2p, ms is the spin magnetic quantum number, and s is the spin
quantum number. This last can have either positive half-integer values 
or nonnegative integer values (0, 1, 2, . . .). For example, an electron has the value
. Hence the spin of an electron (measured along any direction, such as the
z direction) can have the values
(spin up)
or
(spin down).
Confusingly, the term spin is used in two ways: It properly means a particle’s
intrinsic angular momentum , but it is often used loosely to mean the particle’s
spin quantum number s. In the latter case, for example, an electron is said to be
a spin- particle.
Particles with half-integer spin quantum numbers (like electrons) are called
fermions, after Fermi, who (simultaneously with Paul Dirac) discovered the sta-
tistical laws that govern their behavior. Like electrons, protons and neutrons also
have 
and are fermions.
s ! 1
2
1
2
S
:
Sz ! #1
2+
Sz ! 1
2+
s ! 1
2
(1
2, 3
2, . . .)
+
Sz ! ms+  for ms ! s, s # 1, . . . , #s,
S
:
1336
CHAPTER 44
QUARKS, LEPTONS, AND THE BIG BANG
One of the detectors at the Large Hadron Collider at CERN, where the Standard Model
of the elementary particles is being put to the test.
© CERN Geneva
