The Birth of Quantum Physics
Now that we have seen how the photoelectric effect and Compton
scattering propelled physicists into quantum physics, let’s back up
to the very beginning, when the idea of quantized energies gradu-
ally emerged out of experimental data.The story begins with what
might seem mundane these days but which was a fixation point for
physicists of 1900. The subject was the thermal radiation emitted
by an ideal blackbody radiator—that is, a radiator whose emitted
radiation depends only on its temperature and not on the material
from which it is made, the nature of its surface, or anything other
than temperature. In a nutshell here was the trouble: the
experimental results differed wildly from the theoretical predic-
tions and no one had a clue as to why.
Experimental Setup. We can make an ideal radiator by form-
ing a cavity within a body and keeping the cavity walls at a uniform
temperature.The atoms on the inner wall of the body oscillate (they
have thermal energy), which causes them to emit electromagnetic
waves, the thermal radiation. To sample that internal radiation, we
drill a small hole through the wall so that some of the radiation can
escape to be measured (but not enough to alter the radiation inside
the cavity). We are interested in how the intensity of the radiation
depends on wavelength.
That intensity distribution is handled by defining a spectral
radiancy S(l) of the radiation emitted at given wavelength l:
(38-12)
If we multiply S(l) by a narrow wavelength range dl, we have the intensity (that
is, the power per unit area of the hole in the wall) that is being emitted in the
wavelength range l to l 1 dl.
The solid curve in Fig. 38-8 shows the experimental results for a cavity with a
wall temperature of 2000 K, for a range of wavelengths.Although such a radiator
would glow brightly in a dark room, we can tell from the figure that only a small
part of its radiated energy actually lies in the visible range (which is colorfully
indicated). At that temperature, most of the radiated energy lies in the infrared
region, with longer wavelengths.
Theory. The prediction of classical physics for the spectral radiancy, for a
given temperature T in kelvins, is
(classical radiation law),
(38-13)
where k is the Boltzmann constant (Eq. 19-7) with the value
k ! 1.38 $ l0#23J/K ! 8.62 $ 10#5 eV/K.
This classical result is plotted in Fig. 38-8 for T ! 2000 K. Although the theoreti-
cal and experimental results agree well at long wavelengths (off the graph to the
right), they are not even close in the short wavelength region. Indeed, the theo-
retical prediction does not even include a maximum as seen in the measured
results and instead “blows up” up to infinity (which was quite disturbing, even
embarrassing, to the physicists).
Planck’s Solution. In 1900, Planck devised a formula for S(l) that neatly
fitted the experimental results for all wavelengths and for all temperatures:
(Planck’s radiation law).
(38-14)
S(l) ! 2pc2h
l5
1
ehc/lkT # 1
S(l) ! 2pckT
l4
power
#
unit area
of emitter$#
unit
wavelength$
.
!
S(l) !
intensity
#
unit
wavelength$
1165
38-4 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 
T ! 2000 K
Classical
theory
1
2
3
4
5
6
Spectral radiancy (W/cm2 " mm)
Wavelength (mm)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Experiment
Figure 38-8 The solid curve shows the experimental spectral ra-
diancy for a cavity at 2000 K. Note the failure of the classical
theory, which is shown as a dashed curve.The range of visible
wavelengths is indicated.
