Constant Acceleration: A Special Case
In many types of motion, the acceleration is either constant or approximately so.
For example, you might accelerate a car at an approximately constant rate when
a traffic light turns from red to green. Then graphs of your position, velocity,
and acceleration would resemble those in Fig. 2-9. (Note that a(t) in Fig. 2-9c is
constant, which requires that v(t) in Fig. 2-9b have a constant slope.) Later when
you brake the car to a stop, the acceleration (or deceleration in common
language) might also be approximately constant.
Such cases are so common that a special set of equations has been derived
for dealing with them. One approach to the derivation of these equations is given
in this section. A second approach is given in the next section. Throughout both
sections and later when you work on the homework problems, keep in mind that
these equations are valid only for constant acceleration (or situations in which you
can approximate the acceleration as being constant).
First Basic Equation. When the acceleration is constant, the average accel-
eration and instantaneous acceleration are equal and we can write Eq. 2-7, with
some changes in notation, as
Here v0 is the velocity at time t " 0 and v is the velocity at any later time t.We can
recast this equation as
v " v0 # at.
(2-11)
As a check, note that this equation reduces to v " v0 for t " 0, as it must.As a fur-
ther check, take the derivative of Eq. 2-11. Doing so yields dv/dt " a, which is the
definition of a. Figure 2-9b shows a plot of Eq. 2-11, the v(t) function; the function
is linear and thus the plot is a straight line.
Second Basic Equation. In a similar manner, we can rewrite Eq. 2-2 (with a
few changes in notation) as
vavg " x $ x0
t $ 0
a " aavg " v $ v0
t $ 0 .
23
2-4 CONSTANT ACCELERATION
2-4 CONSTANT ACCELERATION
After reading this module, you should be able to . . . 
2.13 For constant acceleration, apply the relationships be-
tween position, displacement, velocity, acceleration, and
elapsed time (Table 2-1). 
2.14 Calculate a particle’s change in velocity by integrating
its acceleration function with respect to time.
2.15 Calculate a particle’s change in position by integrating
its velocity function with respect to time. 
●The following five equations describe the motion of a particle with constant acceleration:
These are not valid when the acceleration is not constant. 
x $ x0 " vt $ 1
2 at2.
x $ x0 " 1
2 (v0 # v)t,
v2 " v0
2 # 2a(x $ x0),
x $ x0 " v0t # 1
2 at2,
v " v0 # at,
Learning Objectives
Key Ideas
Figure 2-9 (a) The position x(t) of a particle
moving with constant acceleration. (b) Its
velocity v(t), given at each point by the
slope of the curve of x(t). (c) Its (constant)
acceleration, equal to the (constant) slope
of the curve of v(t).
0
a
Slope = 0
a(t)
(a)
(b)
(c)
t
Position
0
x0
x
t
Slope varies
x(t)
Velocity
0
Slope = a
v(t)
v0
v
t
Acceleration
Slopes of the position graph 
are plotted on the velocity graph.
Slope of the velocity graph is 
plotted on the acceleration graph.
