Elastic Collisions in One Dimension
As we discussed in Module 9-6, everyday collisions are inelastic but we can
approximate some of them as being elastic; that is, we can approximate that the
total kinetic energy of the colliding bodies is conserved and is not transferred to
other forms of energy:
.
(9-62)
This means:
#
total kinetic energy
before the collision$ !#
total kinetic energy
after the collision $
237
9-7 ELASTIC COLLISIONS IN ONE DIMENSION
9-7 ELASTIC COLLISIONS IN ONE DIMENSION
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
9.32 For isolated elastic collisions in one dimension, apply the
conservation laws for both the total energy and the net mo-
mentum of the colliding bodies to relate the initial values to
the values after the collision.
9.33 For a projectile hitting a stationary target, identify the re-
sulting motion for the three general cases: equal masses,
target more massive than projectile, projectile more mas-
sive than target.
●An elastic collision is a special type of collision in which
the kinetic energy of a system of colliding bodies is con-
served. If the system is closed and isolated, its linear mo-
mentum is also conserved. For a one-dimensional collision in
which body 2 is a target and body 1 is an incoming projec-
tile, conservation of kinetic energy and linear momentum
yield the following expressions for the velocities immediately
after the collision:
and
v2f !
2m1
m1 & m2
v1i.
v1f ! m1 % m2
m1 & m2
v1i
Learning Objectives
Key Idea
In an elastic collision, the kinetic energy of each colliding body may change, but 
the total kinetic energy of the system does not change.
For example, the collision of a cue ball with an object ball in a game of pool
can be approximated as being an elastic collision. If the collision is head-on
(the cue ball heads directly toward the object ball), the kinetic energy of the cue
ball can be transferred almost entirely to the object ball. (Still, the collision trans-
fers some of the energy to the sound you hear.)
Stationary Target
Figure 9-18 shows two bodies before and after they have a one-dimensional colli-
sion, like a head-on collision between pool balls. A projectile body of mass m1
and initial velocity v1i moves toward a target body of mass m2 that is initially at
rest (v2i ! 0). Let’s assume that this two-body system is closed and isolated.Then
the net linear momentum of the system is conserved,and from Eq.9-51 we can write
that conservation as
m1v1i ! m1v1f & m2v2f
(linear momentum).
(9-63)
If the collision is also elastic, then the total kinetic energy is conserved and we
can write that conservation as
(kinetic energy).
(9-64)
In each of these equations, the subscript i identifies the initial velocities and the
subscript f the final velocities of the bodies. If we know the masses of the bodies
and if we also know v1i, the initial velocity of body 1, the only unknown quantities
are v1f and v2f, the final velocities of the two bodies.With two equations at our dis-
posal, we should be able to find these two unknowns.
1
2m1v1i
2 ! 1
2m1v1f
2 & 1
2m2v2f
2
Figure 9-18 Body 1 moves along an x axis
before having an elastic collision with
body 2, which is initially at rest. Both
bodies move along that axis after the
collision.
x
Before
v1i
m1
Projectile
m2
Target 
v2i = 0 
x
After
v1f
m1
m2
v2f
Here is the generic setup
for an elastic collision with
a stationary target.
