313
11-8 CONSERVATION OF ANGULAR MOMENTUM
If the net external torque acting on a system is zero, the angular momentum 
of
the system remains constant, no matter what changes take place within the system.
L
:
Equations 11-32 and 11-33 are vector equations; as such, they are equivalent
to three component equations corresponding to the conservation of angular 
momentum in three mutually perpendicular directions. Depending on the
torques acting on a system, the angular momentum of the system might be con-
served in only one or two directions but not in all directions:
Eq. 11-29 
, which is Newton’s second law in angular form. If no 
(t
:
net ! dL
:/dt)
net external torque acts on the system, this equation becomes 
or
(isolated system).
(11-32)
This result, called the law of conservation of angular momentum, can also be
written as
,
or
(isolated system).
(11-33)
Equations 11-32 and 11-33 tell us:
L
:
i ! L
:
f
#
net angular momentum
at some initial time t i $ !#
net angular momentum
at some later time t f $
L
: ! a constant
dL
:/dt ! 0,
If the component of the net external torque on a system along a certain axis is
zero, then the component of the angular momentum of the system along that axis
cannot change, no matter what changes take place within the system.
This is a powerful statement: In this situation we are concerned with only the initial
and final states of the system;we do not need to consider any intermediate state.
We can apply this law to the isolated body in Fig. 11-15, which rotates around
the z axis. Suppose that the initially rigid body somehow redistributes its mass
relative to that rotation axis, changing its rotational inertia about that axis.
Equations 11-32 and 11-33 state that the angular momentum of the body cannot
change. Substituting Eq. 11-31 (for the angular momentum along the rotational
axis) into Eq. 11-33, we write this conservation law as
Iivi ! Ifvf.
(11-34)
Here the subscripts refer to the values of the rotational inertia I and angular
speed v before and after the redistribution of mass.
Like the other two conservation laws that we have discussed, Eqs. 11-32 and
11-33 hold beyond the limitations of Newtonian mechanics. They hold for parti-
cles whose speeds approach that of light (where the theory of special relativity
reigns), and they remain true in the world of subatomic particles (where quantum
physics reigns). No exceptions to the law of conservation of angular momentum
have ever been found.
We now discuss four examples involving this law.
1. The spinning volunteer
Figure 11-16 shows a student seated on a stool that
can rotate freely about a vertical axis. The student, who has been set into
rotation at a modest initial angular speed vi, holds two dumbbells in his
outstretched hands. His angular momentum vector 
lies along the vertical ro-
tation axis, pointing upward.
The instructor now asks the student to pull in his arms; this action reduces
his rotational inertia from its initial value Ii to a smaller value If because he
moves mass closer to the rotation axis. His rate of rotation increases markedly,
L
:
Figure 11-16 (a) The student has a relatively
large rotational inertia about the rotation
axis and a relatively small angular speed.
(b) By decreasing his rotational inertia, the
student automatically increases his angular
speed.The angular momentum 
of the
rotating system remains unchanged.
L
:
L
Ii
If
Rotation axis 
(a)
(b)
i
ω 
f
ω
L
