528
CHAPTER 18
TEMPERATURE, HEAT, AND THE FIRST LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS
A Closer Look at Heat and Work
Here we look in some detail at how energy can be transferred as heat and work
between a system and its environment. Let us take as our system a gas confined
to a cylinder with a movable piston, as in Fig. 18-13.The upward force on the pis-
ton due to the pressure of the confined gas is equal to the weight of lead shot
loaded onto the top of the piston.The walls of the cylinder are made of insulating
material that does not allow any transfer of energy as heat. The bottom of the
cylinder rests on a reservoir for thermal energy, a thermal reservoir (perhaps a hot
plate) whose temperature T you can control by turning a knob.
The system (the gas) starts from an initial state i, described by a pressure pi,
a volume Vi, and a temperature Ti. You want to change the system to a final
state f, described by a pressure pf, a volume Vf, and a temperature Tf.The proce-
dure by which you change the system from its initial state to its final state is
called a thermodynamic process. During such a process, energy may be trans-
18-5 THE FIRST LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
18.20 If an enclosed gas expands or contracts, calculate the
work W done by the gas by integrating the gas pressure
with respect to the volume of the enclosure.
18.21 Identify the algebraic sign of work W associated with
expansion and contraction of a gas.
18.22 Given a p-V graph of pressure versus volume for a
process, identify the starting point (the initial state) and the
final point (the final state) and calculate the work by using
graphical integration.
18.23 On a p-V graph of pressure versus volume for a gas,
identify the algebraic sign of the work associated with a
right-going process and a left-going process.
18.24 Apply the first law of thermodynamics to relate the
change in the internal energy %Eint of a gas, the energy Q
transferred as heat to or from the gas, and the work W
done on or by the gas.
18.25 Identify the algebraic sign of a heat transfer Q that is
associated with a transfer to a gas and a transfer from
the gas.
18.26 Identify that the internal energy %Eint of a gas 
tends to increase if the heat transfer is to the gas, 
and it tends to decrease if the gas does work on its 
environment.
18.27 Identify that in an adiabatic process with a gas, there
is no heat transfer Q with the environment.
18.28 Identify that in a constant-volume process with a gas,
there is no work W done by the gas.
18.29 Identify that in a cyclical process with a gas, there is
no net change in the internal energy %Eint.
18.30 Identify that in a free expansion with a gas, the heat
transfer Q, work done W, and change in internal energy
%Eint are each zero.
Learning Objectives
●A gas may exchange energy with its surroundings through work.
The amount of work W done by a gas as it expands or contracts
from an initial volume Vi to a final volume Vf is given by
The integration is necessary because the pressure p may vary
during the volume change.
●The principle of conservation of energy for a thermody-
namic process is expressed in the first law of thermodynam-
ics, which may assume either of the forms
%Eint # Eint,f $ Eint,i # Q $ W
(first law)
or
dEint # dQ $ dW
(first law).
Eint represents the internal energy of the material, 
which depends only on the material’s state (temperature,
W #" dW #"
Vf
Vi
p dV.
Key Ideas
pressure, and volume). Q represents the energy exchanged
as heat between the system and its surroundings; Q is posi-
tive if the system absorbs heat and negative if the system
loses heat. W is the work done by the system; W is positive
if the system expands against an external force from the sur-
roundings and negative if the system contracts because of
an external force. 
●Q and W are path dependent; %Eint is path independent.
●The first law of thermodynamics finds application in several
special cases:
adiabatic processes:
Q # 0,
%Eint # $W
constant-volume processes:
W # 0,
%Eint # Q
cyclical processes:
%Eint # 0,
Q # W
free expansions:
Q # W # %Eint # 0
