1184
CHAPTER 38
PHOTONS AND MATTER WAVES
tivistic free particle of mass m can be written as
in which K is the particle’s kinetic energy.
•65
(a) Let n ! a ' ib be a complex number, where a and b are
real (positive or negative) numbers. Show that the product nn* is
always a positive real number. (b) Let m ! c ' id be another com-
plex number. Show that |nm| ! |n| |m|.
••66
In Eq. 38-25 keep both terms, putting A ! B ! c0. The
equation then describes the superposition of two matter waves of
equal amplitude, traveling in opposite directions. (Recall that this
is the condition for a standing wave.) (a) Show that |&(x, t)|2 is
then given by
(b) Plot this function, and demonstrate that it describes the square
of the amplitude of a standing matter wave. (c) Show that the
nodes of this standing wave are located at
and l is the de Broglie wavelength of the particle. (d) Write a simi-
lar expression for the most probable locations of the particle.
Module 38-7
Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle
•67
The uncertainty in the position of an electron along an x axis
is given as 50 pm, which is about equal to the radius of a hydrogen
atom. What is the least uncertainty in any simultaneous measure-
ment of the momentum component px of this electron?
••68
You will find in Chapter 39 that electrons cannot move in
definite orbits within atoms, like the planets in our solar system. To
see why, let us try to “observe” such an orbiting electron by using a
light microscope to measure the electron’s presumed orbital position
with a precision of, say, 10 pm (a typical atom has a radius of about
100 pm). The wavelength of the light used in the microscope must
then be about 10 pm. (a) What would be the photon energy of this
light? (b) How much energy would such a photon impart to an elec-
tron in a head-on collision? (c) What do these results tell you about
the possibility of “viewing” an atomic electron at two or more points
along its presumed orbital path? (Hint: The outer electrons of atoms
are bound to the atom by energies of only a few electron-volts.)
••69
Figure 38-13 shows a case in which the momentum compo-
nent px of a particle is fixed so that )px ! 0; then, from Heisenberg’s
uncertainty principle (Eq. 38-28), the position x of the particle is
completely unknown.From the same principle it follows that the op-
posite is also true;that is,if the position of a particle is exactly known
()x ! 0),the uncertainty in its momentum is infinite.
Consider an intermediate case, in which the position of a
particle is measured, not to infinite precision, but to within a dis-
tance of l/2p, where l is the particle’s de Broglie wavelength.
Show that the uncertainty in the (simultaneously measured) mo-
mentum component is then equal to the component itself; that is,
)px ! p. Under these circumstances, would a measured momen-
tum of zero surprise you? What about a measured momentum of
0.5p? Of 2p? Of 12p?
Module 38-8
Reflection from a Potential Step
••70
An electron moves through a region of uniform electric po-
tential of #200 V with a (total) energy of 500 eV. What are its (a)
x ! (2n ' 1)#
1
4 %$,  where n ! 0, 1, 2, 3, . . .
|&(x, t)|2 ! 23 0
2[1 ' cos 2kx].
k ! 2p 22mK
h
,
What is the momentum (in kg$m/s) of the (a) electron and
(b) photon? What is the energy (in eV) of the (c) electron and
(d) photon?
••55
The highest achievable resolving power of a microscope is
limited only by the wavelength used; that is, the smallest item
that can be distinguished has dimensions about equal to the
wavelength. Suppose one wishes to “see” inside an atom.
Assuming the atom to have a diameter of 100 pm, this means
that one must be able to resolve a width of, say, 10 pm. (a) If an
electron microscope is used, what minimum electron energy is
required? (b) If a light microscope is used, what minimum pho-
ton energy is required? (c) Which microscope seems more prac-
tical? Why?
••56
The existence of the atomic nucleus was discovered in
1911 by Ernest Rutherford, who properly interpreted some ex-
periments in which a beam of alpha particles was scattered from
a metal foil of atoms such as gold. (a) If the alpha particles had a
kinetic energy of 7.5 MeV, what was their de Broglie wave-
length? (b) Explain whether the wave nature of the incident al-
pha particles should have been taken into account in interpret-
ing these experiments. The mass of an alpha particle is 4.00 u
(atomic mass units), and its distance of closest approach to the
nuclear center in these experiments was about 30 fm. (The wave
nature of matter was not postulated until more than a decade af-
ter these crucial experiments were first performed.)
••57
A nonrelativistic particle is moving three times as fast as an
electron. The ratio of the de Broglie wavelength of the particle to
that of the electron is 1.813 " 10 #4. By calculating its mass, identify
the particle.
••58
What are (a) the energy of a photon corresponding to wave-
length 1.00 nm, (b) the kinetic energy of an electron with de
Broglie wavelength 1.00 nm, (c) the energy of a photon correspon-
ding to wavelength 1.00 fm, and (d) the kinetic energy of an elec-
tron with de Broglie wavelength 1.00 fm?
•••59
If the de Broglie wavelength of a proton is 100 fm, (a)
what is the speed of the proton and (b) through what electric poten-
tial would the proton have to be accelerated to acquire this speed?
Module 38-6
Schrödinger’s Equation
•60
Suppose we put A ! 0 in Eq. 38-24 and relabeled B as c0.
(a) What would the resulting wave function then describe?
(b) How, if at all, would Fig. 38-13 be altered?
•61
The function c(x) displayed in Eq. 38-27 can describe a
free particle, for which the potential energy is U(x)
0 in
Schrödinger’s equation (Eq. 38-19).Assume now that U(x) ! U0 !
a constant in that equation. Show that Eq. 38-27 is a solution of
Schrödinger’s equation, with
giving the angular wave number k of the particle.
•62
Show that Eq. 38-24 is indeed a solution of Eq. 38-22 by sub-
stituting c(x) and its second derivative into Eq. 38-22 and noting
that an identity results.
•63
(a) Write the wave function c(x) displayed in Eq. 38-27 in
the form c(x) ! a ' ib, where a and b are real quantities. (Assume
that c0 is real.) (b) Write the time-dependent wave function &(x, t)
that corresponds to c(x) written in this form.
•64
Show that the angular wave number k for a nonrela-
SSM
k ! 2p
h 22m(E # U0)
!
SSM
