ation we would rewrite Eq.9-77 for components along the x axis as
m1v1i ! m1v1f cos u1 & m2v2f cos u2,
(9-79)
and along the y axis as
(9-80)
We can also write Eq. 9-78 (for the special case of an elastic collision) in terms of
speeds:
(kinetic energy).
(9-81)
Equations 9-79 to 9-81 contain seven variables: two masses, m1 and m2; three
speeds, v1i, v1f, and v2f; and two angles, u1 and u2. If we know any four of these
quantities, we can solve the three equations for the remaining three quantities.
1
2m1v1i
2 ! 1
2m1v1f
2 & 1
2m2v2f
2
0 ! %m1v1f sin u1 & m2v2f sin u2.
241
9-9 SYSTEMS WITH VARYING MASS: A ROCKET
Checkpoint 9
In Fig. 9-21, suppose that the projectile has an initial momentum of 6 kg)m/s, a final
x component of momentum of 4 kg)m/s, and a final y component of momentum of
%3 kg)m/s. For the target, what then are (a) the final x component of momentum
and (b) the final y component of momentum?
9-9 SYSTEMS WITH VARYING MASS: A ROCKET
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .
9.36 Apply the first rocket equation to relate the rate at which
the rocket loses mass, the speed of the exhaust products rel-
ative to the rocket, the mass of the rocket, and the accelera-
tion of the rocket.
9.37 Apply the second rocket equation to relate the change in
the rocket’s speed to the relative speed of the exhaust
products and the initial and final mass of the rocket.
9.38 For a moving system undergoing a change in mass at a
given rate, relate that rate to the change in momentum.
●In the absence of external forces a rocket accelerates at an
instantaneous rate given by
Rvrel ! Ma
(first rocket equation),
in which M is the rocket’s instantaneous mass (including
unexpended fuel), R is the fuel consumption rate, and vrel is
the fuel’s exhaust speed relative to the rocket. The term Rvrel
is the thrust of the rocket engine.
●For a rocket with constant R and vrel, whose speed
changes from vi to vf when its mass changes from Mi to Mf,
(second rocket equation).
vf % vi ! vrel ln Mi
Mf
Learning Objectives
Key Ideas
Systems with Varying Mass: A Rocket
So far, we have assumed that the total mass of the system remains constant.
Sometimes, as in a rocket, it does not. Most of the mass of a rocket on its launch-
ing pad is fuel, all of which will eventually be burned and ejected from the nozzle
of the rocket engine. We handle the variation of the mass of the rocket as the
rocket accelerates by applying Newton’s second law, not to the rocket alone but
to the rocket and its ejected combustion products taken together.The mass of this
system does not change as the rocket accelerates.
Finding the Acceleration
Assume that we are at rest relative to an inertial reference frame, watching a
rocket accelerate through deep space with no gravitational or atmospheric drag
