A C K N O W L E
D G
M
E
N T S
A great many people have contributed to this book. Sen-Ben Liao of Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, James
Whitenton of Southern Polytechnic State University, and Jerry Shi, of Pasadena City College, performed the Herculean task
of working out solutions for every one of the homework problems in the book.At John Wiley publishers, the book received
support from Stuart Johnson, Geraldine Osnato and Aly Rentrop, the editors who oversaw the entire project from start to
finish. We thank Elizabeth Swain, the production editor, for pulling all the pieces together during the complex production
process. We also thank Maddy Lesure for her design of the text and the cover; Lee Goldstein for her page make-up; Helen
Walden for her copyediting; and Lilian Brady for her proofreading. Jennifer Atkins was inspired in the search for unusual
and interesting photographs. Both the publisher John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and Jearl Walker would like to thank the following
for comments and ideas about the recent editions:
Jonathan Abramson, Portland State University; Omar Adawi, Parkland College; Edward Adelson, The Ohio State
University; Steven R. Baker, Naval Postgraduate School; George Caplan, Wellesley College; Richard Kass, The Ohio State
University; M. R. Khoshbin-e-Khoshnazar, Research Institution for Curriculum Development & Educational Innovations
(Tehran); Craig Kletzing, University of Iowa, Stuart Loucks, American River College; Laurence Lurio, Northern Illinois
University; Ponn Maheswaranathan, Winthrop University; Joe McCullough, Cabrillo College; Carl E. Mungan, U. S. Naval
Academy, Don N. Page, University of Alberta; Elie Riachi, Fort Scott Community College; Andrew G. Rinzler, University of
Florida; Dubravka Rupnik, Louisiana State University; Robert  Schabinger, Rutgers University; Ruth Schwartz, Milwaukee
School of Engineering; Carol Strong, University of Alabama at Huntsville, Nora Thornber, Raritan Valley Community
College; Frank Wang, LaGuardia Community College; Graham W. Wilson, University of Kansas; Roland Winkler, Northern
Illinois University;William Zacharias, Cleveland State University; Ulrich Zurcher, Cleveland State University.
Finally, our external reviewers have been outstanding and we acknowledge here our debt to each member of that team.
Maris A.Abolins, Michigan State University
Edward Adelson, Ohio State University
Nural Akchurin, Texas Tech
Yildirim Aktas, University of North Carolina-Charlotte
Barbara Andereck, Ohio Wesleyan University
Tetyana Antimirova, Ryerson University
Mark Arnett, Kirkwood Community College
Arun Bansil, Northeastern University
Richard Barber, Santa Clara University
Neil Basecu, Westchester Community College
Anand Batra, Howard University
Kenneth Bolland, The Ohio State University
Richard Bone, Florida International University
Michael E. Browne, University of Idaho
Timothy J. Burns, Leeward Community College
Joseph Buschi, Manhattan College
Philip A. Casabella, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Randall Caton, Christopher Newport College
Roger Clapp, University of South Florida
W. R. Conkie, Queen’s University
Renate Crawford, University of Massachusetts-Dartmouth
Mike Crivello, San Diego State University
Robert N. Davie, Jr., St. Petersburg Junior College
Cheryl K. Dellai, Glendale Community College
Eric R. Dietz, California State University at Chico
N. John DiNardo, Drexel University
Eugene Dunnam, University of Florida
Robert Endorf, University of Cincinnati
F. Paul Esposito, University of Cincinnati
Jerry Finkelstein, San Jose State University
Robert H. Good, California State University-Hayward
Michael Gorman, University of Houston
Benjamin Grinstein, University of California, San Diego
John B. Gruber, San Jose State University
Ann Hanks, American River College
Randy Harris, University of California-Davis
Samuel Harris, Purdue University
Harold B. Hart, Western Illinois University
Rebecca Hartzler, Seattle Central Community College
John Hubisz, North Carolina StateUniversity
Joey Huston, Michigan State University
David Ingram, Ohio University
Shawn Jackson, University of Tulsa
Hector Jimenez, University of Puerto Rico
Sudhakar B. Joshi, York University
Leonard M. Kahn, University of Rhode Island
Sudipa Kirtley, Rose-Hulman Institute
Leonard Kleinman, University of Texas at Austin
Craig Kletzing, University of Iowa
Peter F. Koehler, University of Pittsburgh
xxiii
