72  GENERAL  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY 
the  reason  for  this  preference  ?  In  order  to  show  clearly 
what  I  mean  by  this  question,  I  shall  make  use  of  a 
comparison. 
I  am  standing  in  front  of  a  gas  range.  Standing 
alongside  of  each  other  on  the  range  are  two  pans  so 
much  alike  that  one  may  be  mistaken  for  the  other. 
Both  are  half  full  of  water.  I  notice  that  steam  is  being 
emitted  continuously  from  the  one  pan,  but  not  from  the 
other.  I  am  surprised  at  this,  even  if  I  have  never  seen 
either  a  gas  range  or  a  pan  before.  But  if  I  now  notice 
a  luminous  something  of  bluish  colour  under  the  first 
pan  but  not  under  the  other,  I  cease  to  be  astonished, 
even  if  I  have  never  before  seen  a  gas  flame.  For  I 
can  only  say  that  this  bluish  something  will  cause  the 
emission  of  the  steam,  or  at  least  possibly  it  may  do  so. 
If,  however,  I  notice  the  bluish  something  in  neither 
case,  and  if  I  observe  that  the  one  continuously  emits 
steam  whilst  the  other  does  not,  then  I  shall  remain 
astonished  and  dissatisfied  until  I  have  discovered 
some  circumstance  to  which  I  can  attribute  the  different 
behaviour  of  the  two  pans. 
Analogously,  I  seek  in  vain  for  a  real  something  in 
classical  mechanics  (or  in  the  special  theory  of  rela 
tivity)  to  which  I  can  attribute  the  different  behaviour 
of  bodies  considered  with  respect  to  the  reference- 
systems  K  and  K'.1  Ne,\vton  saw  this  objection  and 
attempted  to  invalidate  it,  but  without  success.  But 
E.  Mach  recognised  it  most  clearly  of  all,  and  because 
of  this  objection  he  claimed  that  mechanics  must  be 
1  The  objection  is  of  importance  more  especially  when  the  state 
of  motion  of  the  reference-body  is  of  such  a  nature  that  it  does 
not  require  any  external  agency  for  its  maintenance,  e.g.  in 
the  case  when  the  reference-body  is  rotating  uniformly. 
