UNIVERSE— FINITE  YET  UNBOUNDED    111 
cumference  of  the  universe  "  is  reached,  and  that  it 
thenceforward  gradually  decreases  to  zero  for  still 
further  increasing  values  of  the  radius.  During  this 
process  the  area  of  the  circle  continues  to  increase 
more  and  more,  until  finally  it  becomes  equal  to  the 
total  area  of  the  whole  "  world-sphere." 
Perhaps  the  reader  will  wonder  why  we  have  placed 
our  "  beings  "  on  a  sphere  rather  than  on  another  closed 
surface.  But  this  choice  has  its  justification  in  the  fact 
that,  of  all  closed  surfaces,  the  sphere  is  unique  in  possess 
ing  the  property  that  all  points  on  it  are  equivalent.  I 
admit  that  the  ratio  of  the  circumference  c  of  a  circle 
to  its  radius  r  depends  on  r,  but  for  a  given  value  of  r 
it  is  the  same  for  all  points  of  the  "  world-sphere  "  ; 
in  other  words,  the  "  world-sphere  "  is  a  "  surface  of 
constant  curvature." 
To  this  two-dimensional  sphere-universe  there  is  a 
three-dimensional  analogy,  namely,  the  three-dimensional 
spheriqal  space  which  was  discovered  by  Riemann.  Its 
points  are  likewise  all  equivalent.  It  possesses  a  finite 
volume,  which  is  determined  by  its  "radius"  (2,Tr2R3). 
Is  it  possible  to  imagine  a  spherical  space  ?  To  imagine 
a  space  means  nothing  else  than  that  we  imagine  an 
epitome  of  our  "  space  "  experience,  i.e.  of  experience 
that  we  can  have  in  the  movement  of  "  rigid  "  bodies. 
In  this  sense  we  can  imagine  a  spherical  space. 
Suppose  we  draw  lines  or  stretch  strings  in  all  direc 
tions  from  a  point,  and  mark  off  from  each  of  these 
the  distance  r  with  a  measuring-rod.  All  the  free  end- 
points  of  these  lengths  lieion  a  spherical  surface.  We 
can  specially  measure  up  the  area  (F)  of  this  surface 
by  means  of  a%quare  made  up  of  measuring-rods.  If 
the  universe  is  Euclidean,  then  F=q*rz  ;  if  it  is  spherical, 
