BEHAVIOUR  OF  CLOCKS  AND  RODS      81 
non-rotating  Galileian  reference-body  K.  As  judged 
from  this  body,  the  clock  at  the  centre  of  the  disc  has 
no  velocity,  whereas  the  clock  at  the  edge  of  the  disc 
is  in  motion  relative  to  K  in  consequence  of  the  rotation. 
According  to  a  result  obtained  in  Section  XII,  it  follows 
that  the  latter  clock  goes  at  a  rate  permanently  slower 
than  that  of  the  clock  at  the  centre  of  the  circular  disc, 
i.e.  as  observed  from  K.  It  is  obvious  that  the  same  effect 
would  be  noted  by  an  observer  whom  we  will  imagine 
sitting  alongside  his  clock  at  the  centre  of  the  circular 
disc.  Thus  on  our  circular  disc,  or,  to  make  the  case 
more  general,  in  every  gravitational  field,  a  clock  will 
go  more  quickly  or  less  quickly,  according  to  the  position 
in  which  the  clock  is  situated  (at  rest).  For  this  reason 
it  is  not  possible  to  obtain  a  reasonable  definition  of  time 
with  the  aid  of  clocks  which  are  arranged  at  rest  with 
respect  to  the  body  of  reference.  A  similar  difficulty 
presents  itself  when  we  attempt  to  apply  our  earlier 
definition  of  simultaneity  in  such  a  case,  but  I  do  not 
wish  to  go  any  farther  into  this  question. 
Moreover,  at  this  stage  the  definition  of  the  space 
co-ordinates  also  presents  insurmountable  difficulties. 
If  the  observer  applies  his  standard  measuring-rod 
(a  rod  which  is  short  as  compared  with  the  radius  of 
the  disc)  tangentially  to  the  edge  of  the  disc,  then,  as 
judged  from  the  Galileian  system,  the  length  of  this  rod 
will  be  less  than  I,  since,  according  to  Section  XII,  moving 
bodies  suffer  a  shortening  in  the  direction  of  the  motion. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  measuring-rod  will  not  experience 
a  shortening  in  length,  as  judged  from  K,  if  it  is  applied 
to  the  disc  in  the  direction  of  the  radius.  If,  then,  the 
observer  first  measures  the  circumference  of  the  disc 
with  his  measuring-rod  and  then  the  diameter  of  the 
6 
