2     SPECIAL  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY 
we  are  able  to  associate  more  or  less  definite  ideas,  and 
from  certain  simple  propositions  (axioms)  which, 
in  virtue  of  these  ideas,  we  are  inclined  to  accept  as 
"  true."  Then,  on  the  basis  of  a  logical  process,  the 
justification  of  which  we  feel  ourselves  compelled  to 
admit,  all  remaining  propositions  are  shown  to  follow 
from  those  axioms,  i.e.  they  are  proven.  A  proposition 
is  then  correct  ("  true  ")  when  it  has  been  derived  in  the 
recognised  manner  from  the  axioms.  The  question 
of  the  "  truth  "  of  the  individual  geometrical  proposi 
tions  is  thus  reduced  to  one  of  the  "  truth  "  of  the 
axioms.  Now  it  has  long  been  known  that  the  last 
question  is  not  only  unanswerable  by  the  methods  of 
geometry,  but  that  it  is  in  itself  entirely  without  mean 
ing.  We  cannot  ask  whether  it  is  true  that  only  one 
straight  line  goes  through  two  points.  We  can  only 
say  that  Euclidean  geometry  deals  with  things  called 
"  straight  lines,"  to  each  of  which  is  ascribed  the  pro 
perty  of  being  uniquely  determined  by  two  points 
situated  on  it.  The  concept  "  true  "  does  not  tally  with 
the  assertions  of  pure  geometry,  because  by  the  word 
"  true  "  we  are  eventually  in  the  habit  of  designating 
always  the  correspondence  with  a  "  real "  object  ; 
geometry,  however,  is  not  concerned  with  the  relation 
of  the  ideas  involved  in  it  to  objects  of  experience,  but 
only  with  the  logical  connection  of  these  ideas  among 
themselves. 
It  is  not  difficult  to  understand  why,  in  spite  of  this, 
we  feel  constrained  to  call  the  propositions  of  geometry 
"  true."  Geometrical  ideas  correspond  to  more  or  less 
exact  objects  in  nature,  and  these  last  are  undoubtedly 
the  exclusive  cause  of  the  genesis  of  those  ideas.  Geo 
metry  ought  to  refrain  from  such  a  course,  in  order  to 
