IDEA  OF  TIME  IN  PHYSICS  23 
tion  would  only  be  possible  if  we  already  had  at  our 
disposal  the  means  of  measuring  time.  It  would  thus 
appear  as  though  we  were  moving  here  in  a  logical  circle." 
'  After  further  consideration  you  cast  a  somewhat 
disdainful  glance  at  me — and  rightly  so — and  you 
declare  :  "I  maintain  my  previous  definition  neverthe 
less,  because  in  reality  it  assumes  absolutely  nothing 
about  light.  There  is  only  one  demand  to  be  made  of 
the  definition  of  simultaneity,  namely,  that  in  every 
real  case  it  must  supply  us  with  an  empirical  decision 
as  to  whether  or  not  the  conception  that  has  to 
be  defined  is  fulfilled.  That  my  definition  satisfies 
this  demand  is  indisputable.  That  light  requires  the 
same  time  to  traverse  the  path  A  — >  M  as  for  the  path 
B — >M  is  in  reality  neither  a  supposition  nor  a  hypothesis 
about  the  physical  nature  of  light,  but  a  stipulation 
which  I  can  make  of  my  own  freewill  in  order  to  arrive 
at  a  definition  of  simultaneity." 
It  is  clear  that  this  definition  can  be  used  to  give  an 
exact  meaning  not  only  to  two  events,  but  to  as  many 
events  as  we  care  to  choose,  and  independently  of  the 
positions  of  the  scenes  of  the  events  with  respect  to  the 
body  of  reference1  (here  the  railway  embankment). 
We  are  thus  led  also  to  a  definition  of  "  time  "  in  physics. 
For  this  purpose  we  suppose  that  clocks  of  identical 
construction  are  placed  at  the  points  A,  B  and  C  of 
1  We  suppose  further,  that,  when  three  events  A,  B  and  C 
occur  in  different  places  in  such  a  manner  that  A  is  simul 
taneous  with  B,  and  B  is  simultaneous  with  C  (simultaneous 
in  the  sense  of  the  above  definition),  then  the  criterion  for  the 
simultaneity  of  the  pair  of  events  A,  C  is  also  satisfied.  This 
assumption  is  a  physical  hypothesis  about  the  law  of  propagation 
of  light ;  it  must  certainly  be  fulfilled  if  we  are  to  maintain  the 
law  of  the  constancy  of  the  velocity  of  light  in  vacua. 
