EXPERIENCE  AND  RELATIVITY       51 
litherto  remained  obscure  to  us.1  If  we  now  assume 
:hat  the  relative  distances  between  the  electrical  masses 
Constituting  the  electron  remain  unchanged  during  the 
motion  of  the  electron  (rigid  connection  in  the  sense  of 
classical  mechanics),  we  arrive  at  a  law  of  motion  of  the 
electron  which  does  not  agree  with  experience.  Guided 
oy  purely  formal  points  of  view,  H.  A.  Lorentz  was  the 
first  to  introduce  the  hypothesis  that  the  particles 
:onstituting  the  electron  experience  a  contraction 
in  the  direction  of  motion  in  consequence  of  that  motion, 
ithe  amount  of  this  contraction  being  proportional  to 
/      v2 
the  expression  \f  i — %.      This  hypothesis,   which  is 
»         c 
not  justifiable  by  any  electrodynamical  facts,  supplies  us 
'then  with  that  particular  law  of  motion  which  has 
been  confirmed  with  great  precision  in  recent  years. 
The  theory  of  relativity  leads  to  the  same  law  of 
motion,  without  requiring  any  special  hypothesis  what 
soever  as  to  the  structure  and  the  behaviour  of  the 
electron.  We  arrived  at  a  similar  conclusion  in  Section 
XIII  in  connection  with  the  experiment  of  Fizeau,  the 
result  of  which  is  foretold  by  the  theory  of  relativity 
without  the  necessity  of  drawing  on  hypotheses  as  to 
the  physical  nature  of  the  liquid. 
The  second  class  of  facts  to  which  we  have  alluded 
has  reference  to  the  question  whether  or  not  the  motion 
of  the  earth  in  space  can  be  made  perceptible  in  terrestrial 
experiments.  We  have  already  remarked  in  Section  V 
that  all  attempts  of  this  nature  led  to  a  negative  result. 
Before  the  theory  of  relativity  was  put  forward,  it  was 
1  The  general  theory  of  relativity  renders  it  likely  that  the 
electrical  masses  of  an  electron  are  held  together  by  gravita 
tional  forces. 
