106    CONSIDERATIONS  ON  THE  UNIVERSE 
density  of  the  stars  is  a  maximum,  and  that  as  we 
proceed  outwards  from  this  centre  the  group-density 
of  the  stars  should  diminish,  until  finally,  at  great 
distances,  it  is  succeeded  by  an  infinite  region  of  empti 
ness.  The  stellar  universe  ought  to  be  a  finite  island  in 
the  infinite  ocean  of  space.1 
This  conception  is  in  itself  not  very  satisfactory. 
It  is  still  less  satisfactory  because  it  leads  to  the  result 
that  the  light  emitted  by  the  stars  and  also  individual 
stars  of  the  stellar  system  are  perpetually  passing  out 
into  infinite  space,  never  to  return,  and  without  ever 
again  coming  into  interaction  with  other  objects  of 
nature.  Such  a  finite  material  universe  would  be 
destined  to  become  gradually  but  systematically  im 
poverished. 
In  order  to  escape  this  dilemma,  Seeliger  suggested  a 
modification  of  Newton's  law,  in  which  he  assumes  that 
for  great  distances  the  force  of  attraction  between  two 
masses  diminishes  more  rapidly  than  would  result  from 
the  inverse  square  law.  In  this  way  it  is  possible  for  the 
mean  density  of  matter  to  be  constant  everywhere, 
even  to  infinity,  without  infinitely  large  gravitational 
fields  being  produced.  We  thus  free  ourselves  from  the 
1  Proof  — According  to  the  theory  of  Newton,  the  number  of 
"  lines  of  force  "  which  come  from  infinity  and  terminate  in  a 
mass  m  is  proportional  to  the  mass  m.  If,  on  the  average,  the 
mass-density  p0  is  constant  throughout  the  universe,  then  a 
sphere  of  volume  V  will  enclose  the  average  mass  pQV.  Thus 
the  number  of  lines  of  force  passing  through  the  surface  F  of  the 
sphere  into  its  interior  is  proportional  to  p0V.  For  unit  area 
of  the  surface  of  the  sphere  the  number  of  lines  of  force  which 
enters  the  sphere  is  thus  proportional  to  />0—  or  to  />0R.       Hence 
F 
the  intensity  of  the  field  at  the  surface  would  ultimately  become 
infinite  with  increasing  radius  R  of  the  sphere,  which  is  impossible. 
