84    GENERAL  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY 
laid  out  with  squares.  The  arrangement  is  such,  that 
each  side  of  a  square  belongs  to  two  squares  and  each 
corner  to  four  squares. 
It  is  a  veritable  wonder  that  we  can  carry  out  this 
business  without  getting  into  the  greatest  difficulties. 
We  only  need  to  think  of  the  following.  If  at  any 
moment  three  squares  meet  at  a  corner,  then  two  sides 
of  the  fourth  square  are  already  laid,  and,  as  a  conse 
quence,  the  arrangement  of  the  remaining  two  sides  of 
the  square  is  already  completely  determined.  But  I 
am  now  no  longer  able  to  adjust  the  quadrilateral  so 
that  its  diagonals  may  be  equal.  If  they  are  equal 
of  their  own  accord,  then  this  is  an  especial  favour 
of  the  marble  slab  and  of  the  little  rods,  about  which  I 
can  only  be  thankfully  surprised.  We  must  needs 
experience  many  such  surprises  if  the  construction  is  to 
be  successful. 
If  everything  has  really  gone  smoothly,  then  I  say 
that  the  points  of  the  marble  slab  constitute  a  Euclidean 
continuum  with  respect  to  the  little  rod,  which  has  been 
used  as  a  "  distance "  (line-interval).  By  choosing 
one  corner  of  a  square  as  "  origin,"  I  can  characterise 
every  other  corner  of  a  square  with  reference  to  this 
origin  by  means  of  two  numbers.  I  only  need  state 
how  many  rods  I  must  pass  over  when,  starting  from  the 
origin,  I  proceed  towards  the  "  right  "  and  then  "  up 
wards,"  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  corner  of  the  square 
under  consideration.  These  two  numbers  are  then  the 
"  Cartesian  co-ordinates  "  of  this  corner  with  reference 
to  the  "  Cartesian  co-ordinate  system"  which  is  deter 
mined  by  the  arrangement  of  little  rods. 
By  making  use  of  the  following  modification  of  this 
abstract  experiment,  we  recognise  that  there  must  also 
