52      SPECIAL  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY 
difficult  to  become  reconciled  to  this  negative  result, 
for  reasons  now  to  be  discussed.  The  inherited 
prejudices  about  time  and  space  did  not  allow  any 
doubt  to  arise  as  to  the  prime  importance  of  the 
Galilei  transformation  for  changing  over  from  one 
body  of  reference  to  another.  Now  assuming  that  the 
Maxwell-Lorentz  equations  hold  for  a  reference-body  K, 
we  then  find  that  they  do  not  hold  for  a  reference- 
body  K'  moving  uniformly  with  respect  to  K,  if  we 
assume  that  the  relations  of  the  Galileian  transforma 
tion  exist  between  the  co-ordinates  of  K  and  K'.  It 
thus  appears  that  of  all  Galileian  co-ordinate  systems 
one  (K)  corresponding  to  a  particular  state  of  motion 
is  physically  unique.  This  result  was  interpreted 
physically  by  regarding  K  as  at  rest  with  respect  to  a 
hypothetical  aether  of  space.  On  the  other  hand, 
all  co-ordinate  systems  K'  moving  relatively  to  K  were 
to  be  regarded  as  in  motion  with  respect  to  the  aether. 
To  this  motion  of  K'  against  the  aether  ("  aether-drift  " 
relative  to  K'}  were  assigned  the  more  complicated 
laws  which  were  supposed  to  hold  relative  to  K'. 
Strictly  speaking,  such  an  aether-drift  ought  also  to  be 
assumed  relative  to  the  earth,  and  for  a  long  time  the 
efforts  of  physicists  were  devoted  to  attempts  to  detect 
the  existence  of  an  aether-drift  at  the  earth's  surface. 
In  one  of  the  most  notable  of  these  attempts  Michelson 
devised  a  method  which  appears  as  though  it  must  be 
decisive.  Imagine  two  mirrors  so  arranged  on  a  rigid 
body  that  the  reflecting  surfaces  face  each  other.  A 
ray  of  light  requires  a  perfectly  definite  time  T  to  pass 
from  one  mirror  to  the  other  and  back  again,  if  the  whole 
system  be  at  rest  with  respect  to  the  aether.  It  is  found 
by  calculation,  however,  that  a  slightly  different  time 
