continuum.  Just  as  it  was  there  impossible  to  construct 
a  Cartesian  co-ordinate  system  from  equal  rods,  so 
here  it  is  impossible  to  build  up  a  system  (reference- 
body)  from  rigid  bodies  and  clocks,  which  shall  be  of 
such  a  nature  that  measuring-rods  and  clocks,  arranged 
rigidly  with  respect  to  one  another,  shall  indicate  posi 
tion  and  time  directly.  Such  was  the  essence  of  the 
difficulty  with  which  we  were  confronted  in  Section 
XXIII. 
But  the  considerations  of  Sections  XXV  and  XXVI 
show  us  the  way  to  surmount  this  difficulty.  We  refer  the 
four-dimensional  space-time  continuum  in  an  arbitrary 
manner  to  Gauss  co-ordinates.  We  assign  to  every 
point  of  the  continuum  (event)  four  numbers,  xlt  x2, 
#3,  x±  (co-ordinates),  which  have  not  the  least  direct 
physical  significance,  but  only  serve  the  purpose  of 
numbering  the  points  of  the  continuum  in  a  definite 
but  arbitrary  manner.  This  arrangement  does  not  even 
need  to  be  of  such  a  kind  that  we  must  regard  xlt  x2,  x3  as 
"  space  "  co-ordinates  and  #4  as  a  "  time  "  co-ordinate. 
The  reader  may  think  that  such  a  description  of  the 
world  would  be  quite  inadequate.  What  does  it  mean 
to  assign  to  an  event  the  particular  co-ordinates  xlf 
xt>  xs>  x±>  if  m  themselves  these  co-ordinates  have  no 
significance  ?  More  careful  consideration  shows,  how 
ever,  that  this  anxiety  is  unfounded.  Let  us  consider, 
for  instance,  a  material  point  with  any  kind  of  motion. 
If  this  point  had  only  a  momentary  existence  without 
duration,  then  it  would  be  described  in  space-time  by  a 
single  system  of  values  xitx2,x3,x^  Thus  its  permanent 
existence  must  be  characterised  by  an  infinitely  large 
number  of  such  systems  of  values,  the  co-ordinate  values 
of  which  are  so  close  together  as  to  give  continuity ; 
