26     SPECIAL  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY 
simultaneous  with  respect  to  the  embankment,  we 
mean  :  the  rays  of  light  emitted  at  the  places  A  and 
B,  where  the  lightning  occurs,  meet  each  other  at  the 
mid-point  M  of  the  length  A  — >  B  of  the  embankment. 
But  the  events  A  and  B  also  correspond  to  positions  A 
and  B  on  the  train.  Let  M'  be  the  mid-point  of  the 
distance  A  — >  B  on  the  travelling  train.  Just  when 
the  flashes  1  of  lightning  occur,  this  point  M'  naturally 
coincides  with  the  point  M,  but  it  moves  towards  the 
right  in  the  diagram  with  the  velocity  v  of  the  train.  If 
an  observer  sitting  in  the  position  M'  in  the  train  did 
not  possess  this  velocity,  then  he  would  remain  per 
manently  at  M,  and  the  light  rays  emitted  by  the 
flashes  of  lightning  A  and  B  would  reach  him  simul 
taneously,  i.e.  they  would  meet  just  where  he  is  situated. 
Now  in  reality  (considered  with  reference  to  the  railway 
embankment)  he  is  hastening  towards  the  beam  of  light 
coming  from  B,  whilst  he  is  riding  on  ahead  of  the  beam 
of  light  coming  from  A.  Hence  the  observer  will  see 
the  beam  of  light  emitted  from  B  earlier  than  he  will 
see  that  emitted  from  A.  Observers  who  take  the  rail 
way  train  as  their  reference-body  must  therefore  come 
to  the  conclusion  that  the  lightning  flash  B  took  place 
earlier  than  the  lightning  flash  A.  We  thus  arrive  at 
the  important  result : 
Events  which  are  simultaneous  with  reference  to  the 
embankment  are  not  simultaneous  with  respect  to  the 
train,  and  vice  versa  (relativity  of  simultaneity).  Every 
reference-body  (co-ordinate  system)  has  its  own  particular 
time  ;  unless  we  are  told  the  reference-body  to  which 
the  statement  of  time  refers,  there  is  no  meaning  in  a 
statement  of  the  time  of  an  event. 
1  As  judged  from  the  embankment. 
