UNIVERSE— FINITE  YET  UNBOUNDED    109 
i.e.  its  volume  (surface)  is  infinite.  If  these  beings  say 
their  universe  is  "  plane,"  there  is  sense  in  the  state 
ment,  because  they  mean  that  they  can  perform  the  con 
structions  of  plane  Euclidean  geometry  with  their  rods. 
In  this  connection  the  individual  rods  always  represent 
the  same  distance,  independently  of  their  position. 
Let  us  consider  now  a  second  two-dimensional  exist 
ence,  but  this  time  on  a  spherical  surface  instead  of  on 
a  plane.  The  flat  beings  with  their  measuring-rods 
and  other  objects  fit  exactly  on  this  surface  and  they 
are  unable  to  leave  it.  Their  whole  universe  of  observa 
tion  extends  exclusively  over  the  surface  of  the  sphere. 
Are  these  beings  able  to  regard  the  geometry  of  their 
universe  as  being  plane  geometry  and  their  rods  withal 
as  the  realisation  of  "  distance  "  ?  They  cannot  do 
this.  For  if  they  attempt  to  realise  a  straight  line,  they 
will  obtain  a  curve,  which  we  "  three-dimensional 
beings  "  designate  as  a  great  circle,  i.e.  a  self-contained 
line  of  definite  finite  length,  which  can  be  measured 
up  by  means  of  a  measuring-rod.  Similarly,  this 
universe  has  a  finite  area  that  can  be  compared  with  the 
area  of  a  square  constructed  with  rods.  The  great 
charm  resulting  from  this  consideration  lies  in  the 
recognition  of  the  fact  that  the  universe  of  these  beings  is 
finite  and  yet  has  no  limits. 
But  the  spherical-surface  beings  do  not  need  to  go 
on  a  world-tour  in  order  to  perceive  that  they  are  not 
living  in  a  Euclidean  universe.  They  can  convince 
themselves  of  this  on  every  part  of  their  "  world," 
provided  they  do  not  use  too  small  a  piece  of  it.  Starting 
from  a  point,  they  draw  "  straight  lines  "  (arcs  of  circles 
as  judged  in  three-dimensional  space)  of  equal  length 
in  all  directions.  They  will  call  the  line  joining  the 
