THE  PROPAGATION  OF  LIGHT         19 
mce.  But,  from  our  above  consideration,  this  would 
ippear  to  be  impossible.  If  every  ray  of  light  is  pro 
pagated  relative  to  the  embankment  with  the  velocity 
;,  then  for  this  reason  it  would  appear  that  another  law 
)i  propagation  of  light  must  necessarily  hold  with  respect 
;o  the  carriage — a  result  contradictory  to  the  principle 
:>f  relativity. 
In  view  of  this  dilemma  there  appears  to  be  nothing 
jlse  for  it  than  to  abandon  either  the  principle  of  rela- 
[ivity  or  the  simple  law  of  the  propagation  of  light  in 
MCUO.  Those  of  you  who  have  carefully  followed  the 
preceding  discussion  are  almost  sure  to  expect  that 
sve  should  retain  the  principle  of  relativity,  which 
ippeals  so  convincingly  to  the  intellect  because  it  is  so 
natural  and  simple.  The  law  of  the  propagation  of 
iight  in  vacua  would  then  have  to  be  replaced  by  a 
more  complicated  law  conformable  to  the  principle  of 
relativity.  The  development  of  theoretical  physics 
shows,  however,  that  we  cannot  pursue  this  course. 
The  epoch-making  theoretical  investigations  of  H.  A. 
Lorentz  on  the  electrodynamical  and  optical  phenomena 
connected  with  moving  bodies  show  that  experience 
in  this  domain  leads  conclusively  to  a  theory  of  electro 
magnetic  phenomena,  of  which  the  law  of  the  constancy 
of  the  velocity  of  light  in  vacua  is  a  necessary  conse 
quence.  Prominent  theoretical  physicists  were  there 
fore  more  inclined  to  reject  the  principle  of  relativity, 
in  spite  of  the  fact  that  no  empirical  data  had  been 
found  which  were  contradictory  to  this  principle. 
At  this  juncture  the  theory  of  relativity  entered  the 
arena.  As  a  result  of  an  analysis  of  the  physical  con 
ceptions  of  time  and  space,  it  became  evident  that  in 
reality  there  is  not  the  least  incompatibility  ietween  the 
