64  GENERAL  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY 
The  effects  of  gravitation  also  are  regarded  in  an  ana 
logous  manner. 
The  action  of  the  earth  on  the  stone  takes  place  in 
directly.  The  earth  produces  in  its  surroundings  a 
gravitational  field,  which  acts  on  the  stone  and  produces 
its  motion  of  fall.  As  we  know  from  experience,  the 
intensity  of  the  action  on  a  body  diminishes  according 
to  a  quite  definite  law,  as  we  proceed  farther  and  farther 
away  from  the  earth.  From  our  point  of  view  this 
means  :  The  law  governing  the  properties  of  the  gravita 
tional  field  in  space  must  be  a  perfectly  definite  one,  in 
order  correctly  to  represent  the  diminution  of  gravita 
tional  action  with  the  distance  from  operative  bodies. 
It  is  something  like  this :  The  body  (e.g.  the  earth)  pro 
duces  a  field  in  its  immediate  neighbourhood  directly  ; 
the  intensity  and  direction  of  the  field  at  points  farther 
removed  from  the  body  are  thence  determined  by 
the  law  which  governs  the  properties  in  space  of  the 
gravitational  fields  themselves. 
In  contrast  to  electric  and  magnetic  fields,  the  gravita 
tional  field  exhibits  a  most  remarkable  property,  which 
is  of  fundamental  importance  for  what  follows.  Bodies 
which  are  moving  under  the  sole  influence  of  a  gravita 
tional  field  receive  an  acceleration,  which  does  not  in  the 
least  depend  either  on  the  material  or  on  the  physical 
state  of  the  body.  For  instance,  a  piece  of  lead  and 
a  piece  of  wood  fall  in  exactly  the  same  manner  in  a 
gravitational  field  (in  vacuo),  when  they  start  off  from 
rest  or  with  the  same  initial  velocity.  This  law,  which 
holds  most  accurately,  can  be  expressed  in  a  different  ^ 
form  in  the  light  of  the  following  consideration. 
According  to  Newton's  law  of  motion,  we  have 
(Force) =(inertial  mass)  X  (acceleration), 
