112    CONSIDERATIONS  ON  THE  UNIVERSE 
then  F  is  always  less  than  47^.  With  increasing 
values  of  r,  F  increases  from  zero  up  to  a  maximum 
value  which  is  determined  by  the  "  world-radius,"  but 
for  still  further  increasing  values  of  r,  the  area  gradually 
diminishes  to  zero.  At  first,  the  straight  lines  which 
radiate  from  the  starting  point  diverge  farther  and 
farther  from  one  another,  but  later  they  approach 
each  other,  and  finally  they  run  together  again  at  a 
"  counter-point  "  to  the  starting  point.  Under  such 
conditions  they  have  traversed  the  whole  spherical 
space.  It  is  easily  seen  that  the  three-dimensional 
spherical  space  is  quite  analogous  to  the  two-dimensional 
spherical  surface.  It  is  finite  (i.e.  of  finite  volume),  and 
has  no  bounds. 
It  may  be  mentioned  that  there  is  yet  another  kind 
of  curved  space  :  "  elliptical  space."  It  can  be  regarded 
as  a  curved  space  in  which  the  two  "  counter-points  " 
are  identical  (indistinguishable  from  each  other).  An 
elliptical  universe  can  thus  be  considered  to  some 
extent  as  a  curved  universe  possessing  central  symmetry. 
It  follows  from  what  has  been  said,  that  closed  spaces 
without  limits  are  conceivable.  From  amongst  these, 
the  spherical  space  (and  the  elliptical)  excels  in  its 
simplicity,  since  all  points  on  it  are  equivalent.  As  a 
result  of  this  discussion,  a  most  interesting  question 
arises  for  astronomers  and  physicists,  and  that  is 
whether  the  universe  in  which  we  live  is  infinite,  or 
whether  it  is  finite  in  the  manner  of  the  spherical  uni 
verse.  Our  experience  is  far  from  being  sufficient  to 
enable  us  to  answer  this  question.  But  the  general 
theory  of  relativity  permits  of  our  answering  it  with  a 
moderate  degree  of  certainty,  and  in  this  connection  the 
difficulty  mentioned  in  Section  XXX  finds  its  solution. 
