10    SPECIAL  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY 
preceding  section.  If  instead  of  "  body  of  reference  " 
we  insert  "  system  of  co-ordinates,"  which  is  a  useful 
idea  for  mathematical  description,  we  are  in  a  position 
to  say  :  The  stone  traverses  a  straight  line  relative  to  a 
system  of  co-ordinates  rigidly  attached  to  the  carriage, 
but  relative  to  a  system  of  co-ordinates  rigidly  attached 
to  the  ground  (embankment)  it  describes  a  parabola. 
With  the  aid  of  this  example  it  is  clearly  seen  that  there 
is  no  such  thing  as  an  independently  existing  trajectory 
(lit.  "  path-curve  "  1),  but  only  a  trajectory  relative  to  a 
particular  body  of  reference. 
In  order  to  have  a  complete  description  of  the  motion, 
we  must  specify  how  the  body  alters  its  position  with 
time  ;  i.e.  for  every  point  on  the  trajectory  it  must  be 
stated  at  what  time  the  body  is  situated  there.  These 
data  must  be  supplemented  by  such  a  definition  of 
time  that,  in  virtue  of  this  definition,  these  time-values 
can  be  regarded  essentially  as  magnitudes  (results  of 
measurements)  capable  of  observation.  If  we  take  our 
stand  on  the  ground  of  classical  mechanics,  we  can 
satisfy  this  requirement  for  our  illustration  in  the 
following  manner.  We  imagine  two  clocks  of  identical 
construction  ;  the  man  at  the  railway-carriage  window 
is  holding  one  of  them,  and  the  man  on  the  foot 
path  the  other.  Each  of  the  observers  determines 
the  position  on  his  own  reference-body  occupied  by  the 
stone  at  each  tick  of  the  clock  he  is  holding  in  his 
hand.  In  this  connection  we  have  not  taken  account 
of  the  inaccuracy  involved  by  the  finiteness  of  the 
velocity  of  propagation  of  light.  With  this  and  with  a 
second  difficulty  prevailing  here  we  shall  have  to  deal 
in  detail  later. 
1  That  is,  a  curve  along  which  the  body  moves. 
