INFERENCES  FROM  RELATIVITY      75 
way,  so  that  our  consideration  supplies  us  with  nothing 
essentially  new. 
However,  we  obtain  a  new  result  of  fundamental 
importance  when  we  carry  out  the  analogous  considera 
tion  for  a  ray  of  light.  With  respect  to  the  Galileian 
reference-body  K,  such  a  ray  of  light  is  transmitted 
rectilinearly  with  the  velocity  c.  It  can  easily  be  shown 
that  the  path  of  the  same  ray  of  light  is  no  longer  a 
straight  line  when  we  consider  it  with  reference  to  the 
accelerated  chest  (reference-body  K').  From  this  we 
conclude,  that,  in  general,  rays  of  light  are  propagated 
curvilinearly  in  gravitational  fields.  In  two  respects 
this  result  is  of  great  importance. 
In  the  first  place,  it  can  be  compared  with  the  reality. 
Although  a  detailed  examination  of  the  question  shows 
that  the  curvature  of  light  rays  required  by  the  general 
theory  of  relativity  is  only  exceedingly  small  for  the 
gravitational  fields  at  our  disposal  in  practice,  its  esti 
mated  magnitude  for  light  rays  passing  the  sun  at 
grazing  incidence  is  nevertheless  1*7  seconds  of  arc. 
This  ought  to  manifest  itself  in  the  following  way. 
As  seen  from  the  earth,  certain  fixed  stars  appear  to  be 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  sun,  and  are  thus  capable 
of  observation  during  a  total  eclipse  of  the  sun.  At  such 
times,  these  stars  ought  to  appear  to  be  displaced 
outwards  from  the  sun  by  an  amount  indicated  above, 
as  compared  with  their  apparent  position  in  the  sky 
when  the  sun  is  situated  at  another  part  of  the  heavens. 
The  examination  of  the  correctness  or  otherwise  of  this 
deduction  is  a  problem  of  the  greatest  importance,  the 
early  solution  of  which  is  to  be  expected  of  astronomers.1 
1  By  means  of  the  star  photographs  of  two  expeditions  equipped 
by  a  Joint  Committee  of  the  Royal  and  Royal  Astronomical 
