76     GENERAL  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY 
In  the  second  place  our  result  shows  that,  according 
to  the  general  theory  of  relativity,  the  law  of  the  con 
stancy  of  the  velocity  of  light  in  vacuo,  which  consti 
tutes  one  of  the  two  fundamental  assumptions  in  the 
special  theory  of  relativity  and  to  which  we  have 
already  frequently  referred,  cannot  claim  any  unlimited 
validity.  A  curvature  of  rays  of  light  can  only  take 
place  when  the  velocity  of  propagation  of  light  varies 
with  position.  Now  we  might  think  that  as  a  conse 
quence  of  this,  the  special  theory  of  relativity  and  with 
it  the  whole  theory  of  relativity  would  be  laid  in  the 
dust.  But  in  reality  this  is  not  the  case.  We  can  only 
conclude  that  the  special  theory  of  relativity  cannot 
claim  an  unlimited  domain  of  validity  ;  its  results 
hold  only  so  long  as  we  are  able  to  disregard  the  in 
fluences  of  gravitational  fields  on  the  phenomena 
(e.g.  of  light). 
Since  it  has  often  been  contended  by  opponents  of 
the  theory  of  relativity  that  the  special  theory  of 
relativity  is  overthrown  by  the  general  theory  of  "rela 
tivity,  it  is  perhaps  advisable  to  make  the  facts  of  the 
case  clearer  by  means  of  an  appropriate  comparison. 
Before  the  development  of  electrodynamics  the  laws 
of  electrostatics  were  looked  upon  as  the  laws  of 
electricity.  At  the  present  time  we  know  that 
electric  fields  can  be  derived  correctly  from  electro 
static  considerations  only  for  the  case,  which  is  never 
strictly  realised,  in  which  the  electrical  masses  are  quite 
at  rest  relatively  to  each  other,  and  to  the  co-ordinate 
system.  Should  we  be  justified  in  saying  that  for  this 
Societies,  the  existence  of  the  deflection  of  light  demanded  by 
theory  was  confirmed  during  the  solar  eclipse  of  20th  Mav  IQIQ 
(Cf.  Appendix  III.) 
