98     GENERAL  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY 
variables  x,  y,  z,  t,  of  a  (Galileian)  reference-body  K 
by  the  space-time  variables  x',  y',  z',  t',  of  a  new  re 
ference-body  K'.  According  to  the  general  theory 
of  relativity,  on  the  other  hand,  by  application  of 
arbitrary  substitutions  of  the  Gauss  variables  xl}  x2,  %  x±, 
the  equations  must  pass  over  into  equations  of  the  same 
form  ;  for  every  transformation  (not  only  the  Lorentz 
transformation)  corresponds  to  the  transition  of  one 
Gauss  co-ordinate  system  into  another. 
If  we  desire  to  adhere  to  our  "  old-time  "  three- 
dimensional  view  of  things,  then  we  can  characterise 
the  development  which  is  being  undergone  by  the 
fundamental  idea  of  the  general  theory  of  relativity 
as  follows  :  The  special  theory  of  relativity  has  reference 
to  Galileian  domains,  i.e.  to  those  in  which  no  gravita 
tional  field  exists.  In  this  connection  a  Galileian  re 
ference-body  serves  as  body  of  reference,  i.e.  a  rigid 
body  the  state  of  motion  of  which  is  so  chosen  that  the 
Galileian  law  of  the  uniform  rectilinear  motion  of 
"  isolated  "  material  points  holds  relatively  to  it. 
Certain  considerations  suggest  that  we  should  refer 
the  same  Galileian  domains  to  non-Galileian  reference- 
bodies  also.  A  gravitational  field  of  a  special  kind  is 
then  present  with  respect  to  these  bodies  (cf .  Sections  XX 
and  XXIII). 
In  gravitational  fields  there  are  no  such  things  as  rigid 
bodies  with  Euclidean  properties  ;  thus  the  fictitious  rigid 
body  of  reference  is  of  no  avail  in  the  general  theory  of 
relativity.  The  motion  of  clocks  is  also  influenced  by 
gravitational  fields,  and  in  such  a  way  that  a  physical 
definition  of  time  which  is  made  directly  with  the  aid  of 
clocks  has  by  no  means  the  same  degree  of  plausibility 
as  in  the  special  theory  of  relativity. 
