128  APPENDIX  III 
deflection  of  light  from  the  star  by  the  sun,  the  star 
will  be  seen  in  the  direction  D2,  i.e.  at  a  somewhat 
greater  distance  from  the  centre  of  the  sun  than  cor 
responds  to  its  real  position. 
In  practice,  the  question  is  tested  in  the  following 
way.  The  stars  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  sun  are 
photographed  during  a  solar  eclipse.  In  addition,  a 
second  photograph  of  the  same  stars  is  taken  when  the 
sun  is  situated  at  another  position  in  the  sky,  i.e.  a  few 
months  earlier  or  later.  As  compared  with  the  standard 
photograph,  the  positions  of  the  stars  on  the  eclipse- 
photograph  ought  to  appear  displaced  radially  out 
wards  (away  from  the  centre  of  the  sun)  by  an  amount 
corresponding  to  the  angle  a. 
We  are  indebted  to  the  Royal  Society  and  to  the 
Royal  Astronomical  Society  for  the  investigation  of 
this  important  deduction.  Undaunted  by  the  war  and 
by  difficulties  of  both  a  material  and  a  psychological 
nature  aroused  by  the  war,  these  societies  equipped 
two  expeditions — to  Sobral  (Brazil),  and  to  the  island  of 
Principe  (West  Africa) — and  sent  several  of  Britain's 
most  celebrated  astronomers  (Eddington,  Cottingham, 
Crommelin,  Davidson),  in  order  to  obtain  photographs 
of  the  solar  eclipse  of  2Qth  May,  1919.  The  relative 
discrepancies  to  be  expected  between  the  stellar  photo 
graphs  obtained  during  the  eclipse  and  the  comparison 
photographs  amounted  to  a  few  hundredths  of  a  milli 
metre  only.  Thus  great  accuracy  was  necessary  in 
making  the  adjustments  required  for  the  taking  of  the 
photographs,  and  in  their  subsequent  measurement. 
The  results  of  the  measurements  confirmed  the  theory 
in  a  thoroughly  satisfactory  manner.  The  rectangular 
components  of  the  observed  and  of  the  calculated 
