INERTIAL  AND  GRAVITATIONAL  MASS       69 
enough  to  effect  the  acceleration  of  the  body.  That 
which  determines  the  magnitude  of  the  tension  of  the 
rope  is  the  inertial  mass  of  the  body."  Guided  by 
this  example,  we  see  that  our  extension  of  the  principle 
of  relativity  implies  the  necessity  of  the  law  of  the 
equality  of  inertial  and  gravitational  mass.  Thus  we 
have  obtained  a  physical  interpretation  of  this  law. 
From  our  consideration  of  the  accelerated  chest  we 
see  that  a  general  theory  of  relativity  must  yield  im 
portant  results  on  the  laws  of  gravitation.  In  point  of 
fact,  the  systematic  pursuit  of  the  general  idea  of  re 
lativity  has  supplied  the  laws  satisfied  by  the  gravita 
tional  field.  Before  proceeding  farther,  however,  I 
must  warn  the  reader  against  a  misconception  suggested 
by  these  considerations.  A  gravitational  field  exists 
for  the  man  in  the  chest,  despite  the  fact  that  there  was 
no  such  field  for  the  co-ordinate  system  first  chosen. 
Now  we  might  easily  suppose  that  the  existence  of  a 
gravitational  field  is  always  only  an  apparent  one.  We 
might  also  think  that,  regardless  of  the  kind  of  gravita 
tional  field  which  may  be  present,  we  could  always 
choose  another  reference-body  such  that  no  gravitational 
field  exists  with  reference  to  it.  This  is  by  no  means 
true  for  all  gravitational  fields,  but  only  for  those  of 
quite  special  form.  It  is,  for  instance,  impossible  to 
choose  a  body  of  reference  such  that,  as  judged  from  it, 
the  gravitational  field  of  the  earth  (in  its  entirety) 
vanishes. 
We  can  now  appreciate  why  that  argument  is  not 
convincing,  which  we  brought  forward  against  the 
general  principle  of  relativity  at  the  end  of  Section  XVIII. 
It  is  certainly  true  that  the  observer  in  the  railway 
carriage  experiences  a  jerk  forwards  as  a  result  of  the 
