the  same  difficulty  with  all  physical  statements  in  which 
the  conception  "  simultaneous  "  plays  a  part.  The 
concept  does  not  exist  for  the  physicist  until  he  has  the 
possibility  of  discovering  whether  or  not  it  is  fulfilled 
in  an  actual  case.  We  thus  require  a  definition  of 
simultaneity  such  that  this  definition  supplies  us  with 
the  method  by  means  of  which,  in  the  present  case,  he 
can  decide  by  experiment  whether  or  not  both  the 
lightning  strokes  occurred  simultaneously.  As  long 
as  this  requirement  is  not  satisfied,  I  allow  myself  to  be 
deceived  as  a  physicist  (and  of  course  the  same  applies 
if  I  am  not  a  physicist),  when  I  imagine  that  I  am  able 
to  attach  a  meaning  to  the  statement  of  simultaneity. 
(I  would  ask  the  reader  not  to  proceed  farther  until  he 
is  fully  convinced  on  this  point.) 
After  thinking  the  matter  over  for  some  time  you 
then  offer  the  following  suggestion  with  which  to  test 
simultaneity.  By  measuring  along  the  rails,  the 
connecting  line  AB  should  be  measured  up  and  an 
observer  placed  at  the  mid-point  M  of  the  distance  AB. 
This  observer  should  be  supplied  with  an  arrangement 
(e.g.  two  mirrors  inclined  at  90°)  which  allows  him 
visually  to  observe  both  places  A  and  B  at  the  same 
time.  If  the  observer  perceives  the  two  flashes  of 
lightning  at  the  same  time,  then  they  are  simultaneous. 
I  am  very  pleased  with  this  suggestion,  but  for  all 
that  I  cannot  regard  the  matter  as  quite  settled,  because 
I  feel  constrained  to  raise  the  following  objection : 
"  Your  definition  would  certainly  be  right,  if  I  only 
knew  that  the  light  by  means  of  which  the  observer 
at  M  perceives  the  lightning  flashes  travels  along  the 
length  A  — >  M  with  the  same  velocity  as  along  the 
length  B  — >  M.  But  an  examination  of  this  supposi- 
