FOUR-DIMENSIONAL  SPACE  57 
ance  for  the  formal  development  of  the  theory  of  re 
lativity,  does  not  lie  here.  It  is  to  be  found  rather  in 
the  fact  of  his  recognition  that  the  four-dimensional 
space-time  continuum  of  the  theory  of  relativity,  in  its 
most  essential  formal  properties,  shows  a  pronounced 
relationship  to  the  three-dimensional  continuum  of 
Euclidean  geometrical  space.1  In  order  to  give  due 
prominence  to  this  relationship,  however,  we  must 
replace  the  usual  time  co-ordinate  t  by  an  imaginary 
magnitude  \l-i.ct  proportional  to  it.  Under  these 
conditions,  the  natural  laws  satisfying  the  demands  of 
the  (special)  theory  of  relativity  assume  mathematical 
forms,  in  which  the  time  co-ordinate  plays  exactly  the 
same  role  as  the  three  space  co-ordinates.  Formally, 
these  four  co-ordinates  correspond  exactly  to  the  three 
space  co-ordinates  in  Euclidean  geometry.  It  must  be 
clear  even  to  the  non-mathematician  that,  as  a  conse 
quence  of  this  purely  formal  addition  to  our  knowledge, 
the  theory  perforce  gained  clearness  in  no  mean 
measure. 
These  inadequate  remarks  can  give  the  reader  only  a 
vague  notion  of  the  important  idea  contributed  by  Min- 
kowski.  Without  it  the  general  theory  of  relativity,  of 
which  the  fundamental  ideas  are  developed  in  the  follow 
ing  pages,  would  perhaps  have  got  no  farther  than  its 
long  clothes.  Minkowski's  work  is  doubtless  difficult  of 
access  to  anyone  inexperienced  in  mathematics,  but 
since  it  is  not  necessary  to  have  a  very  exact  grasp  of 
this  work  in  order  to  understand  the  fundamental  ideas 
of  either  the  special  or  the  general  theory  of  relativity, 
I  shall  at  present  leave  it  here,  and  shall  revert  to  it 
only  towards  the  end  of  Part  II. 
1  Cf .  the  somewhat  more  detailed  discussion  in  Appendix  II. 
