6     SPECIAL  THEORY  OF  RELATIVITY 
Square,  London,"1  I  arrive  at  the  following  result. 
The  earth  is  the  rigid  body  to  which  the  specification 
of  place  refers ;  "  Trafalgar  Square,  London,"  is  a 
well-defined  point,  to  which  a  name  has  been  assigned, 
and  with  which  the  event  coincides  in  space.2 
This  primitive  method  of  place  specification  deals 
only  with  places  on  the  surface  of  rigid  bodies,  and  is 
dependent  on  the  existence  of  points  on  this  surface 
which  are  distinguishable  from  each  other.  But  we 
can  free  ourselves  from  both  of  these  limitations  without 
altering  the  nature  of  our  specification  of  position. 
If,  for  instance,  a  cloud  is  hovering  over  Trafalgar 
Square,  then  we  can  determine  its  position  relative  to 
the  surface  of  the  earth  by  erecting  a  pole  perpendicu 
larly  on  the  Square,  so  that  it  reaches  the  cloud.  The 
length  of  the  pole  measured  with  the  standard  measuring- 
rod,  combined  with  the  specification  of  the  position  of 
the  foot  of  the  pole,  supplies  us  with  a  complete  place 
specification.  On  the  basis  of  this  illustration,  we  are 
able  to  see  the  manner  in  which  a  refinement  of  the  con 
ception  of  position  has  been  developed. 
(a)  We  imagine  the  rigid  body,  to  which  the  place 
specification  is  referred,  supplemented  in  such  a  manner 
that  the  object  whose  position  we  require  is  reached  by 
the  completed  rigid  body. 
(b]  In  locating  the  position  of  the  object,  we  make 
use  of  a  number  (here  the  length  of  the  pole  measured 
1  I  have  chosen  this  as  being  more  familiar  to  the  English 
reader  than  the  "  Potsdamer  Platz,  Berlin,"  which  is  referred  to 
in  the  original.     (R.  W.  L.) 
2  It  is  not  necessary  here  to  investigate  further  the  significance 
of  the  expression  "  coincidence  in  space."     This  conception  is 
sufficiently  obvious  to  ensure  that  differences  of  opinion  ar* 
scarcely  likely  to  arise  as  to  its  applicability  in  practice. 
