apply  with  great  accuracy  in  the  domain  of  mechanics. 
But  that  a  principle  of  such  broad  generality  should 
hold  with  such  exactness  in  one  domain  of  phenomena, 
and  yet  should  be  invalid  for  another,  is  a  priori  not 
very  probable. 
We  now  proceed  to  the  second  argument,  to  which, 
moreover,  we  shall  return  later.  If  the  principle  of  rela 
tivity  (in  the  restricted  sense)  does  not  hold,  then  the 
Galileian  co-ordinate  systems  K,  K',  K",  etc.,  which  are 
moving  uniformly  relative  to  each  other,  will  not  be 
equivalent  for  the  description  of  natural  phenomena. 
In  this  case  we  should  be  constrained  to  believe  that 
natural  laws  are  capable  of  being  formulated  in  a  par 
ticularly  simple  manner,  and  of  course  only  on  condition 
that,  from  amongst  all  possible  Galileian  co-ordinate 
systems,  we  should  have  chosen  one  (K0)  of  a  particular 
state  of  motion  as  our  body  of  reference.  We  should 
then  be  justified  (because  of  its  merits  for  the  description 
of  natural  phenomena)  in  calling  this  system  "  absolutely 
at  rest,"  and  all  other  Galileian  systems  K  "  in  motion." 
If,  for  instance,  our  embankment  were  the  system  K^, 
then  our  railway  carriage  would  be  a  system  K, 
relative  to  which  less  simple  laws  would  hold  than  with 
respect  to  K0.  This  diminished  simplicity  would  be 
due  to  the  fact  that  the  carriage  K  would  be  in  motion 
(i.e.  "  really  ")  with  respect  to  K0.  In  the  general  laws 
of  nature  which  have  been  formulated  with  refer 
ence  to  K,  the  magnitude  and  direction  of  the  velocity 
of  the  carriage  would  necessarily  play  a  part.  We  should 
expect,  for  instance,  that  the  note  emitted  by  an  organ- 
pipe  placed  with  its  axis  parallel  to  the  direction  of 
travel  would  be  different  from  that  emitted  if  the  axis 
of  the  pipe  were  placed  perpendicular  to  this  direction. 
