SPECIAL  AND  GENERAL  PRINCIPLE    61 
motion  is  such  that  the  Galileian  law  holds  with  respect 
to  it  :  A  particle  left  to  itself  and  sufficiently  far  removed 
from  all  other  particles  moves  uniformly  in  a  straight 
line.  With  reference  to  K  (Galileian  reference-body)  the 
laws  of  nature  were  to  be  as  simple  as  possible.  But 
in  addition  to  K,  all  bodies  of  reference  K'  should  be 
given  preference  in  this  sense,  and  they  should  be  exactly 
equivalent  to  K  for  the  formulation  of  natural  laws, 
provided  that  they  are  in  a  state  of  uniform  rectilinear 
and  non-rotary  motion  with  respect  to  K  ;  all  these 
bodies  of  reference  are  to  be  regarded  as  Galileian 
reference-bodies.  The  validity  of  the  principle  of 
relativity  was  assumed  only  for  these  reference-bodies, 
but  not  for  others  (e.g.  those  possessing  motion  of  a 
different  kind).  In  this  sense  we  speak  of  the  special 
principle  of  relativity,  or  special  theory  of  relativity. 
In  contrast  to  this  we  wish  to  understand  by  the 
"  general  principle  of  relativity  "  the  following  state 
ment  :  All  bodies  of  reference  K,  K',  etc.,  are  equivalent 
for  the  description  of  natural  phenomena  (formulation  of 
the  general  laws  of  nature),  whatever  may  be  their 
state  of  motion.  But  before  proceeding  farther,  it 
ought  to  be  pointed  out  that  this  formulation  must  be 
replaced  later  by  a  more  abstract  one,  for  reasons  which 
will  become  evident  at  a  later  stage. 
Since  the  introduction  of  the  special  principle  of 
relativity  has  been  justified,  every  intellect  which 
strives  after  generalisation  must  feel  the  temptation 
to  venture  the  step  towards  the  general  principle  of 
relativity.  But  a  simple  and  apparently  quite  reliable 
consideration  seems  to  suggest  that,  for  the  present 
at  any  rate,  there  is  little  hope  of  success  in  such  an 
attempt.  Let  us  imagine  ourselves  transferred  to  our 
