INFERENCES  FROM  RELATIVITY      77 
reason  electrostatics  is  overthrown  by  the  field-equa 
tions  of  Maxwell  in  electrodynamics  ?  Not  in  the  least. 
Electrostatics  is  contained  in  electrodynamics  as  a 
limiting  case  ;  the  laws  of  the  latter  lead  directly  to 
those  of  the  former  for  the  case  in  which  the  fields  are 
invariable  with  regard  to  time.  No  fairer  destiny 
could  be  allotted  to  any  physical  theory,  than  that  it 
should  of  itself  point  out  the  way  to  the  introduction 
of  a  more  comprehensive  theory,  in  which  it  lives  on 
as  a  limiting  case. 
In  the  example  of  the  transmission  of  light  just  dealt 
with,  we  have  seen  that  the  general  theory  of  relativity 
enables  us  to  derive  theoretically  the  influence  of  a 
gravitational  field  on  the  course  of  natural  processes, 
the  laws  of  which  are  already  known  when  a  gravita 
tional  field  is  absent.  But  the  most  attractive  problem, 
to  the  solution  of  which  the  general  theory  of  relativity 
supplies  the  key,  concerns  the  investigation  of  the  laws 
satisfied  by  the  gravitational  field  itself.  Let  us  consider 
this  for  a  moment. 
We  are  acquainted  with  space-time  domains  which 
behave  (approximately)  in  a  "  Galileian  "  fashion  under 
suitable  choice  of  reference-body,  i.e.  domains  in  which 
gravitational  fields  are  absent.  If  we  nov  -efer  such 
a  domain  to  a  reference-body  K'  possessing  any  kind 
of  motion,  then  relative  to  K'  there  exists  a  gravita 
tional  field  which  is  variable  with  respect  to  space  and 
time.1  The  character  of  this  field  will  of  course  depend 
on  the  motion  chosen  for  K'.  According  to  the  general 
theory  of  relativity,  the  general  law  oi  the  gravitational 
field  must  be  satisfied  for  all  gravitational  fields  obtain- 
1  This  follows  from  a  generalisation  of  the  discussion  in  Section 
XX. 
