INERTIAL  AND  GRAVITATIONAL  MASS      67 
we  are  viewing  all  this  from  another  reference-body 
which  is  not  being  pulled  with  a  rope. 
But  how  does  the  man  in  the  chest  regard  the  process  ? 
The  acceleration  of  the  chest  will  be  transmitted  to  him 
by  the  reaction  of  the  floor  of  the  chest.  He  must 
therefore  take  up  this  pressure  by  means  of  his  legs  if 
he  does  not  wish  to  be  laid  out  full  length  on  the  floor. 
He  is  then  standing  in  the  chest  in  exactly  the  same  way 
as  anyone  stands  in  a  room  of  a  house  on  our  earth. 
If  he  release  a  body  which  he  previously  had  in  his 
hand,  the  acceleration  of  the  chest  will  no  longer  be 
transmitted  to  this  body,  and  for  this  reason  the  body 
will  approach  the  floor  of  the  chest  with  an  accelerated 
relative  motion.  The  observer  will  further  convince 
himself  that  the  acceleration  of  the  body  towards  the  floor 
of  the  chest  is  always  of  the  same  magnitude,  whatever 
kind  of  body  he  may  happen  to  use  for  the  experiment. 
Relying  on  his  knowledge  of  the  gravitational  field 
(as  it  was  discussed  in  the  preceding  section),  the  man 
in  the  chest  will  thus  come  to  the  conclusion  that  he 
and  the  chest  are  in  a  gravitational  field  which  is  constant 
with  regard  to  time.  Of  course  he  will  be  puzzled  for 
a  moment  as  to  why  the  chest  does  not  fall,  in  this 
gravitational  field.  Just  then,  however,  he  discovers 
the  hook  in  the  middle  of  the  lid  of  the  chest  and  the 
rope  which  is  attached  to  it,  and  he  consequently  comes 
to  the  conclusion  that  the  chest  is  suspended  at  rest  in 
the  gravitational  field. 
Ought  we  to  smile  at  the  man  and  say  that  he  errs 
in  his  conclusion  ?  I  do  not  believe  we  ought  to  if  we 
wish  to  remain  consistent  ;  we  must  rather  admit  that 
his  mode  of  grasping  the  situation  violates  neither  reason 
nor  known  mechanical  laws.  Even  though  it  is  being 
